




















































Hansard: July 22, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1665 

 July 22, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

it's my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the 

members, a group of 22 young people who are here as part of 

the Voyageurs Canada 92 youth travel exchange program.  It's 

my understanding that these people are here from . . . these 

young people are here from the constituency of Toronto 

Etobicoke which is represented by Michael Wilson, and they're 

here to visit the federal constituency of Regina Wascana. 

 

They're accompanied by their chaperons, Irene Crumley and 

Anne Skoberg, and they're seated in the Speaker's gallery.  And 

I ask all members of the Assembly to join with me to wish 

these people a warm Saskatchewan welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of this 

Assembly, two very good personal friends of mine, Grant and 

Llona Sundholm from Rose Valley, that are seated in the west 

gallery.  They are very politically minded and very politically 

active people.  And I ask all members of the Assembly to greet 

these good people here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today it's my pleasure 

on behalf of my colleague, the member from Regina Wascana, 

to introduce to you 14 people seated in your gallery.  These 

include 13 students of English as a second language, and 

they're accompanied by their teacher, Elsa Turek.  I trust that 

our visitors will enjoy the proceedings here today.  And I want 

to, on behalf of my colleague, the member from Regina 

Wascana, wish them all the best in their studies as they 

continue on in their life in Saskatchewan.  And I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming these guests today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members to join 

me in welcoming in your west gallery the director of 

organization and education for the National Farmers Union, 

Ken Imhoff, a person who has worked very hard and long on 

behalf of farmers in Saskatchewan and co-operatively with the 

government.  And I welcome you here and ask other members 

to join in welcoming Ken. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to 

you and through you to members of the Assembly a friend and 

a former fellow student from the University of Saskatchewan, 

now at Sheraton Park with Atomic Energy of Canada, Dennis 

Bredhal who's seated in the Speaker's gallery.  Mr. Bredhal is 

out on holidays 

visiting friends and relatives down in the Shaunavon area 

where we grew up together north of Shaunavon.  I'd like 

Dennis to stand and be recognized and wish him a good 

holiday back in the province. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, this is day 4 of the new 

legislature, the fourth day since this House has been given back 

to the people and their representatives, the duly elected 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

In the four days since control of this Chamber was handed back 

to the people, six Bills have been given third reading and two 

others second reading.  And soon we will be able to conclude 

our Estimates and pass in this House for the first time in more 

than two years, a provincial budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- And now the government can continue its work, 

its four-year mission to cut waste, to rebuild the economy, and 

restore confidence in the province.  Yes, Mr. Speaker, we are 

boldly going where the previous government had not gone 

before. 

 

And there sits the former government, Mr. Speaker, refusing to 

accept responsibility for their self-induced fate.  Mr. Speaker, 

they are like a pirate going down with his ship who refuses to 

accept the inevitable and instead issues the order, take no 

prisoners.  Well, Mr. Speaker, piratization is now on its way to 

joining the Titanic. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In the months 

that I've spent in this legislature, I've listened to many speak on 

a variety of issues.  There are some points upon which we 

agree, some upon which we will never agree.  It has become 

clear, however, that there are certain issues which deserve the 

full attention of all elected members, rural and urban. 

 

Agriculture is one of them.  When there is a farm trek to 

Ottawa to raise awareness about the Saskatchewan farm crisis, 

politics should not be a factor.  I was pleased to join with 

farmers and some members of this government at my own 

expense to lend support to their pleas.  And I was disappointed 

that the Leader of the Opposition was not interested in 

supporting farmers if the spotlight shone elsewhere. 

 

Today, Mr. Premier, and members of this Assembly, I would 

like to show my support for the farmers of this province once 

again and for the attempts being made to negotiate for a portion 

of the tax dollars we pay federally to be allocated to the 

drought relief program for Saskatchewan.  I call upon the 

Leader of the Official Opposition and his caucus to offer their 

support as well. 
 

In closing, I would like to table my letter to the Prime Minister, 

supporting the Premier's request for support of the third line of 

defence. 



1666 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1999 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to inform 

the House of various successes resulting from this 

government's economic development initiatives.  The 

Department of Economic Development reports that new capital 

investment in manufacturing has increased.  And in fact during 

the past year, it worked with 21 companies that completed new 

industrial projects resulting in $230 million in new investment; 

the creation of 500 new jobs; and the retention of 300 existing 

jobs.  Other successful initiatives include jobs in northern 

Saskatchewan; promotion of exports sales; and a growing 

interest by entrepreneurs in establishing small businesses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of business organizations and 

publications have already made note of the dramatic change in 

direction that came with the change in government.  An 

example is the cover story in the June edition of World 

Business Magazine entitled "Saskatchewan Fights Back".  The 

article told about the economic shambles in Saskatchewan 

resulting from 10 years of misfortune and mismanagement, and 

the provincial NDP (New Democratic Party) government 

leadership that is beginning to turn it around. 

 

Recently media reports showed that the Canadian Imperial 

Bank of Commerce predicting that Saskatchewan will lead 

most provinces in economic growth in 1993.  I commend the 

Minister of Economic Development and look forward to 

continued progress in the economic recovery of our province 

and our communities.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and fellow 

members of the legislature.  Mr. Speaker, today on the east side 

of my constituency there is a significant event taking place.  

The communities of Beatty, Kinistino, and Weldon will be 

signing water supply agreements with the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation. 

 

These agreements will provide treated water for these 

communities through a 150 to 200 millimetre diameter pipeline 

which will be approximately 40 kilometres long.  These 

communities have experienced severe water quality and 

quantity problems over the past number of years.  The addition 

of this pipeline will provide a dependable source of quality 

water to the area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these works will become part of the Melfort 

regional water supply system which was agreed to earlier, and 

currently is under construction.  This system involves pumping 

water from the Codette Lake to Melfort where an upgraded 

treatment facility will process supplies for Melfort and 

surrounding communities. 

 

The Melfort to Weldon pipeline is estimated to cost $20 

million and is financed by the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation.  Construction on the pipeline is scheduled to start 

in May 1993 and be completed by the fall of that year.  This 

project will make sure current and future needs are met. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the Government of 

Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan Water Corporation for 

proceeding with this project.  It is further proof that this 

government through its agencies is committed to rural 

communities and its residents.  This project will provide 

stability and also enable these . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  There's nothing 

more devastating or terrifying than a major fire, and on 

Monday night in North Battleford, fire destroyed Hunters 

Trailer & Marine, one of the most established and important 

businesses in the city, as well as one of the largest retailers in 

Saskatchewan.  The fire caused about $10 million in damages 

and has left the city, its employees, and the business 

community rather shaken. 

 

While we're upset at the fact and worried about the 

consequences, we can be thankful that no one was seriously 

injured in what could have been a major catastrophe.  Some 

firefighters were actually hospitalized from smoke inhalation, 

but reports are that they are recovering well. 

 

We should all join in praising the work of the firefighters in 

bringing the fire under control.  In their job bravery is a matter 

of course and injury a constant presence. 

 

Understandably, the 65 employees are concerned about their 

future.  I am pleased that the company officials have 

announced plans to reopen and that they will be back in 

business as soon as Saturday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, set-backs happen.  When they do, we can all 

lower our heads and give up or we can pick up our losses and 

carry on.  In Saskatchewan we know something of adversity 

and rising above it.  I'm hopeful the people of North Battleford, 

the employees and the officials at Hunters Trailer & Marine, 

will rise out of the ashes and make our community even 

stronger. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today 

to express my pleasure in being a Saskatchewan citizen 

because Saskatchewan is a great place to live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has been a lot of well-deserved attention 

lately in the United Nations survey which places Canada as the 

number one place in the world in which we live.  Today, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to draw this Assembly's attention to how 

Saskatchewan fits into this bigger picture. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the report indicates that Saskatchewan is one of 

the least expensive provinces which we live in in Canada.  

While our taxes are higher than some other provinces, those 

taxes have gone to provide low-cost services in health, utilities, 

and insurances.  When all factors are considered together, 

Statistics Canada has shown that Saskatchewan people get a 

good deal for the total cost of living here.  The reason being, 

Mr. Speaker, is that this province relies on co-operation.  When 

we all 



April 11, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1667 

help each other, together we succeed. 

 

That helping spirit was put into action by provincial 

governments -- the Douglas government, for example -- when 

public utilities were planned and implemented in major ways in 

the '40s and '50s, and we will continue to advance that through 

our government. 

 

This is a view of the world, Mr. Speaker, that is important to 

Saskatchewan people.  It's part of our history and was 

necessary for the survival and growth of our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm confident that Saskatchewan will continue to 

be one of the best places in Canada to live because our 

government understands, as does our society in Saskatchewan 

understand . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- To the members of the legislature and the 

public, we know it has been five sitting days since the 

new-found Democrats have done their best to stifle any official 

opposition in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And why, Mr. Speaker?  Because in two weeks when the NDP 

decide it's time to win their court case and to take hundreds of 

millions of dollars out of the pockets of farmers, they can 

introduce their retroactive GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) Bill.  Even though contracts with Saskatchewan 

families will be broken and the livelihoods of thousands 

depend upon honouring GRIP '91, the new-found Democrats 

don't care. 

 

And today the editorials are coming out condemning the 

government for this.  In Estevan today, it simply says this: 

 

 Romanow simply wants no part of this controversy, and for 

good reason.  He realizes the NDP is in an incredibly difficult 

situation and basically doesn't have a leg to stand on. 

 

He goes on to say, and it goes on to say: 

 

 No matter how you look at this situation, it's a mess.  

Obviously the NDP's hands are not clean . . . 

 

We see the NDP government now on a second and third and 

fourth wave of Draconian legislation.  Look at the labour 

legislation they're about to introduce and force by this 

legislature.  Look what they're doing in Ontario at the same 

time.  Look at what they're doing with respect to going into the 

homes of businesses, going into homes of people . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has elapsed.  

Order. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Changes to GRIP 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier.  

Mr. Premier, in the news yesterday and in the media today and 

in the newspapers -- and I quote the Star-Phoenix: 

Saskatchewan farmers have lost up to $40 an acre in GRIP 

coverage because of the NDP changes to the 1991 GRIP. 

 

Mr. Premier, in the event that we have in the neighbourhood of 

a third of our acres affected by drought and up to $40 an acre, 

you're looking at in the neighbourhood 5, 6, 7, up to $800 

million farmers could lose as a result of your initiative in 

changing GRIP. 

 

Don't you believe, Mr. Premier, that when you were warned 

that your program would not be good in cases of drought, that 

you should now admit that you, sir, have taken hundreds of 

millions of dollars out of the hands of Saskatchewan farmers in 

the event of drought? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank the 

Leader of the Opposition for that question.  The answer to the 

Leader of the Opposition is one that I know he fully 

understands. 

 

At the time when he was the minister of Agriculture in 1990, 

the federal and provincial governments agreed that a third line 

of defence would be needed for, among other things, such 

circumstances as we face now.  They quote a 1990s report that 

the Canadian crop drought assistance program is exactly the 

kind of a program to which special relief needs to be . . . and 

special assistance needs to be provided from time to time under 

the third line of defence. 

 

This is the circumstance that we are appealing to the federal 

government.  We say that the federal government should make 

the '90-91 third line of defence payment good, and secondly, 

they should develop a permanent crop disaster program, 

particularly for this year but for the future.  That's what we're 

speaking to, and we're still hoping for a favourable response 

from the Prime Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Premier, in the correspondence released 

yesterday by the federal Minister of Agriculture, he clearly 

warned the NDP government that if you change GRIP in this 

way, you're going to be short of money in the cases of drought.  

And he clearly laid that out.  Because Saskatchewan's program 

is  different than Manitoba's and Alberta's.  So you have 

short-changed Saskatchewan farmers and you were warned in 

the case of drought there wouldn't be the money in the 

Saskatchewan program because you changed it. 

 

Now secondly, you have to admit -- and I'm going to ask you -- 

will you now admit that Saskatchewan farmers under a national 

program are getting less than their Alberta and Manitoba 

counterparts because you made this dramatic change here in the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1668 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1999 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite was 

party to the development of a slapped-together program that 

did not meet the needs of farmers and continues not to meet the 

needs of farmers.  The design features that the member 

opposite refers to would cost the producers in the long run and 

in the short run more money in premiums. 

 

The member opposite knows that the accumulated deficits from 

a program ill-conceived as the one he designed become part of 

the premium base that not only the province has to bear but the 

farmers have to bear.  And we moved to change a program that 

could not survive in the long run because of the very serious 

misdesign of it, and we know that that will be the direction 

which sound farm programs will go in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Premier, I'm sure you see the logic of the 

farmers' argument saying, well gosh, if the NDP were warned 

that there would be poor drought coverage and they also 

figured out that we won't have the same amount of money 

going into Alberta and Manitoba's farm pockets and then even 

if there's a third line of defence, which was your first response, 

obviously Manitoba and Alberta will get third line of defence 

on top of better coverage. 

 

Any way we shake it, the NDP administration in Saskatchewan 

has caused farmers to receive less under a national program.  

Wouldn't the Premier agree that he struck our three times?  

Because he has not got the coverage, he will not get the kind of 

protection that neighbours get, and now even under third line of 

defence, you get less than other provinces and people in other 

provinces because you unilaterally made the change. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Agriculture has given the explanation to the former minister of 

Agriculture about the rationale for the changes of GRIP and I 

will not repeat that because he has outlined this to this House 

and to the farmers over and over again. 

 

What's at issue here, Mr. Speaker, are two things.  First of all 

the third line of defence payment for 1990-91, which is left 

owing by Ottawa to the farmers of this province and to the 

farmers of Canada, we say that the farmers of Saskatchewan 

amongst other farmers, but for this province, need that cash 

flow now and Ottawa should pony up on its commitment. 

 

The second thing that we're saying is that there needs to be a 

crop disaster plan in place to take care of circumstances not 

only what might happen this year in Saskatchewan -- we don't 

know yet for sure -- but down the road, a crop disaster plan 

contemplated by the 1990 ministers of Agriculture proposal. 

 

I say to the Leader of the Opposition, rather than defending the 

Ottawa government, he should be on the side of the provincial 

government in urging these two payments to be made by 

Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Premier, we're on the side of farmers.  

Farmers in Saskatchewan, Mr. Premier, are going to get less 

money than they do in Alberta or Manitoba.  And even if 

there's a third line of defence, they're still going to get less 

money.  So even if your best dream came true and the feds 

said, all right there's more third money, it's a national program, 

but where are they short-changed?  They're short-changed only 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

So the question that is coming forward is why won't you now 

live up to some responsibility to make sure that you can lever 

the $200 million that would come out of an insurance program 

so that farmers could get the $40 an acre that they expected?  

They bought and paid for that and only in Saskatchewan will 

they not get it.  And even if you were lucky you're going to find 

that if farmers across the country receive the third line of 

defence, only in the NDP Saskatchewan do farmers get it in the 

ear as a result of unilateral policy decisions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't know if 

there was a question mark at the end of that statement made by 

the Leader of the Opposition, but I'll assume that there is a 

question mark there.  And I simply say to the Leader of the 

Opposition, when the official opposition had a chance in this 

legislature to demonstrate its commitment to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan, it voted against the motion in support of the 

third line of defence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- In this House, this vote was taken and 

you, sir, as the Leader of the Opposition voted against it.  And I 

say to the Leader of the Opposition and to the Conservative 

opposition there, this is a time to try to put the partisanship 

aside.  We have got a problem and there is time for assistance 

now . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Could we please 

have some order in the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just will 

finish off by saying, Mr. Speaker, that this is a situation which 

begs for the Leader of the Opposition and the official 

opposition to join in the united stance requesting Ottawa to 

give assistance to our farmers on the third line of defence, as 

the motion was contemplated -- and you voted against it, but 

you voted against the motion -- and on a crop disaster program 

which we say is needed and we want your support in this sense. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Premier, you have been telling us, and your 

Minister of Finance, saying that you know that you have to 

manage funds.  What if an RM (rural municipality) came to 

you and said: we're opting out of a program; we can't cover it 

because we don't have any money.  Will the province pick up 

our fair share? 

 

Do you know what you would say to them?  Well I am a 

provincial government; I'd have to do the same for all RMs.  

Well that's what the federal government says.  If you 



April 11, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1669 

opt out of a program, how can the federal government come in 

and back-fill just in Saskatchewan?  Don't you think the 

Alberta Finance minister would say hey, I'm opting out too?  

Manitoba would say hey, I'm opting out because the feds are 

going to back-fill. 

 

How can you expect to get money from the federal government 

when you opt out of a program and then say, we're going to 

have a national program, only Saskatchewan gets more money 

than other provinces.  How do you explain that?  Would you 

kind of clarify your position how you expect farmers to get 

more money than their neighbours in other provinces even with 

a third line of defence? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm afraid to say that the 

Leader of the Opposition's words speak louder than his actions 

did in defence and in support of the farmers of Saskatchewan.  

The loud rhetoric that the Leader of the Opposition gives us 

today is not matched by the fact that he signed the province of 

Saskatchewan on to a costly program of GRIP which was not 

properly based. 

 

And his rhetoric and his question does not acknowledge the 

fact that on the changes in 1992 the federal government said 

that they would move those changes forward when the 

prerequisite number of provinces also agreed to them and they 

have been reached, the seven that have done so.  That is our 

position. 

 

We think that the program on GRIP changes are the directions 

which should take place.  We think it's a better plan.  It's been 

done on the recommendations of an advisory committee which 

is largely the committee which advised you, sir, in the initial 

program.  Now that is the situation. 

 

But today we're talking about a crop disaster program, a relief 

program which is surely the responsibility of Ottawa.  Every 

provincial premier and every prime minister said that we need 

this money.  Everybody in this legislature except you, sir, are 

saying that.  And I say, join on side to the defence of the 

farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Before I accept the next question, I 

just want to warn members I will simply not tolerate the 

interference on both sides when the question is asked or when 

the answer is given. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Premier, I'll try to say that . . . and speak on 

behalf of farmers who are looking at a disaster of $40 an acre 

that was in their old program that they bought and paid for.  

They paid good money and they had a contract and it was a 

national program.  It was the federal government, the 

provincial government, and farmers, who signed on a contract.  

And they said, you know, I'm going to have to buy good 

insurance because I can't afford a drought.  And you say, but 

we can't afford to buy good insurance.  Farmers bought that 

insurance because the benefit on this year on 20 million acres 

would be $800 million prize.  And you say, we can't afford 20 

million or 31 million. 

Look at what you might get for that insurance policy.  It's an 

insurance mechanism.  And you won't let them participate in 

Saskatchewan like they do in Alberta and Manitoba and across 

Canada because it's a national program.  Only in Saskatchewan 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Could the Leader of the 

Opposition please put his question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Premier, do you understand that only 

Saskatchewan farmers are going to lose hundreds of millions of 

dollars as a result of the fact that you unilaterally changed their 

contract?  And this is a national program.  You can't expect a 

national government to make exceptions for provincial . . . 

province.  You must understand that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, again it's difficult to sift 

through the rhetoric to find a question in this matter from the 

Leader of the Opposition, but I'll try to discern what I can get 

out of this.  I will again repeat and re-endorse what the Minister 

of Agriculture said about the changes to GRIP '91. 

 

These changes were made on the recommendation of an 

advisory committee which largely, sir, is the same committee 

that advised you.  These changes were made also when the 

federal government agreed to move them along when the seven 

other provincial governments agreed.  That is the situation.  

We've given you the rationale. 

 

But we're talking about a program here which is designed to 

meet the shortfall of farmers now, separate and apart from 

GRIP.  We're talking about the third line of defence for 

1990-91.  We're talking about a crop disaster program which is 

contemplated by the very ministers of Agriculture committee 

that you're on in 1990.  The assistance is needed; it's needed 

separate from the changes that may or may not be made to 

GRIP. 

 

And I say to the Leader of the Opposition, instead of being 

critical of us, and instead of being critical of the fact that we're 

trying to fight for the farmers, get on side and join us -- join us.  

Because frankly, the way you left the provincial treasury leaves 

this province with very little option and running room but to do 

what we've done and to proceed the way that we're proceeding. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- We're just going to make it clear, so that 

everybody knows, that number one, the committee and 

Professor Furtan will tell you that under a drought situation the 

'92 GRIP is a disaster.  And that's confirmed.  Everybody 

knows that.  And he says it; you know it.  And farmers . . . It's a 

disaster because there isn't the coverage here. 

 

Secondly, you know, Mr. Premier, that it was forecast that only 

in Saskatchewan would you have this shortfall and that you 

would be less than Alberta and less than Manitoba.  So you're 

leaving hundreds of millions of dollars in Ottawa because you 

won't participate.  And people told you that would happen.  So 

you're saying, 



1670 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1999 

whoop, we don't care.  We're going to change the contract.  So 

I'm just reminding you, Mr. Premier, that you're going to have 

to explain. 

 

Our farmers are out when Manitoba and Alberta people aren't.  

And even under a national program of third line of defence, we 

don't get as much money.  And third, you were told by Hartley 

Furtan and others that under crop insurance '92 a drought is a 

disaster.  And we are experiencing . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  Does the Leader 

of the Opposition have a question?  I would ask him to put his 

question right now, directly. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Will the Premier acknowledge that he has 

isolated Saskatchewan farmers in a national program so they 

could potentially lose $40 an acre.  And you can find the acres 

after the harvest is in, but it's up to $800 million.  Will he 

confirm that Saskatchewan farmers are put in that predicament, 

even if there is a third line of . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, what I will say to the 

Leader of the Opposition, if there is anyone isolated it is him 

and his Conservative caucus on this issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- They are isolated because the farmers 

of this province know the financial situation that they face 

themselves firsthand.  They know the financial situation that 

we have as a government, thanks to your 10 years nearly of 

administration, and they know that it is an obligation of the 

national government, the national government, to help out 

provinces in this kind of a circumstance. 

 

Your principle, sir, was not applied when it came to bail out the 

fishermen in the cod crisis in Newfoundland.  It was not done.  

It was assumed as a national responsibility.  And yet you're 

standing on your feet and you're urging Mr. McKnight that the 

farmers should be forking more out of their money personally, 

that the farmers should be forking more out in terms of tax 

dollars in order to get the assistance.  I say to you, sir, shame. 

Stand up for the farmers and stand up for this Legislative 

Assembly's attempt to get support from Ottawa for a national 

crisis.  You're the one who's isolated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  

Would the Premier entertain a supplementary question?  Will 

you consider putting a small delegation together, including the 

three leaders of the parties in this province, to go to Ottawa in 

search of drought relief from the Prime Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to think about the 

suggestion, and if the idea has merit -- I think it might have 

merit -- we could pursue it.  Obviously I don't want to make a 

quick response to this for a number 

reasons.  But whatever could be done would I think be very 

important. 

 

We did go to Ottawa.  You were there in November, and 

perhaps there has some merit in this.  I'd like to think about it. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Premier, in the P.A. (Prince Albert) Herald 

you're quoted as saying that the GRIP and NISA (net income 

stabilization account) legislation don't require more tax money.  

And I'm paraphrasing, but I'll get you the quote. P.A. Herald, 

1990, you said no new taxes are necessary to fund the GRIP 

and NISA programs.  And you campaigned, Mr. Premier, on no 

new taxes.  And farmers said, I think he's even going to give 

me the cost of production. 

 

Well under that situation when today Saskatchewan farmers are 

being isolated and under a national program, no they can't get 

more than anybody else.  And knowing that you said there was 

enough money in Crop Insurance Corporation to pay premiums 

and that it is designed for that, can't you today, Mr. Premier, 

realize that Saskatchewan farmers are going to be isolated and 

cannot conceivably get extra money coming into Saskatchewan 

that wouldn't go into Alberta and Manitoba.  Can you figure 

that out, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, again I don't want 

to be disrespectful but I do say that I cannot figure out the 

question, except that the former premier seems to be arguing 

that our position in the Prince Albert Daily Herald was that 

we could finance GRIP changes without any additional tax 

increases. 

 

I want to tell the Leader of the Opposition what I've been 

telling him and the people of Saskatchewan ever since we 

assumed office.  I say two things to him:  I received a letter just 

before the campaign started . . . just after the campaign started 

from your minister of Finance, who in direct response from me 

to him, asking for a statement of the province's finances, told us 

that the budget was on track and on estimate of $250 million. 

 

It was only after we opened up the books, sir, that we found 

that the deficit was $900 million, and the cumulative debt of 

the province of Saskatchewan is $14 billion.  If you had told 

the people of Saskatchewan, including the farmers, the truth 

prior to the election, there wouldn't have been one of you 

re-elected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- If the NDP leader had told the truth, he 

wouldn't be as elected and he'd be sitting some place else as he 

was in 1982. 

 

You told the farmers that you would back them up and you 

would give them the cost of production.  And now when you 

have a bit of a drought, you run and hide and you change 

legislation retroactively.  You cause the rules to be changed.  

And we're going to be out several hundred million dollars only 

in Saskatchewan because of your sham and your falsehoods at 

election time when you said, no new taxes; in fact we can cut 

taxes. 



April 11, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1671 

You'd promised farmers that you would be there over and over 

and over again.  You went to rallies with tens of thousands of 

people.  You said you'd be there.  And then when the crunch 

comes, no money from Ottawa, not a dime from Saskatchewan, 

and you've retroactively changed their contracts . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  This is question period.  

I'd ask the Leader of the Opposition, please put his question.  

Okay?  Let's have the question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Premier, in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix it 

says, and I quote from ministers, federal and provincial, that it 

would be $24 million from the Government of Saskatchewan 

could lever hundreds of millions of dollars in a national 

program. 

 

Will you reconsider your share of the premium so that in fact 

farmers can have access to hundreds of millions of dollars as a 

result of drought in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 

Opposition fails to understand, by the request that he makes, 

that at the end of the day, the dollars which are advanced by the 

provincial treasury come from the farmers of the province of 

Saskatchewan together with the rest of the taxpayers.  And he 

doesn't understand apparently, that at the end of the day the 

farmers are in a cash crunch, a financial crunch, where asking 

the provincial government to put in money in this circumstance 

is, in the words of my colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, 

like giving ourselves a blood transfusion when we're bleeding 

to death. 

 

Does not the Leader of the Opposition understand, Mr. 

Speaker, that since 1990 the percentage of provincial share for 

federal-provincial agricultural programs has risen from zero to 

41 per cent, and the federal share has fallen from 100 per cent 

to 59 per cent?  And does he not understand that the premiers 

of this country all unanimously agreed, together with the Prime 

Minister, that in these circumstances the money should come 

from Ottawa, not from those provinces which are affected? 

 

I say to the Leader of the Opposition, please don't isolate 

yourself.  Come to the support of the farmers of Saskatchewan 

with the right policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Return of Leased Lands 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- My question is to the Premier, in the light of 

the fact the Rural Development minister was less than 

forthcoming yesterday. Mr. Premier, your NDP candidate in 

the past provincial election, the defeated NDP candidate from 

Maple Creek, Mr. Brian Oster, has recently turned back to the 

Department of Rural Development a parcel of land bank land 

which he was leasing from your government. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, turning back leased land generally means 

that an individual was unable to meet contractual 

obligations.  Can you confirm that the reason Mr. Oster turned 

the land back to Rural Development was due to missed 

payments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the individual in 

question did turn back the land, the circumstances of which are 

certainly not something for public consumption.  The member 

opposite well knows that individual files are not . . . People's 

bills, and unpaid or otherwise, are not for public consumption. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- As no information has been provided to us by 

the department, and as a result of that, I am asking that you 

supply it now.  It is public money and the public has a right to 

know where the money has gone. 

 

Mr. Premier, can you confirm that?  In turning back this leased 

land to the Department of Rural Development, Mr. Oster was 

paid by the department for what was thought to be 

improvements to the buildings that were on that land.  And can 

you tell me how much was paid to Mr. Oster? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I can assure the 

members opposite that no public money was lost in the 

transaction, if that's of interest to him.  Mr. Speaker, the 

individual was paid for his improvements as is the policy of all 

lessees who turn back their leases.  The improvements that they 

make to those that are . . . Their improvements are paid for by 

the department and are done in all cases.  This was done in a 

standard manner.  It was done by the department, assessed, and 

he was paid as other people are.  The members opposite may 

have been in the habit of . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

National Farm Safety Week 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise this afternoon to report 

on the steps my government is taking to address a serious issue 

which affects many of our citizens.  Our provincial economy 

and many of our citizens depend on agriculture for their 

livelihood.  For many of our families farming is not just a job 

but a way of life.  Yet this way of life is becoming increasingly 

dangerous. 

 

There have been 72 accidental deaths on Saskatchewan farms 

in the past five years and there have been three farm fatalities 

already this year.  In recognition of this, the week of July 25 to 

31 has been declared National Farm Safety Week.  I ask all 

members of this Assembly to join with me in showing our 

support for the people and programs which are working to 

address this serious concern. 
 

Mr. Speaker, our government is currently studying the report 

developed by the farm safety advisory committee.  This report 

recommended that the risk to farm people can be most 

effectively addressed by improved education and information 

programs.  It is also recommended a permanent farm health and 

safety council be established to advise the Minister of Labour 

on farm, health, and safety programs, research needs, and 

regulation of the 



1672 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1999 

farm industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce that a farm health and 

safety council will be established as a part of proposed 

amendments to The Occupational Health and Safety Act.  

Health and safety awareness are key to preventing farm 

accidents.  The establishment of this council will assist us 

greatly in encouraging our farm families to develop safer work 

practices.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1415) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to discuss the issue 

of farm accidents and farm safety with the public of 

Saskatchewan.  I know that it is a serious concern.  We live in a 

time when a slight mishap can create devastation in a farm 

family, and I am completely aware of that.  We have significant 

machinery and large machinery.  We have livestock and 

different things like that that can increasingly cause the 

opportunity for almost irreparable harm to individuals on the 

farm. 

 

And it is precisely in this way that many, many people who are 

hurt are the men in dealing with this.  And it leaves a lot of the 

women who are the spouses of the farmers in a very, very 

serious position in relation to that. 

 

So I am going to say just that, plus one other thing. That I think 

it's extremely important that the Minister of Agriculture, in 

reviewing this, also take into consideration that the acute care 

responsibility and emergency responsibility that we have in the 

rural Saskatchewan ought to be maintained so that we can 

prevent the calamity of fatalities during those periods of time 

of accidents occurring on farms. 

 

And I hope, I hope with all of my internal being, that you, sir, 

allow those places like Beechy, Mankota, and all those other 

hospitals to remain open so we can treat those people who have 

been hurt in accidents across rural Saskatchewan so that we 

don't have fatalities besides having people hurt.  Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Does the member from Saskatoon Greystone 

have leave to speak to this? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

members of the Assembly.  I too wish to join with the minister 

and congratulate him on the decision to bring forward a farm 

health and safety council for occupational health and safety.  I 

was very proud to have been employed with the Centre for 

Agricultural Medicine.  And at this point, I would like to 

continue to congratulate them for the outstanding work that 

they do. 

 

I also had the privilege of addressing the handicapped farmers 

of Saskatchewan on different occasions.  They are indeed 

courageous people.  And we need to be reminded that there are 

five times the numbers of accidents and injuries in farming 

than in any other occupation, including labour, in our nation. 

Farming is not simply something to do.  It's not simply 

something one does.  It's a state of being.  And I think that 

anything that we can do to ensure the safety of individuals in 

this extremely important field is going to be to the advantage of 

all of us.  So I congratulate you. 

 

BEFORE ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall on 

Friday next move first reading of a Bill to amend The Labour 

Sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Act. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 40 -- An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act.  The 

Bill covers a number of areas requiring changes as a result of 

recent court decisions and to increase public safety on 

Saskatchewan highways. 

 

With respect to seat-belts, the current seat-belt law requires 

seat-belts to be worn in a properly adjusted and securely 

fastened manner.  An amendment is proposed to ensure that 

shoulder straps are worn over the shoulder.  The wearing of 

shoulder straps in the proper manner prevents the head and 

vital parts of the chest from hitting a steering-wheel or 

dashboard.  The strap spreads the impact over a greater part of 

the body. 

 

An amendment is also proposed to match the description of 

child safety seats with those contained in other provincial 

legislation and federal government safety standards. 

 

A third amendment allows cabinet to make regulations 

allowing small individuals, usually young children, to wear a 

shoulder strap behind their back when it would otherwise come 

across their face.  Our intention is to have similar regulations as 

those in Ontario. 

 

With respect to the exceeding of gross weight, the Bill before 

us makes it an offence to operate a vehicle in excess of 5,000 

kilograms when the vehicle is registered by wheelbase.  The 

amendment also makes it an offence for vehicles to operate 

with a weight in excess of that stated on a registration permit.  

Both changes result from advice from the government's legal 

advisors. 

 

With respect to cross-referencing error, section 6 of the Bill 

corrects a cross-referencing error in the last set of amendments. 

 

With respect to owner liability for violations of the Act or 

bylaws, Mr. Speaker, the current provision makes the 

registered owner of a vehicle and any person in charge of the 

vehicle's operation liable for violations unless they prove the 

vehicle was stolen.  The courts have ruled this section may be 

unconstitutional as the owner or person in charge could go to 

jail for an offence committed by 



April 11, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1673 

another person.  The Bill before us today will provide 

immunity from imprisonment for the registered owner or 

person in charge of operating the vehicle. 

 

I am pleased to advise the Assembly, the Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association has advised me of their support for this 

provision. 

 

I can also tell hon. members, the car rental dealers have been in 

to see me and have told me they are satisfied with the intention 

of this provision.  We told them they need only provide the 

name of a person leasing a vehicle to the police. 

 

With respect to evidence from portable scales, Mr. Speaker, 

our enforcement staff have raised a concern relating to 

prosecutions for exceeding registered gross rate, prosecutions 

used as evidence, readings from portable and statutory weight 

scales . . . stationary weigh scales.  The amendment specifically 

allows readings from these scales to be used.  The use of 

evidence from portable scales was in the past called into doubt.  

The amendment ensures the continued use of this evidence.  I 

will be pleased to answer any questions from hon. members in 

committee. 

 

I now move second reading of An Act to amend The Highway 

Traffic Act.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I've 

listened very . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to introduce a guest. 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I recognize the member, the reason I 

didn't recognize you is that the rule says when the Speaker is 

on his feet a member shouldn't be on his feet, so I had to wait 

until I sat down.  The member may proceed. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to introduce 

Alex Strelioff, a friend of mine and a farmer and 

small-business man from Marcelin, Saskatchewan in the east 

gallery.  And I would appreciate it if you would join with me in 

welcoming him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 40 (continued) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I've listened intently to 

the comments by the minister.  And certainly as an opposition 

we want to take a closer look at the Bill.  I think we've already 

spoken . . . mentioned a few concerns we have regarding The 

Highway Traffic Act. 

 

When it comes to seat-belt use, there's no doubt that seat-belts 

are protective pieces of equipment in a vehicle, 

and we certainly are very well and soundly in favour of 

seat-belts. 

 

I guess one argument that I've had over the years is the fact that 

government should have to legislate and even impose stiff fines 

for not wearing a seat-belt.  But I think the value of seat-belts is 

very important.  I think, from what I heard this afternoon, the 

fact, recognizing that an infant could be severely hurt by a lap 

belt if they're forced to have it in front of them, and allowing 

for it to be behind them is very appropriate.  And I commend 

the department for taking that step. 

 

The other question certainly will continue to arise around the 

fact that police can send out notices or tickets to individuals on 

the basis of a driver's licence. I can appreciate the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association asking for this 

specific regulation or change to the Bill because of the fact we 

realize the safety of our children on our roads is very 

important.  And unfortunately on many occasions drivers still 

fail to recognize the stop sign on a bus. 

 

However, going beyond the ability of just extending tickets for 

school buses, in the case of buses or whatever, I think may, as 

was indicated, may infringe some of the rights, may be 

challenged in courts. 

 

But we want to take a closer look at the Bill before us, and at 

this time then I'll adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 66 -- An Act to amend The Industrial Development 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I wish to stress at the 

outset that the Bill before us does not reflect any significant 

change to SEDCO's (Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation) direction or mandate and it is basically 

housekeeping in nature. 

 

Before I deal with the principle of the Bill, I want to take a few 

minutes to talk to the Assembly about SEDCO and the record 

of SEDCO over the past 10 years and, Mr. Speaker, just a few 

words about the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we said during the election campaign that we 

would change SEDCO's mandate and give it a more significant 

role in economic development in Saskatchewan.  We said we 

would restructure the corporation and we would run it on a 

break-even basis.  Anyone who wants proof that restructuring 

is required need only look at two SEDCO annual reports. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, look at the 1982 annual report.  It showed 

retained earnings of $4.3 million.  And then compare that with 

the report from 1991.  By then the corporation had racked up 

an accumulated deficit of $118 million.  Mr. Speaker, in 10 

years, just 10 years, the bottom line had taken . . . gone from a 

profit of 4.3 million to a loss of $118 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we took office we looked at some of 

SEDCO's major files in detail.  It didn't take long to spot some 

of the reasons for that sorry record of performance. 



1674 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1999 

It was not SEDCO itself or the staff who were to blame.  It was 

in fact the politicians, some of them who sit opposite now.  

Cabinet ministers and other MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) meddled in the economic decisions of the 

corporation.  SEDCO had in fact become a political tool. 

 

There is no doubt that over the long run, SEDCO has made a 

difference to the province's economic development picture.  

Thousands of projects it has helped finance did produce and 

maintain thousands of jobs.  However what we need to 

question now is the cost and durability of those jobs.  Did they 

cost more than they should have?  Will projects that proceed 

mainly because of political pressure have long-term viability? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will be taking steps to assure those kinds of 

questions don't arise in the future and that political interference 

will not be a factor in decisions made at SEDCO in the future.  

When we complete the process of creating a new SEDCO, we 

will have made sure of two things:  one, that it stimulates a 

diversified economy and creates jobs; Mr. Speaker, secondly 

that it does so without hemorrhaging of red ink that has in fact 

flowed from that corporation as a result of political decisions 

over the last 10 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the task of making necessary changes was begun 

very shortly after we took office and is ongoing.  So far we 

launched a review of programs and policies.  The review is 

essentially completed and activities under existing programs 

has been resumed but we are and have reduced the basis of the 

number of loans and they are being done on a more stringent 

criteria.  We've reviewed existing loans and investment and 

took the appropriate write-offs that were necessary.  We took 

steps to implement a number of the Gass Commission's 

recommendations and addressed several other concerns by 

proceeding with legislation before us.  We appointed a new 

board of directors and hired a new president, both mandated to 

thoroughly examine policy issues and the total role of SEDCO. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we initiated steps to assure that board members 

will avoid conflict of interest situations, and we've directed the 

management of SEDCO and other economic development 

departments and agencies to look for ways to transform 

SEDCO into a new type of economic development institution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's obvious that achieving the general aims I've 

outlined is not something that should or can be achieved in a 

hurry.  Mr. Speaker, this is a long-term project.  In the mean 

time, it is necessary to address a number of deficiencies that 

have been identified in SEDCO and SEDCO's enabling 

legislation, The Industrial Development Act.  These 

deficiencies have been raised over at least five years by 

SEDCO's clients, by their solicitors, and by other departments, 

and in fact SEDCO itself. 

 

Most of these amendments now before us are being proposed 

and were proposed to the government back in 1989, so they 

should come as no surprise to many of the members opposite.  I 

would therefore not expect them to view these changes as 

being controversial. 

In principle the proposed changes would include making the 

legislation more responsible to the needs of the business 

community, bringing it in line with existing lending practices, 

clarifying some of SEDCO's powers, and bringing its 

legislation more in line with other commercial Crowns, 

enabling the government to comply with the recommendations 

of the Gass Commission that all Crown funding come from the 

Consolidated Fund. 

 

It will clarify the corporation's level of authority and make it 

more responsible to cabinet and to the legislature, clarify the 

corporation's power to enter in to the types of security 

agreements it has traditionally entered into, simplify 

establishment of quorum for board of directors, and clarify the 

term of appointment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look forward to the opportunity to provide 

further details of this Bill during clause-by-clause consideration 

in Committee of the Whole.  Therefore I move second reading 

of the Bill, an Act to amend The Industrial Development Act. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will be making a 

few comments in response to the minister and then asking to 

adjourn debate on this. 

 

The minister and I certainly agree on one thing: the employees 

in SEDCO are excellent employees; they often work under 

some conditions that are extremely difficult at times.  When 

one is dealing with a family business breaking up after a couple 

of generations of being successful, when one is involved with 

people that have felt they had the best idea on earth in order to 

develop a new product and then it doesn't turn out exactly right, 

then you have to have employees that are understanding, that 

are compassionate, that can make the best of a situation that 

sometimes isn't the greatest.  And SEDCO has those kind of 

employees; there's no doubt about it.  The current minister has 

got good people to work with. 

 

Unfortunately this minister has the same problem as a lot of the 

other members of the government.  He has this sort of 

institutionalized fiction that goes along with being a New 

Democrat, and it's from being in opposition too long.  You 

forget about reality, and you've preached the same thing over 

and over again that you actually start to believe it.  And it's a 

terrible problem because I'm sure that it creates ringing in your 

ears and all sorts of things. 

 

I think the members of the government are going to have to 

realize that they aren't in opposition any more, and some of this 

institutionalized fiction that they told the voters of this province 

for so many years is going to have to change if they're going to 

do a good job. 

 

And the minister will not reorganize the functions of SEDCO.  

He will not do what he says if some of these sort of 

institutional problems within the New Democratic Party don't 

go away.  And that's the problem that we're going to face in this 

Assembly when ministers like the minister from Elphinstone 

make these kind of statements. 



April 11, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1675 

That minister knows full well that many of the long-term debt 

situations that SEDCO's dealt with go back way beyond 1982.  

Matter of fact, the minister is speculating in the press, I see, 

about the sale of Westank-Willock.  Westank-Willock has been 

around a long time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You had it for sale. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- And we had it for sale.  And if I'd have had a 

couple more months, Mr. Speaker, I might even got it there. 

 

And I use that example, Mr. Speaker, because 

Westank-Willock has been one of those things that . . . as the 

minister commented, he said: there is always that urge in 

Saskatchewan, with a very thin industrial base, to maintain 

what jobs you have. 

 

And I hope that when the minister does sell Westank-Willock, 

when he does sell Westank-Willock -- and I would caution him 

on dealing with . . . well I shouldn't say it in this Assembly but 

the minister knows that there is some caution to be dealt with 

in Westank-Willock -- that it be done in such a way that we not 

only preserve the jobs but the industrial contracts with the U.S. 

(United States) Air Force and others. The railcar potential is 

explored in such a way that we do keep those jobs here, that we 

add to our economic base, and that we don't let sort of this 

institutionalized fiction in the NDP Party get in the road of 

doing some of these things. 

 

That the proper reorganization of SEDCO, CMB (Crown 

Management Board of Saskatchewan), some of the other things 

that are necessary to look at, take place in an open manner.  

He's got good employees that can converse with the private 

sector very well, and that some type of public process I would 

suggest would be in order. 

 

The minister's right.  Most of the changes that he is bringing 

forward in this particular Bill are ones that clients, the lending 

community, others, have identified over a number of years.  

There are a number of them in there and I think in all fairness 

to doing this process in a proper way that I will ask for 

adjournment on this Bill so that we can go through it a little 

more extensively. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 71 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 

Care Insurance Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 

Amendment Act.  As indicated in the budget there's a pressing 

need to reduce the rising cost of health care in Saskatchewan.  

In aid of this the amendments to the chiropractic and 

optometric programs will limit coverage in accordance with 

other provinces which insure those benefits. 

 

In Saskatchewan chiropractors will be allowed to bill patients 

an additional amount with the provision, Mr. Speaker, that 

government may establish a limit for these charges.  I would 

point out as well that under both the chiropractic and 

optometric programs, supplementary 

health beneficiaries and recipients of the Family Income Plan 

and the Saskatchewan Income Plan will continue to receive full 

coverage.  That is people on low incomes will be protected.  

Also under the optometrist program all persons under 18 years 

of age will continue to receive full coverage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these initiatives will save Saskatchewan taxpayers 

approximately $9.5 million the first year and $13.4 million 

annually. 

 

I note as well, Mr. Speaker, that these amendments will still 

place Saskatchewan beneficiaries amongst the best insured in 

Canada.  Mr. Speaker, in addition to cost-saving measures, 

these amendments also allow Saskatchewan Health to make 

direct payment to insurers of medical services provided outside 

the country.  By making it easier to have those services paid 

for, this initiative will help to ensure prompt and adequate 

attention for Saskatchewan beneficiaries who may require 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well as making the medical care program more 

cost-effective the amendments will provide further savings to 

government by allowing Saskatchewan Health to recover 

monies from SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and 

other insurance companies for medical costs paid in connection 

with third-party liability accidents.  This is consistent with the 

current policy of recovering hospital costs regarding such 

accidents.  These amendments also revise the definition of 

position to include physicians serving as locum tenens.  This 

follows from regulatory changes by the College of Physicians 

and Surgeons to allow locum tenens positions to practice on 

their own and to pay them directly for their services. 

 

This amendment is particularly significant for people in rural 

areas, since due to constraints and current billing practices, 

rural areas have had serious difficulty in attracting doctors.  

Consequently, Mr. Speaker, it will greatly assist rural 

communities to both obtain and retain physicians' services. 

 

In total these amendments will ensure that Saskatchewan 

residents continue to enjoy one of the most comprehensive 

health care programs in Canada.  A program which, through 

these amendments and changes to payments for insured 

physicians services, would now also realize annualized savings 

of nearly $31 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hereby move second reading of The 

Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, as I've been listening to the 

minister, some of the changes that certainly the Minister of 

Finance talked about in his budget are now coming to place . . . 

or take place, and this Bill before this Assembly, as many 

MLAs I'm sure around this . . . in this Assembly know. 

 

They've had phone calls, if people have called like they've 

called my office, and a lot of people have had concerns.  And 

there's no doubt that there are also people who realize the fact 

that the question of our debt and the question of health care 

spending must be addressed.  I'm pleased that the government 

has taken a look at the fact 



1676 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1999 

that there are people within this province who are on low, fixed 

incomes and the fact that we've addressed the issue of the 

Saskatchewan Income Plan.  Anyone who falls within that 

criteria or low incomes will have at least the greater portion, if 

not all the portion, of the optometric and chiropractic fees cut. 

 

I would also like to indicate that when we talk about reducing 

the ability . . . or putting a fee on chiropractic and optometric 

services, it doesn't necessarily I think in the long run address 

the total costs of health as one wonders. 

 

And of course the professionals will always argue that if they 

don't have access or if they aren't able to provide the services 

that a patient needs as quickly as a patient should receive them, 

then it may mean higher costs and longer times or terms in the 

hospital for a patient. 

 

No doubt our system, the way it's set up, will probably . . . still 

leaves itself wide open to abuses and misuses of the health 

services that are available. 

 

And I trust that people across this province will think a little 

more seriously about the health question, will not just be 

running to the professionals every time they have a cough or a 

cold, but will look at the fact that they should be more 

conscious and more responsible, as I believe that's the only 

real, significant way we are going to address the escalating 

costs that we're finding in the funding for our health care 

question. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that I believe there 

will be more things we'd like to address as we peruse the Bill 

even further, I would adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 21 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 21 -- An Act 

to continue SaskEnergy Incorporated, to make certain 

consequential amendments to certain Acts resulting from 

that continuance and to validate certain transactions 

involving SaskEnergy Incorporated be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  There's a number of 

areas on SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker, that I want to touch on this 

afternoon because I think it's important that an item this 

controversial, one that obviously has played a very large role 

politically and philosophically in our province, that there has to 

be considerable discussion before we get into the Committee of 

the Whole because I think it's important for the government to 

understand certain things that are, in my view, reality in the gas 

industry. 

 

SaskEnergy becoming a Crown corporation, I believe is the 

right way to go.  I think that it was a mistake of the former 

government when we were proposing some of the 

changes in the gas industry that that wasn't clearly outlined to 

the public.  That the delivery of gas to farms and households, in 

this province anyway, rightly belongs in the purview of the 

Crown. 

 

You will never, ever see in a deregulated market-place, I don't 

believe, the ability of a farmer or someone like that to go to 

well-head unless it was on their own home quarter section or 

something like that.  So it is right and proper that that process 

take place, that the delivery of gas to those entities be in the 

form of a Crown corporation. 

 

I do have problems, Mr. Speaker, with that type of a Crown 

corporation being implemented without the corresponding 

regulatory bodies attached to it.  And I see no place in this 

particular Act where we have a tool like the Energy Resources 

Conservation Board that they have in Alberta. For instance, the 

tolling and tariff controls that are brought to bear on the 

delivery system so that people from top to bottom in the gas 

industry will feel comfortable that the rates being charged, that 

the tolling charges being charged, are fair and reasonable. 

 

And I think this government is missing a very important 

opportunity if that mechanism is not an institutional part of 

creating this Crown corporation.  And I'm wondering, Mr. 

Speaker, if it isn't deliberate.  And I guess that's why I think it's 

important that we speak on this debate before we get into 

committee, because there are some very important questions to 

be asked of the government as this Bill is taken through its 

various stages. 

 

(1445) 

 

If, as I understand, the debt that now is in SaskEnergy, which 

was taken from SaskPower and originally put with SaskEnergy 

as a stand-alone unit, is now going back into SaskEnergy -- or 

going back into SaskPower -- that means that SaskEnergy, as 

of today, other than certain commitments that it will probably 

make in the areas of pipeline construction, for instance, through 

its subsidiary TransGas, will be a debt-free operation. 

 

Most gas companies in Canada today, even with very low 

natural gas prices, are still very profitable.  That's why you find 

the pension funds, the people, the long-term institutional 

investor, still very interested in gas stocks; that they view the 

long-term future of natural gas as being a positive one. 

 

Natural gas is one of the cleanest burning fossil fuels that we 

have; we do have it in great abundance; we have anywhere 

from 150 to 200 years supply in Canada, which means that 

natural gas will be a fact of life for a long time in our province. 

 

Given that that long-term confidence is there, it means that the 

profitability of the natural distribution network will be there.  

And as a Crown corporation, SaskEnergy no doubt will pay 

dividends, pay dividends to the Consolidated Fund. 

 

The danger for the consumer in all of this, Mr. Speaker, is that 

without the proper regulatory mechanisms being put in place, 

when you're starting out with a new company, one that you 

have now stripped a couple of hundred 



April 11, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1677 

million dollars worth of debt away from, that there could be a 

certain amount of temptation, without a public regulatory 

mechanism, to use your rate and tolling structure to rack up 

some pretty hefty profits. 

 

And the other problem is that, Mr. Speaker, in all other 

jurisdictions in North America there is a clear delineation 

between cross-subsidizations of energy sources.  In other 

words, you don't mix electricity and gas.  You don't mix oil and 

gas.  You don't mix nuclear and gas.  Most jurisdictions keep 

the various entities separate so that the person paying the bill -- 

you and I, the consumer -- have a clear indication on a least a 

yearly basis of where our costs are going; otherwise you can 

have gouging occur. 

 

And that's why, Mr. Speaker, you have such strong sort of 

public utility review commissions in the United States.  That's 

why you've seen power plants stopped in midstream down 

there.  It's because the consuming public feel very strongly 

about the issue.  And I would think it would be incumbent upon 

the government as they go through this creation of a new 

Crown corporation that they would want to give the public 

assurance that there would be a regulatory mechanism that 

would govern the tolling and tariff structures, that people could 

feel confident, that industrial users could feel confident in 

approaching and knowing that they're going to get a fair 

hearing at a reasonable cost. 

 

One of the problems, Mr. Speaker, with the former 

Conservative government's experiment with the Public Utilities 

Review Commission in this province in the early '80s was that 

it had proved to be a very litigious process, very expensive.  In 

talking to people like Kalium Chemicals and others that use 

that process to put forward their arguments with SaskPower, 

which at the time was the sole mechanism to deliver gas in this 

province, they found that the legal costs, the cost burden to 

appear before the tribunal was almost greater than the end 

result, even if you won your case.  And other jurisdictions have 

come up with mechanisms that simply don't have that onerous 

impact on anyone sort of appearing and filing an official 

protest or filing for grievance against something that they don't 

feel is proper. 

 

And I think the people, for instance, that were very interested 

in buying TransGas last year from the Government of 

Saskatchewan, the consortium out of Calgary put forward -- 

and the Minister of Energy has that information, as does the 

minister responsible for SaskEnergy -- put forward a package 

of regulatory regimes that would be suitable for a SaskEnergy 

Corporation, a public Crown corporation having at that time a 

privatized TransGas operating side by side in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

If that regulatory regime is in place with a publicly owned 

TransGas and a publicly owned SaskEnergy, I think the 

consuming public could feel as much confidence as they would 

have with the other scenario. 

 

It's interesting, Mr. Speaker, in talking to people, large 

industrial users of gas in this province and others, that they 

have a number of concerns that are going to have to be 

addressed. 

The government is saying to the large urban municipalities that 

we are going to give you back the ability to put your surtax on 

gas, something that disappeared under the former regime when 

gas was deregulated. 

 

And the scenario is not a pleasant one, Mr. Speaker, for 

companies that are in the development of natural gas.  Because 

what they're doing is they're signing long-, mid-, and 

short-term contracts with various large users under 

deregulation.  That means a couple of gas companies sign 

contracts with people like IPSCO.  Those contracts, some of 

them will be for a 30-day supply, some of them will be for so 

much at six months supply, some of that will be over two years 

supply.  And they will arrive at a price and they will lock that 

price in or they will say that under this contract, that there is so 

much leeway over a given period of time. 

 

So now what we have proposed is that the Government of 

Saskatchewan allows the large urban areas to once more surtax 

gas.  The urban jurisdiction charges back to the company the 

amount of money of the surtax.  The company then has to go 

back to the industrial user or to the large public user and say, I 

have just been charged so much for my gas; I'm going to have 

to raise your rates. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if it's a hospital or a school or a university 

or this building or whatever, a public institution with a lot of 

public dollars in it, a lot of taxpayers' dollars, I suspect the 

reaction back to the gas company will be, sorry, we don't have 

any more money.  The government has just cut our grant.  The 

government has cut back our funding.  We can't increase mill 

rates any higher than what we've increased them already. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I say to you, that type of scenario is not 

going to be conducive to a happy relationship between the 

people that drill and develop natural gas in the province of 

Saskatchewan and the people that use the product. 

 

And what's going to happen in all of this, Mr. Speaker, unless 

there is some type of regulatory mechanism attached to the 

SaskEnergy Bill, or at least a strong commitment to a 

public-hearing process that will evolve a regulatory 

mechanism, is that there will be no incentive to drill and 

develop natural gas wells in this province.  There will be a 

strong urge, a very strong urge, to go outside of our province, I 

suspect, to access natural gas, and that we as a province in the 

end will be losers. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said, there are a lot of games that can 

be played with a company such as SaskEnergy, that starts out 

new in life, basically debt free without any regulatory 

mechanism.  And hopefully, hopefully, Mr. Speaker, we aren't 

going to see the government succumb to that urge to try and 

make very large profits at the expense of home owners, 

farmers, small-business people, who by their nature will have 

to rely upon this government Crown corporation to deliver gas 

to them in the best means possible. 

 

And I think those are the kind of questions, Mr. Speaker, that 

have to be asked about SaskEnergy.  Because we're dealing 

with a company that on the transportation side 



1678 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1999 

alone, on the TransGas side was valued at at least $450 million, 

and that was by independent appraisal from at least three 

different sources that I know of. 

 

So we have a company here that will be starting out with large 

assets and a company that is going to have to make some very 

large commitments in the not-too-near future.  SaskEnergy will 

be required over the next couple . . . two to three years to 

probably spend upwards of $200 million on installing 

natural-gas pipelines in this province. 

 

And they will be installed for two reasons: one is to provide a 

gathering network for natural-gas supplies that have already 

been discovered but at present have no access to market; and 

the other will be to deliver Saskatchewan natural gas to 

markets outside the province of Saskatchewan either in eastern 

Canada or the United States. 

 

The funding, Mr. Speaker, of how those pipelines will be 

delivered will be absolutely crucial.  Will that funding be with 

borrowed money?  Will that money be out of retained 

earnings?  Will that money be by special surtax on rates?  So 

you see, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of ways that that 

funding will have to be achieved. 

 

And once again it begs the questions, who will do the 

monitoring, who will work on behalf of home owners, 

hospitals, schools, large users like IPSCO, Kalium.  In other 

words, Mr. Speaker, almost the entire industrial sector in this 

province is going to have to feel with some confidence that this 

process is going to go ahead and that no one is going to get 

gouged. 

 

We in Saskatchewan are blessed with many resources, natural 

gas certainly being one of them -- environmentally sound, low 

price, at least in the foreseeable future, and adaptable to many 

different industrial and commercial situations.  It gives us an 

edge, Mr. Speaker, an edge that many of our competitors don't 

have.  It can be, if it is handled properly, a significant-enough 

edge that Saskatchewan can probably garner certain situations 

ahead of others because of our supplies. 

 

And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that Saskferco is but 

the first and largest in a line of what could be many successes, 

because Saskferco is founded on the principle of relatively 

modest-priced natural gas, close to the areas that the end 

product can be used in most effectively.  And I feel very 

confident, Mr. Speaker, that at the end of the day Saskferco 

will live up to its commitments of being a major supplier of 

fertilizer to Saskatchewan, Canada, the world.  It will return 

significant profit, taxes, and opportunities to Saskatchewan 

people.  And I think Saskferco would be one of the first to say 

that a regulatory mechanism attached to SaskEnergy or 

developed in conjunction with the SaskEnergy Bill would be 

right and proper for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are those in our province -- and I've also 

heard them and seen them in other provinces -- that say that 

deregulation of the gas industry was a backward step.  That 

deregulation takes away the ability of various 

jurisdictions to manage resources. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that anyone in North 

America today is going to reverse deregulation, no more than 

we are going to move back to large-scale, quarter and a half 

section farming, will the people that have become accustomed 

to the deregulated gas markets change their mind very easily.  

And I think it would be a serious mistake for SaskEnergy, once 

it attains Crown corporation status, to look at ways of 

destroying the deregulated market-place. 

 

I think that to succumb to those temptations would simply be 

setting back the process and setting back our province decades 

in the way that we deal with life.  The co-generation that I've 

heard members of the government stand up and boast about, 

co-generation and its successful development will be 

predicated on the ability of natural-gas producing companies 

and other industrial companies and SaskPower in getting 

together in a joint venture, if you will, to produce electricity 

and industrial steam in a joint effort. 

 

That is going to mean access at the well-head to the cheapest 

gas possible.  And the cheapest gas possible will only be 

achieved through a deregulated market-place.  And that is the 

only way that the ultimate consumer of the electricity of 

co-generation will be able to keep the lowest rates possible. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of issues that are all tied 

together in SaskEnergy.  There is our environment, there is the 

cost to the taxpayer, there is the strength of our industrial 

sector, and there are all of the things that we can build on in 

this province for the future if secure, reasonably priced supplies 

of natural gas are available for development down the road. 

 

So what I'm going to urge today, Mr. Speaker, in this 

second-reading debate is that the government be prepared at the 

time of Committee of the Whole, that the government be 

prepared, that the minister responsible be prepared, to talk 

about regulatory mechanisms, regulatory bodies; that he be 

prepared to show us how the consumer, how the commercial 

sector, and how the large industrial user in this province, is 

going to be assured that this new Crown corporation will not 

gouge for some short-term monetary gain in the next couple of 

years.  And how that this particular Crown corporation will be 

able to coexist with the private sector, in the rest of the western 

Canadian sedimentary basin at least, in the development and 

management and usage of natural gas in a responsible way. 

 

And I think if they can answer and talk about those particular 

questions in Committee of the Whole that what we will have 

here, Mr. Speaker, is a Crown corporation that will stand the 

test of time and will be an asset to citizens in this province. 

 

And I know that other of my colleagues will probably want to 

speak on this at a later date, but I will ask to adjourn debate on 

this at this time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



April 11, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1679 

Bill No. 60 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 60 -- An Act 

to amend The Community Bonds Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I understand the 

premise behind this particular Bill is to allow the co-operative 

movement to interface with community bond corporations in a 

way that wasn't possible under the original Act.  And I don't 

think that we have a lot of problem with that, Mr. Speaker, as 

long as some things are clearly understood. 

 

That the co-op structure, as I understand it, and I have had a . . . 

our family has had a number at the Moose Jaw Co-op since I 

don't know how long, probably three generations.  That the 

structure is that every person is equal, every person has one 

vote. 

 

A community bond is structured in such a way that you don't 

necessarily have equality in the shareholders, that the period of 

the bond before its conversion means that, even though you 

may have a board of directors who in effect are all equal during 

the bond period, that if it gets to such a point that the 

conversion to a shareholder -- the proviso is in The Community 

Bonds Act -- occurs, that you may have some people with more 

shares than others which is diametrically different than what 

you have with the co-operative structure. 

 

And I'm not saying, Mr. Speaker, that those two entities have to 

necessarily be at odds.  They are just a reality in life.  So that 

the marrying of a co-operative into a community bond 

corporation means that there may have to be a rethinking of 

how the ultimate ownership may shake down because you may 

have a co-op with several thousand members holding a certain 

percentage of a community bond.  That co-op is going to have 

to interact with the other shareholders in such a way that its 

sheer size, I suppose, doesn't infringe on the rights of other 

shareholders. 

 

Community bonds are in a way . . . well as we know in this 

province, they're leading edge.  The fact that you have to have 

a youth on the board of directors, I think, is something that 

probably no other jurisdiction in North America to my 

knowledge has ever contemplated; the fact that you recognize 

that the strength in a community is predicated upon other 

people in that community coming along and picking up the 

challenge, if you will, that the current generation invested in in 

a community bond.  Therefore you should have young people, 

who might not necessarily have any money, sitting on your 

board of directors so that they in the future will pass the torch, 

if you will. 

 

And that is wise, and I think that it was one of the reasons 

under the original structure.  The government has chosen to 

strengthen that, and I commend them for it. 

 

But I think it is important, Mr. Speaker, that when we go 

through this process of integrating two sort of different entities 

into one that we have a very clear understanding of how that 

co-operative structure would interface with 

existing shareholders in a community bond, and I will listen 

with some interest as the minister responsible explains that 

relationship and how it will carry on, in committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 49 -- An Act to amend The Mortgage Protection 

Act 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister please introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have 

with me John Wright, the deputy minister of Finance who's on 

my right; and Len Rog, the assistant deputy minister of 

Finance, who is immediately behind him. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, just 

to refresh everyone -- and I'm sure you've given this answer at 

some place before -- how many people are currently affected 

by the cancellation of this Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, it's slightly below 

1,300 -- and just to add some additional information -- and the 

average benefits are about $19 a month. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Just for information, Mr. Minister, and 

anyone watching, what's the going mortgage rate in the 

province of Saskatchewan today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I am glad to say, 

because my mortgage comes due on November 1, but a 

one-year mortgage rate is 6.95 per cent, which is a promising 

thing, and anyone renewing their mortgage is able to take 

advantage of this.  And the member may ask, where will this 

stay?  All the indications are that interest rates are expected to . 

. . those who make these analyses expect it to continue to drop 

in a modest way for the next little while, and there is no signs 

or indications that they may be starting to increase in the near 

future. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, these 13,000 households that 

are still or were being protected on mortgage protection, it must 

be safe to say then that they were in probably multi-year 

mortgage arrangements. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, I think that that's quite correct. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- That no one should have any problem 

probably remortgaging their household, given the present 

market? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm advised that there should be no 

difficulty here. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I wonder if the minister, just for information 

-- he may not have this -- what is the longest mortgage that a 

person can get today with a regular 



1680 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1999 

household? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Generally the time is five.  That's a 

standard rule, but there are exceptions in some situations where 

you could go to seven, six.  But the general time period in 

which institutions prefer, and I think CMHC (Canada Mortgage 

and Housing Corporation) works this way, is five years. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, do you and your officials feel 

that the changes in the federal Act regulating mortgages, down 

payments, that sort of thing, has created a higher-risk clientele 

that may be more adversely affected by sudden spikes in 

interest rates? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think that that's a fair statement 

that it is a . . . this is a positive but yet a difficult move.  The 

CMHC is going to have to be . . . watch this with some care to 

try to advise people who may get trapped because maybe 

they're not in the position where they ought to be taking out a 

mortgage.  So there's mixed benefits but also some risk here.  

But as I said, that's where CMHC is going to have to be very 

careful. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I think, Mr. Minister, that our provincial 

government will also have to be very careful.  It's a situation 

that, not unlike the early '80s, could lead to a disaster, in my 

view -- that people that get overly exposed as you had in the 

housing market of the late '70s and early '80s, obviously are the 

first to suffer when you have early and quick spikes in the 

interest markets. 

 

And I would think that you as the Minister of Finance will 

want to watch very carefully in discussions with your federal 

counterpart any large movement toward first-time home buying 

in this province, and that the government be fairly careful in 

being restraint minded, if you will, with people that might get 

themselves a little bit overboard. 

 

And I think I'd like a commitment from you that we won't have 

to see what we saw in 1982 when interest rates went to 20 and 

21 per cent, that we're relying upon the federal government 

only to sort of regulate the situation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Once again I have no hesitation in 

saying that again, because the member is right.  I was around in 

this portfolio in the 1970s and early '80s when the interest rates 

did go out of sight.  And there was at that time, both at the 

federal levels and different provincial levels, incentives of all 

kinds to entice people to buy homes. 

 

That is not to say that we should not be trying to make homes 

available for everyone.  But yet there's a timing.  At some point 

in time people may have to wait till they're better positioned to 

be able to buy a home. 
 

We're going to be . . . I can certainly give the member a 

commitment that those kinds of situations will not be 

encouraged.  I think we do as a government, as I know the 

members of the opposition will share, have a responsibility to 

advise people appropriately.  And that's what we want to do 

here so that, having learned from what happened in the 

1980-81-82, hopefully that's going 

to guide us well into whatever we have to do in future years. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 50 -- An Act to amend The Financial 

Administration Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister introduce any additional 

staff that may be with him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you for that, Mr. Chairman.  

There's a change in the staff advisors who are with me, and I 

want to introduce Gerry Kraus, who's the Provincial 

Comptroller, seated behind Mr. Wright. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'm wondering if 

the minister could give us an example of exactly what is 

intended here with the write-down of an advance or a loan.  I 

mean, can he give us a concrete example of what his deputy 

minister's contemplating here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I can actually give you four 

examples because it actually has transpired.  These are Crown 

loans and investments that have been written-down.  I guess I 

was confused because the technical term is extinguished. 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation, 183.7 million; Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation, 715 million; Saskatchewan 

Grain Car Corporation, 35.9 million; and the Crown 

Investments Corporation, 583.9 million -- for a total of 18.5. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So I gather from what this Bill is asking, is 

the consent of the legislature to take these write-downs in a 

particular area and transfer the debt to the Consolidated Fund.  

Is that what you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Actually that has already been 

done.  When we were in the process of doing this, the 

government was, we consulted the Department of Justice.  

Department of Justice advised us that we should have such an 

amendment to make it clear that we have the authority as a 

government to be able to do this write-down.  So that's here on 

the advice of Justice to make sure that the authority is there in 

the legislation for this, or if it should ever happen to be 

necessary in the future, so that there is no question about the 

authority and the process. 

 

Because from time to time . . . and I hope it doesn't happen and 

we're going to try to manage the portfolio so that we don't get 

stuck in these kind of situations -- but if there is the need to do 

this some time in the future, the authority will adhere in the 

legislation in order to be able to get it done. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I wonder if the minister would be prepared to 

send across the list and the appropriate 



April 11, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1681 

numbers attached to them? 

 

Mr. Minister, under the explanation I'm looking at, it says the 

corporation is required to use the grant to fund its net operating 

loss and to return any amount paid in excess of the actual 

operating loss.  What are you getting at in the explanation on 

clause 4 on the Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- This directly involves the question 

of the CIC, the Crown Investments Corporation.  It is 

anticipated, and that has been provided for in the budget, that 

this year the CIC will run a loss of some $39 million.  It will 

require a subsidy from the Consolidated Fund, as 

recommended by the Provincial Auditor, as recommended by 

the Gass Commission and the Ernst & Young report. 

 

What this amendment does, for the information of the member 

of Thunder Creek, is that it provides the government the 

authority to be able to do that.  So this year, assuming that the 

estimate that was provided where there will be loss of $39 

million, and it's also been included in the budget at $39 million, 

we'll be able to pay that subsidy to the CIC. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay, what if that estimate is wrong?  What 

if for certain circumstances you come in at a lower figure or 

you actually show a profit, what's the process then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We will . . . I shouldn't say we, but 

the Consolidated Fund will only pay when the exact amount is 

determined.  So the estimate is up to $39 million.  If it so 

happens that it is $15 million, we'll pay $15 million.  If it's 

zero, there will be no subsidy provided whatsoever. 

 

If you look at the Bill, you will see that there is a provision 

here that:  "The minister may impose any terms and conditions 

on a grant pursuant to this section . . ." So there's the 

opportunity to do that.  But the way it's going to work, and 

that's the terms and conditions, is that if they do not require the 

full 39 million, they will only be provided the amount that's 

necessary. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So what this means is, at the end of the fiscal 

year when the loss is determined or not -- you either have a loss 

or you don't -- you will then, as minister, determine what is 

appropriate and you will then transfer those funds.  What is the 

reporting mechanism then to the legislature on this particular 

transaction, seeing as it occurs beyond the end of your budget 

year that you're asking appropriation for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It's helpful for the purposes of the 

House because the Crowns operate on a calendar year so you 

get the information earlier because it's on the calendar year 

basis.  But that information will be provided therefore in the 

timely manner, assuming that the next session begins sometime 

in the new year -- March.  We will have information then on 

what the amount will be and we'll be able to report that to the 

legislature.  If members want to ask the question, that'll be 

quite available.  There's no problem with that at all. 

 

I want to comment, because I think the member did ask 

about what happens if the amount of requirement is above the 

$39 million.  In that case, the government would have to 

provide a special warrant so that there would have to be public 

knowledge of this expenditure because of how the special 

warrant becomes public.  And that too would have to then be 

reported to the legislature. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I'm a little bit mystified at the wording, Mr. 

Minister, of sort of "that the minister considers appropriate".  In 

other words, I guess what it leaves me to think is that if you've 

budgeted for a $39 million loss but for some reason you only 

want to take a $15 million loss, you can deem that that is 

appropriate.  I would think that you would have wanted a 

clause that simply said that the minister will pay to the Crown 

Investments Corporation X as determined by year-end 

statement or something like that, rather than whatever the 

minister feels is appropriate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Actually in essence, that's what's 

going to be done.  The loss will not be established by the 

Minister of Finance.  A loss will be established by the CIC.  

They will have to account for the loss, identify for it, identify 

what it is, and then the money will be provided.  So in essence 

what the member describes is what the process will be. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well in all due respect, Minister, as Finance 

minister I suspect you sit on the board of CIC, and not having 

ever been on the board of CIC but having been fairly closely 

related to it, I understand how it does function a certain way.  

And it could seem appropriate at times to vary the amount of 

loss from year to year. 

 

And I know it's a little late to bring in an amendment to the 

process, but I would have preferred something a little more 

definitive when we're talking about appropriate losses. 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Let me try to be helpful.  It's not 

possible to hide or conceal or bury the amount of loss because 

it has to be reported in an audited statement in the annual report 

of the Crown Management Board.  And the member is right, 

the Minister of Finance does sit on the Crown Management 

Board.  And actually that's a good and useful way to do it 

because the left hand knows what the right hand is doing.  

Whether they are the Crown sector or the Consolidated Fund 

sector of the government, in many ways they are interrelated 

and it is very important that there be a close working 

relationship.  And that's why the minister -- in this case myself 

-- sits on the board of the Crown Management Board. 

 

But clearly, there are losses; they will be identified, and they 

will have to be reported in the audited statements that are 

provided in the annual report on the calendar year basis. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have some 

questions, Mr. Minister, that relate to, first of all, Sask Water. 

 

In the $183.7 million that you're asking us to look at in this 

Bill, the auditor raised some concerns the other day in 



1682 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1999 

Crown Corporations that I'm not sure you're aware of.  And he 

said he was having a great deal of difficulty, he was having a 

great deal of difficulty defining in where you were placing the 

183 million as a debt write-off and where you were placing the 

value of the assets in relation to the debt write-down and that 

you were writing the assets off as well.  That's what I gathered 

from what he had said to us in Crown Corporations.  And I'd 

like you to explain that to us if you would. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm not able to comment on the 

comments that the member says the auditor was saying . . .  Is 

it Crown Corporations Committee or Public Accounts? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Crown Corporations.  Because 

advances that were made from the Consolidated Fund to the 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation, it was determined by 

sources and advisors other than the Department of Finance or 

the government -- although that was a concern here as well -- 

that there was certain projects on which there was no income to 

repay the advance or the loan. 

 

The Gass Commission recommended therefore that they be 

written off.  The Provincial Auditor supported that, and does 

support that.  And so maybe I misunderstand the question and 

the member may want to repeat it, but I don't know that there is 

any disagreement along the line on this, based on the advice 

that we received and the action that we took based on that 

advice. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, the auditor clearly identified 

that there was a significant problem.  In fact, we spent 15 or 20 

minutes talking about what the problem was.  And I'd like you, 

if you've got the answer, to describe it to us because I want to 

get the Crown Corporations minutes, Hansard, and then I'll 

read it to you what his problem was so that then you'll 

understand.  But if you've got the answer, then you tell me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think I do.  The auditor may be 

referring to the fact that there is a one-year lag in the reporting, 

and that may be what he is referring to.  But I don't think that 

the auditor is prohibited from getting the information that he 

wants.  He just has to ask and that's available. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I gathered from the discussion, Mr. Minister, 

that that necessarily wasn't the problem.  He was wondering 

why you had taken the debt and written it off and taken the 

assets and written them off down to zero too. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well once again, all I can do in 

response is explain why this has taken place.  It has taken place 

because the debt that was incurred did not have the assets that 

were able to earn the income to repay the debt.  So the only 

way you can repay the debt is from the Consolidated Fund.  So 

you might as well have it -- and that's the appropriate way to do 

it for accountability purposes -- become a debt of the 

Consolidated Fund because the Consolidated Fund is 

responsible for the debt.  Basically there were no assets that 

could earn the 

income to repay the debt. 

 

And I really . . . I don't know what the confusion is, if there is 

any.  I would like to get the Crown Corporations Hansard and 

go through it and do some work on it and get back to the 

member.  I don't mind providing that explanation at all.  But to 

the best of my knowledge, that's what's happened here. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- As soon as I get the Hansard from Crown 

Corp, I'll read you what the question was.  However what I'd 

like also to have is the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation, the list of the items that were there in terms of the 

same list that you have in your CIC list.  On page 4 of your 

budget address you've got a list of those items that you wrote 

off in CIC, and I'd like to have that same list of items in the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation that you 

wrote off and I'd like to have that same consideration for both 

of those items. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm sorry, could you explain what 

you mean by a list? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the Crown Investments 

Corporation had a list of items on page 4 of your budget 

address, on page 4, of PCS (Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Inc.) dividends, SEDCO, STC (Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company), Saskatchewan Diversification 

Corporation losses . . . has a list of items that those losses were 

accrued to. 

 

Now on the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, 

I'd like to have those identified in hospitals, schools, university 

buildings, all of the things that relate to that, and I'd like to 

have a list of them, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes the information I have . . . and 

I don't have it hospital by hospital and community by 

community.  The Department of Health will have that.  But the 

list of items that I have is . . . In the Department of Health, they 

were for hospitals and special care homes; Education, some 

university funding in regional colleges.  In SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation), tentative 

improvements for departments and SPMC internal 

requirements. 

 

And there was some miscellaneous items, all of which were 

part of this money that the Provincial Auditor and the Gass 

Commission said to the government, there is no assets for 

which there is income to be repaying that with, other than 

money from the Consolidated Fund that come in the form of a 

grant. 

 

And the recommendation there was, by those advisors -- one of 

them a servant of the legislature -- was since you have to pay 

for this even over a period of time, from grants from the 

Consolidated Fund, it should be a liability of the Consolidated 

Fund.  And therefore it should be part of the provincial debt 

because in the reality that's what it is.  And so that's why this 

conversion has been made. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I want the list of the items and 

their dollar value: hospitals, 250 million; schools, 25 million; 

nursing homes, 75 million.  That's what I was asking for.  I was 

asking that the other day already. 



April 11, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1683 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Sorry.  I am told that it is as 

follows.  Out of the 715 million for health, in the area of health, 

for hospitals, 460 million; special care homes, 20 million; 

universities, 164 million; regional colleges, 5 million; tentative 

improvements for departments, 16 million; SPMC internal 

requirements, 41 million; and the miscellaneous, 7 million. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you mind sending me over that list 

please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'll get the staff to write it up for 

you, and we'll get it over for you right away. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'd like also to deal with the Grain Car 

Corporation and your write-off on this.  Why was it done at this 

point in time, the write-off of the $35.9 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Simply because that was . . . we 

had the independent inquiry into the state of the books, and the 

Gass Commission recommended that we do it at this point in 

time and we followed that advice. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- When was the Grain Car Corporation initiated 

its original debt? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The people who are with me are far 

too young to be able to have the corporate memory for that, but 

it was about the middle . . . some time after the middle '70s.  

I'm sorry I can't give the member the exact year but it was in 

the '70s, late '70s. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Was any of the debt accrued from SPMC 

prior to 1982? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation was established in 1986, and so all of 

the debt that is part of the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation item that we're considering here was incurred 

since 1986. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, on health care of 460 million, 

special care homes of 20 million, universities 164 million, 

regional colleges 5, 16 for the department, where would you 

consider that the greatest amount of waste and mismanagement 

occurred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It's not a question of waste and 

mismanagement, and that's not the point that we're making in 

this particular case.  It's simply a question of the Provincial 

Auditor for several years saying that the old system was an 

inappropriate way to place this kind of debt, and made a 

recommendation on the more appropriate way to handle it.  

And we have followed that recommendation.  We sought 

further advice through the Gass Commission, and the Gass 

Commission also made that recommendation.  So it seems to 

me that those are pretty good arguments of why the 

government should have and in fact did act. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Well my point, Mr. Minister, is you ran the 

election on the basis that you were going to run this outfit with 

a lot less waste and mismanagement.  And, Mr. Minister, here 

is the point that I want to make.  You said all of these debts . . . 

in your budget you went through all of the waste and 

mismanagement, the horrendous waste, 

and all of the things that went on. 

 

And you know, Mr. Minister, $460 million of that was spent in 

health care, in hospitals across this province, dealing with the 

kinds of things that . . . Our Minister of Agriculture stood in 

this House today and said we've got to have a reasonable 

concern for the safety of rural people in rural Saskatchewan.  

And, Mr. Minister, what we did because of your inept delivery 

of the health care system from 1971 till 1982 . . . you did 

nothing, almost nothing in delivering that health care 

component. 

 

And as the member from Eston said yesterday, or was it the 

day before, the people from Eston have been told that very 

likely their health care facility will be closed down.  And they 

personally put over $1 million into that themselves.  And you 

say over and over again, this is waste and mismanagement. 

 

(1545) 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I don't consider it waste and 

mismanagement.  I think it's prudent borrowings on the part of 

a government in a time to serve the needs of the people on an 

individual basis across the province of Saskatchewan.  I think it 

was right.  I thought it was right at the time.  I think it's right 

today. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I want to have you tell me which hospitals 

in the $460 million that were built from 1985 till 1992, which 

one is a waste?  Tell me that.  Which one of those in my 

constituency and across this province were a waste? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, what I'm here is to 

deal with the Bill which provides a write-off for the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, of certain 

monies that were inappropriately accounted for. 

 

The Provincial Auditor, and I have it here, said the following.  

He said that these financial statements should record losses as 

assets only when the loans can be used to discharge the 

government's liabilities or finances in future operations. 

 

He also said that the loans can only be repaid when the 

government provides SPMC, a government organization, the 

necessary money according to loans. Accordingly the loans are 

not assets. 

 

That's what we're doing here.  We're not determining here 

which hospital facilities ought to be built or which ones are 

wise or not wise.  We're simply putting the appropriate 

accounting systems into place so that it is done the way the 

advisors who advised this legislature say it ought to be made -- 

and that's the Provincial Auditor. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- The problem is, Mr. Minister, we might not 

necessarily disagree with the accounting procedure.  It's the 

public stance that you and your government take on this issue.  

You're always taking these numbers and flowing them into a 

bigger picture of waste and mismanagement. 

 

And the member from Morse quite rightly challenges you 



1684 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1999 

say which of these hospitals, which of these university 

improvements, which of these regional colleges do you class as 

waste and mismanagement?  Because your pronouncement 

when you take this 715 and the other write downs that you say 

that these independent bodies have recommended, that you take 

in the sense of establishing a better accounting method, and it's 

always attached to some larger political agenda.  And that's the 

point that we find very offensive, Mr. Minister. 

 

It's not arriving at an accounting system.  If you're eventually 

going to change the accounting system of this province so that 

we go to a new basis, fine and dandy.  But we think at some 

point you need to be a little more honest with people in your 

public pronouncements about the size of the debt and where 

some of it accrued from and how it is made up. 

 

And otherwise, minister, you have to be able to go through this 

list and tell us which ones of those are, in your opinion, waste 

and mismanagement, so that we can then go back to the 

affected people and communities and talk about it in that way.  

That's the problem that we're having with your government.  

And we don't think that it's quite fair to compare like that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I really have no 

comment on that.  There's another place where the debate on 

what some people might or might not think is waste or was 

waste and mismanagement can take place. 

 

All I'm providing here is something which apparently the 

member from Thunder Creek is in general agreement with.  

And that is providing in The Financial Administration Act the 

kind of amendments that are necessary to put in place the 

accounting systems which will clearly account for government 

expenditures -- which is taxpayers' expenditures -- so that it is 

clear and there are no questions, and so that the funds for 

expenditures on capital projects are, as a policy of the 

government under this government, expensed at the time that 

they are made.  In other words, pay as you go. 

 

That's how we're doing here.  We're not here making 

judgements on the basis of projects that may or may not have 

been pleasing to some people or not pleasing to other people. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I'll read for the minister this issue that the 

auditor raised, and perhaps we can deal with it here: 

 

 In our work we see there are two key issues that pertain to the 

year ending December 31, 1991.  The first is the removal of 

$180 million or about $180 million of debt from the financial 

statements of the corporation.  And the second issue relates to 

the write-off of $197 million of assets. 

 

 We have, in our examination, we have not yet seen the 

sufficient or appropriate evidence to support those write-offs, 

and we're discussing that with the appointed auditors. 

 

That's in the Water Corporation, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, that is . . . 

Thank you very much.  That is something that the auditor 

obviously is working out with the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation, and we'll have to do that.  But all I can say is that 

on that matter, is that the Consolidated Fund only records the 

financial assets on its balance sheet, not the physical assets.  

And the financial assets in these cases are loans to the 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation and not the physical assets 

which are owned by the Saskatchewan Water Corporation.  

The ownership and management of these assets is there. 

 

So if there is -- as the member was good enough to send over 

me a copy of the Hansard from the Crown Corporations 

Committee -- some work that yet needs to be done between the 

auditor and the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, I have full 

confidence that it will be worked out in due course as under the 

normal time frame and the normal circumstances.  And the 

answers will be there when that work is done. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Minister, you have said though that there 

were no physical assets that would contribute in any shape or 

form to the debt.  Now the auditor seems to think that there are 

physical assets attached to this debt with Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation.  Because he and the private sector auditor haven't 

been able to come to some type of agreement on the size of 

your write-down.  And obviously if they can't agree on the size 

of your write-down, someone must feel that there's an asset that 

is worth more than the zero value that you're attaching to it or 

at least saying that there was no assets; therefore I had to take 

the entire write-down.  Obviously there is a dispute between 

the private sector auditor and the Provincial Auditor as to that 

fact. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, what we deal with 

here is what the accountants of the Water Corporation have 

reported.  And in the Saskatchewan Water Corporation annual 

report for the year 1991 they say that: 

 

 In our opinion, these financial statements present fairly, in all 

material respects, the financial position of the Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation as at December 31, 1991 and the results 

of its operations and the changes in its financial position for 

the year then ended in accordance with generally accepted 

accounting principles. 

 

I don't think anybody argues with that.  But if there are some 

specifics that the accountants for the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation and the Provincial Auditor need to work out, that's 

where . . . they have to be worked out.  If the Minister of 

Finance needs to be or can be of some assistance in those 

deliberations, he's prepared to do that.  But I have every 

confidence that it will be worked out because that is clearly a 

direction that has been given by this government to our Crown 

corporations, to our departments, that they have to be 

accountable.  They have to report openly and clearly and fairly, 

and I have no doubt that that's what's going to happen. 

 

But that's a matter that I can't respond to.  It's a matter that the 

Provincial Auditor and the Water Corporation will have to 

work out.  And when the Water Corporation is before either 

this committee or in the Crown 



April 11, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1685 

Corporations Committee, I believe that they should have to 

account for any disputes or any differences that may exist, to 

those committees. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, what we're talking about here is 

a change of menu and a wilful decision on the Department of 

Finance to accept the accounting practices as outlined by Gass, 

and we have no problem dealing with it that way.  What the 

auditor has a problem with is how you're going to deal with 

that and writing the assets down to zero.  That's what he's got a 

problem with. 

 

And what we're asking you, sir, because of your change in 

policy, you have to reflect some asset value.  And he's saying 

to you that there are some asset values, at least that's what I 

gather from it.  And now we're asking you, you had a specific 

change in policy to have the write-down occur.  His 

observations were that you had $180 million debt write-down 

and $197 million asset write-down.  The two numbers don't 

correspond either.  He said there was $142 million write 

_down in Rafferty-Alameda in the assets and a $55 million 

write-down in assets in the irrigation projects around 

Diefenbaker Lake. 

 

Now you explain to me and to the public of Saskatchewan, 

number one, why those numbers are different, why the auditor 

has a problem with it, and resolve that we're going to get this 

thing straightened out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think obviously that's where the 

misunderstanding is.  There is no dispute over the numbers.  I 

don't think that the auditor is disputing.  Even when I read the 

Hansard, that's clearly not the issue. 

 

The issue that seems to be between the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation and the Provincial Auditor -- and I'm not even sure 

if it's an issue; it's a matter of something they have to work out 

-- is a matter of accounting and how they will show the 

accounting of, for example, the Rafferty dam, how they will 

show that asset in their books.  That's the issue there. 

 

All that we're dealing with here is the writing off of the 

financial assets, the loan.  And because there is no capability to 

earn the income or the revenue necessary to repay the loan, 

we've had to write down the financial loan off.  Now we've not 

dealt with the assets.  That's the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation which is going to have to deal with that, and will 

appropriately have to record and report them with the advice of 

the Provincial Auditor in their financial statements. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, the question that he raises is 

first the removal of the 180 million or about 180 million of 

debt from the financial statement of the corporation.  And the 

second issue relates to the write-off of 197 million of assets. 

 

So he's got two questions he wants to ask you and we're asking 

on his behalf here today.  Why the $180 million write-off of 

debt, and why the $197 million write-off of the assets?  Two 

very simple questions that he asked. 

 

And you're the Finance minister, and don't push it off on the 

Water Corporation.  I think it's your responsibility 

because you made a political decision that that's what you were 

going to do consequently from the Gass Commission report.  

And we're asking you to provide this Assembly and the people 

of Saskatchewan the opportunity to understand with us what 

you did. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Why is the member for Saskatoon 

Broadway on her feet? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- I'd like to ask for leave to introduce some 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'd like to introduce to 

all members in the legislature two people who are visiting us 

today from the city of Saskatoon.  Isabelle Nelson is in the west 

gallery and her husband, Randy Nelson, a former member of 

the legislature for the city of Yorkton, is seated on the floor of 

the legislature.  I'd like to welcome Isabelle and Randy to the 

legislature and to the city of Regina.  And I hope you have a 

safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Why is the member for Yorkton on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I too am asking 

leave to welcome Mr. Nelson. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Mr. Chairman, I too, as the sitting member from 

Yorkton wish to welcome Randy, who was sitting in 

government for two years prior to my coming to the Legislative 

Assembly, and his wife, Isabelle.  Both have been very strong 

supporters of mine and have assisted me throughout the term of 

the nomination.  And I want to welcome them to the Assembly 

and thank them for their support and assistance during the time 

that I ran for the nomination and for the election here.  Thank 

you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 50 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, let me just provide a 

more detailed answer here.  The breakdown of the total amount 

of the write-off in the Saskatchewan Water Corporation was 

total dollars of money borrowed for Rafferty-Alameda, 

$168,819,683 less the contributions from the United States of 

$24,988,958 for a total of $143,830,725.  Then on the irrigation 

side, the Riverhurst 10 million project, and the Lucky Lake 

project 20 million.  And there were others for $9,879,904.  All 

of this totals up to the amount which was provided. 



1686 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1999 

The member asked, what was the reason for the write-off.  The 

reason for the write-off is because these assets -- and they are 

assets; nobody's arguing that -- are not able to earn the 

revenues to pay back the loan.  It's not possible to earn those 

kind of revenues.  That doesn't mean that the assets aren't there, 

holding back water or providing water for irrigation purposes. 

 

What I understand the Provincial Auditor as saying -- and I 

don't disagree with him -- is that the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation has to find a way to show those assets.  We don't 

disagree with that.  I think the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation has to find a way to show those assets because 

they are assets.  But that does not in any way take away from 

the fact that, even though they are there, they don't have 

sufficient revenues to pay back the loan.  And so the issue here 

is the inability to pay back the loan and therefore the need to do 

the write-off. 

 

Now I have no difficulty at all in resolving this issue.  The 

Department of Finance is ready.  And in fact I've already 

instructed while we are deliberating here, while you're asking 

the questions and making the comments, I've already instructed 

my staff to speak to the Saskatchewan Water Corporation to 

see what the problem is so that it can be resolved.  And 

therefore I don't think there should be any difficulty.  The 

private sector auditor will have to be involved in this resolve as 

well. 

 

I don't question the fact that the Provincial Auditor, if that's 

what he's saying . . . And that's what we understand him to be 

saying.  The Provincial Auditor is saying the Water 

Corporation has to have a way to show those assets.  I think 

they should.  And we'll have to find a way, or they'll have to 

find a way to do that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I'm not an accountant and I 

don't pretend to be.  But in reviewing the item that the auditor 

brought forward, if you were doing it according to the method 

that I assume you're doing it with -- you're taking the write-offs 

and doing them -- you should take the $183 million plus the 

$197 million, add them together, and write it off.  Because 

that's what you're writing off.  That's the write-off of the debt 

and the assets in Sask Water . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well he says you're writing off the assets.  That's what he said.  

I'm not misinterpreting it.  He said: "And the second issue 

relates to the write-off of $197 million of assets."  I didn't say 

that; the auditor did. 

 

Now under common accounting practices, you'd add the two 

write-offs together and say that's the total.  Because if you 

write off . . . if you take your debt and write off the car value of 

your . . . the debt of your car, and then you take and write off 

the asset value, you should have to combine them together 

because you've eliminated both of them. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is what the auditor says here.  He wrote 

off both of them.  And I'm not telling you what I think, I'm 

telling you what he said.  Now you explain that to me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think it's becoming more clear 

what the issue is here.  First of all, it is true that the loans have 

been written off.  For all the reasons I've given and for the 

interests of time, I'm not going to repeat those 

reasons again.  But the loans have been written off. 

 

There seems to be a dispute between the Provincial Auditor 

and the private sector auditor because the private sector auditor 

seemed to have also written off the assets in the way that is 

reported here.  I don't know why they did that.  That's an 

argument that the Provincial Auditor and the auditor who does 

the Saskatchewan Water Corporation are talking about.  And I 

don't understand why the private sector auditor would have 

written off the assets.  We didn't write off the assets, they're 

there. 

 

But we are prepared to intervene to see that this is corrected 

and we'll speak to the Provincial Auditor, find exactly what his 

concern is, and then follow up with the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation and the firm that provides the audit for the 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation.  Because I don't disagree 

with the member that this is a question that needs to be 

addressed and resolved and clarified. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, now that we've established that there's a problem that 

obviously has to be sorted out, I'm wondering why, now that 

we've established that we've got an asset that shouldn't have 

been written off, we both agree that we've got assets to deal 

with here . . . a quick calculation here, and I used very 

conservative numbers -- small "c" by the way -- on calculating 

the return to Sask Water from the various irrigation projects 

around Lake Diefenbaker, basis $30 an acre which I say is 

quite conservative for water usage in those irrigation districts.  

And I come up with about a million and a half dollars. 

 

Now a million and a half dollars has some ability to service 

debt.  I'm wondering if you're saying a million and a half 

dollars couldn't service . . . and I'm not sure that that is all the 

money that would accrue to Sask Water because of the various 

agreements with towns and villages and other things.  But out 

of that $55 million write-off, how much debt could you have 

serviced even on the million and a half dollars? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Actually none, because the 

information that I have is that the return that the member 

speaks of is barely enough to pay for the operating costs of 

these projects.  There is no money therefore available for 

repayment of the loans which were incurred in the construction 

of these facilities. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, most of those projects, whether 

it's done through PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 

Administration) or through Sask Water, that was always -- and 

I'm more familiar with the PFRA ones -- done with a sinking 

fund that was done over about a 25- or 30-year period of time.  

And that money was set aside. 

 

PFRA, the federal government, as you know is a big 

component.  It's a 50-50 deal on these irrigation projects.  And 

I think that there was some money available to handle capital 

costs besides ongoing operating.  Is that totally wrong? There is 

none? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, there is no sinking fund or any 

kind of a fund with monies available to do this.  Now 



April 11, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1687 

there may be in the PFRA.  I'm not familiar with that.  That's 

federal government.  I can't report on that.  But as far as the 

provincial projects that are involved here, there was no money 

set aside. 

 

The only revenue and money available is that which is gained 

as revenues from the customers who pay, and the amount of 

return on that is just enough to pay for the operations of these 

projects and nothing else. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Will you undertake, Mr. Minister, to explain 

to the Provincial Auditor the two items and the reasons why the 

decision was made in 1991 to write off an additional $197 

million over and above the 183 that you have listed here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I've given that undertaking already.  

We will undertake . . . I'll speak to the Water Corporation. I'll 

have my officials do that, and also speak to the auditor who 

audits the Saskatchewan Water Corporation to clarify this.  I'm 

just as interested in getting it clarified as the member from 

Morse or the member from Thunder Creek.  And as I said 

earlier, we will do whatever is required in order to make this 

thing clear. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- In relation to this, Mr. Minister, we have a 

debt . . . in the paper that you provided to us we have a debt of 

$183 million from the Sask Water Corporation, which is the 

debt side of the Sask Water Corporation. 

 

Then on the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, 

we also have a debt of 715 million.  That was the same number 

as in the budget address that you made here.  The 184 is in 

sense the same number.  But what you have in this paper and 

what you have in your budget address is the difference between 

875 million and 583 million in Crown Investments Corporation 

write-off.  Now which is it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm told it's like apples and oranges.  

The 875 million was the debt transfer, the transfer of debt from 

CIC to the Consolidated Fund because the Consolidated Fund 

would have to pay for it eventually anyway. 

 

The 583 million is the equity write-down, the total losses that 

the Crown Investments Corporation has incurred over its 

period of time.  So they're two different items and therefore 

you will find them reported in two different places. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay.  Then I want to ask this question.  Give 

me a list of the items in CIC.  If the 583 is a different list than 

on page 4 of your book, then tell me which list I go to to find 

out where your 583 is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- In the interests of time, the 1991 

annual report of the Crown Investments Corporation, if the 

member wants to take note, on page 51 refers to the $583.9 

million that we're speaking of. And then it has the 

accompanying notes which provide all of the details and the list 

that the member's seeking.  And it's been published and it's 

available there. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I don't have it on hand 

here today.  Would you mind sending it over so that I 

could review those items? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Only on the condition that if I need 

this copy to refer to it again you'll bring it back to me, please. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I guess the interest on 

long-term debt, the interest on short-term debt, general, 

administrative and other depreciation, dividends . . . or pardon 

me, interest, I guess would be the items that would be 

occurring there, and you took and put . . . looks to me like most 

of the $583 million is interest debt. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Let me try to take the committee 

through this.  If you look . . . once again the member is looking 

at page 51.  You start and you see what the income has been -- 

$121.579 million.  Then there are expenses in which there are: 

interest -- long-term debt, $278 million; and interest -- 

short-term debt; general, administrative and other; depreciation 

for $287 million.  And then the income loss would be $165.484 

million. 

 

There's provision here -- and you can find the explanation on 

that on note 12 -- for decline in value of investments.  

Investments that were made have lost their value.  That decline 

of value of investments were $449.615 million; for a net 

income loss of $615 million.  There is some revenue because of 

reinvested earnings of $31 million.  You subtract that from that 

and you have a deficit that is being written off of $583.947 

million. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, in order to have the $583 

million accounted for, it says there: interest in long and 

short-term debt.  I find that easy to understand.  The income 

and loss before the following -- if that's the interest difference.  

And then the item in provision no. 12, it says $449 million.  Is 

there a list of those items that we need to take a look at and 

where are they? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I can 

report to the committee, yes you can find them on page 61.  

And there's an item here, no. 12, "provisions for decline in the 

value of investments," and it ranges from Saskatchewan 

Mining Development Corporation to a CIC Industrial Interests 

to NewGrade, Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation, STC, Sask Forest Corporation, and that's where 

you find the addition up to $449 million. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So, Mr. Minister, you wrote off in debt what 

your share and responsibility was in the upgrader at 

Lloydminster.  Is that accurate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- There is no provision here in 

Lloydminster; this is NewGrade Energy Corporation. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So then this deals with the upgrader here in 

Regina.  Is that accurate?  Okay. 

 

So you wrote off $365 million in NewGrade, the Co-op 

upgrader?  As I understand this, you wrote off 47 million in 

Weyerhaeuser and another 50 million in the P.A. pulp mill. 



1688 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1999 

An Hon. Member: -- You're on the wrong page. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On the wrong page?  That's item no. 12. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Page 61. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That's what I'm reading from.  Yes, page 61.  

CIC Industrial Interests Inc. had 160 million at December, 

resulting primarily from the three investments as follows: 160 

million loss you wrote off in the Bi-Provincial Upgrader, you 

wrote off in Weyerhaeuser, and you wrote off in the P.A. pulp 

mill. 

 

My question I guess, in all of this is in all of your decision to 

write all this stuff off, you put interest, you put assets, you put 

debt, you put all of these things and you throw them all in a 

pile and say: whew, this is what you had for losses and this is 

what you had for a debt put forward in 1991-92 budget year. 

 

And my point is that you're mixing apples and oranges all the 

way through the system.  You're taking -- just like the auditor 

pointed out -- you're taking a debt and writing that off.  You're 

taking assets and you're writing that off.  You're taking interest 

and you're writing that off as a part of the debt. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is where this whole thing has grown 

into a lot confusion.  And that, Mr. Minister, is what we want 

to flush out.  We're not here trying to point fingers.  We're 

trying to find where these dollars went.  Because in changing 

the role of accounting, you've got to deliver to us and to the 

people of Saskatchewan accurate figures.  And that's what we 

want to find out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well no, the answer is really quite 

straightforward, Mr. Chairman.  The provision is for the 

decline in their value of each of these items.  I repeat again; the 

provision is for the decline in the value of each of these items.  

You take a look, for example, on the Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company.  The provision here is for a 

write-down of $6.4 million.  That's an outright loss that has 

been provided for.  It's pretty straightforward. 

 

Where do we get the advice on the basis of which to do this?  

By a report prepared by Ernst & Young on Crown Investments 

Corporation, April 1992.  We sought the advice of some expert 

outside people, well-renowned and established North American 

firm, to give us the advice.  On the basis of their accounting 

advice, we made those changes. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, we're not finished with the 

discussion on how these debt write-offs occurred in 1991, 

December 31 and March 31, because there's more on March 

31.  And we're not finished with that.  And when we come to 

your Estimates, Mr. Minister, we will want to know the details 

in every one of these areas about how you did the bookkeeping 

in relation to this. 

 

And we want to know the functions of the interest, the 

functions of . . . and where that accrued from.  We want to 

know the details of each of those areas.  And when we get to 

your Estimates, Mr. Minister, we're going to review that very 

thoroughly. 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- In order that I am able to provide 

the member with the answers that he wants, I'm going to ask 

him to help.  If you don't mind putting that down on a piece of 

paper, sending me a letter, I will make sure that when the 

Estimates come before this Assembly, I'll have them for you in 

writing. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Because I believe 

this is the last committee that the minister has in today, I'd just 

like to thank the officials. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 

 

The Chair: -- There is a House amendment: 

 

 Amend section 5 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after the words "Standing Committee on Public Accounts of 

the Legislative Assembly" where they occur in clause 

65(5)(a) as enacted therein the words "and to any member of 

the Legislative Assembly who so requests". 

 

That was moved by the member for . . . we'll ask the member 

for Thunder Creek to move that. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I got a letter from the 

Associate Minister of Finance saying that the necessary 

changes had been made and there was no need for the House 

amendment.  I'll take the minister at his word. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- . . . the member from Thunder 

Creek for sending us a letter raising the issue, so we could get 

to it ahead of time. 

 

We have consulted with the Law Clerk and he has provided 

information which says that this amendment isn't necessary.  

It's already provided for in another provision in the Act.  So it's 

all covered for and therefore the amendment will not be 

necessary. 

 

The Chair: -- We stand corrected.  There is no amendment. 

 

Clause 5 agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 35 -- An Act respecting the Production, Supply, 

Distribution and Sale of Milk 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister introduce his officials? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to introduce to 

you Mr. Stuart Kramer, the deputy minister of Sask Ag and 

Food, on my right; and on his right, Stan Barber, chairman and 

chief executive officer of the Milk Control Board; directly 

behind me, Bob Ford, the administrator in the production and 

development, livestock branch, Sask Ag and Food; and on his 

right, Garry Moran, solicitor with the Department of Justice. 



April 11, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1689 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, would you provide to the 

committee a list of the members appointed to the Milk Control 

Board, not the individuals' name, but the lists of the individuals 

who are representing various groups and how they're 

appointed.  Will you give us an explanation of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there is in the Act no 

provision for a specific designation of members appointed, 

although it's been recent practice to have two producers and 

two others.  The two others presently could be said, one, to be 

representing the consumers association, and the others at large 

but presently from the university community.  But there is no 

direction with respect to how those four members are 

appointed, and then of course the chairman. 

 

(1630) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

in clause 11 of this Bill, you'll be able to make regulations, and 

I quote: 

 

 . . . prescribing terms and conditions on which any person or 

category of persons may distribute in any area prescribed by 

regulation . . . 

 

Mr. Minister, why is it that you feel you need the power to 

make these regulations which would otherwise be made by the 

board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you for the question.  

The Act presently provides no direction to the Milk Control 

Board with respect to the designation and conditions under 

which milk control areas are established.  This does provide the 

opportunity for the Lieutenant Governor in Council to create 

conditions in the public interest relative to, for example, 

maintaining rural development initiatives, economic 

development initiatives so it allows conditions to be established 

that are in the public interest, where presently there is no 

direction given the Milk Control Board in that regard. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

I've reviewed the previous Act, and no similar section in that 

Act allows the minister to make regulations that the board itself 

in the past made.  And what's the point of having such a board 

if what is able to happen is an undermining of its authority and 

its autonomy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there is no interest in 

undermining the authority of the board.  The authority of the 

board is retained.  And this discussion has taken place with 

representatives of the industry broadly.  They agree with the 

changes, and they are the ones whose interest attempts to be 

managed by the Milk Control Board. 

 

What occurs here is the opportunity for the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council to establish beyond the decisions that the 

Milk Control Board might in its mandate consider to be 

legitimate decisions, a broader public interest perspective by 

the government with no particular interest in weakening the 

powers of the board. 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Am I to understand then that 

in consultation with people who you consider to be most 

concerned about this particular Act -- they will be most 

affected by it -- that you've been in consultation with them, and 

it was upon their recommendation that this was changed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- There is an exception, is there?  There's 

one and then there are all the others? 

 

Mr. Chairman, respecting that there may be exceptions, we 

have had discussions with the dairy producers co-operatives 

who represent all producers in the province -- that does not 

mean they're all of one mind but they do represent them -- and 

with the milk producers association, and they're in concurrence 

with the direction outlined in this respect in this Bill. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I hope you will 

be willing to table the names of the individuals with whom you 

met, the dates that you met, and the topics of conversation so 

that in fact I have some assurance that this was indeed the case, 

that this was their decision to make this change. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I can't tell the member 

opposite the moment exactly the records available from the 

meetings that were held.  The department can document the 

particular meetings that were held with the dairy producers.  I 

had met with the chairman of the milk producers and on a 

number of occasions through consultations on supply 

management issues in general, and consulted on this topic on 

some of those occasions. 

 

So I don't know whether in fact . . . and I can check my 

schedule to see if there was ever a specific meeting set up for 

that purpose, but clearly we can provide the names of the 

leaders of those organizations if you wanted to check with 

them with respect to their concurrence. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  Did 

you consider the possibility that this Bill may be left outdated 

by changes, once the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 

go through?  In other words, should the agreement be signed in 

the future, I think what needs to be considered here is that a 

GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) agreement 

may render milk regulation boards a thing of the past.  And I 

know that that's something that people don't want to talk about 

in our nation.  But I'm just wondering if, in your deliberations 

with people who have expertise and are going to be affected in 

this province, if you were prepared for such an eventuality. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm willing to be corrected 

if I've missed a fine point in the understanding.  Clearly, 

depending on the outcome of GATT negotiations, there could 

be impacts in time on the way the Canadian system is 

structured. 

 

The proposal presently about which milk producers and other 

supply-managed producers are expressing concern is the 

provision in the Dunkel proposal that border patrols would be 

converted to tariff barriers which might begin 



1690 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1999 

by being possibly 2 or 300 per cent of trading values of 

product, but that could over time erode.  I'm not aware that 

there would be any defined impact until the erosion occurs to 

the point where it affects the way we can compete.  And then 

of course there would be an impact. 

 

But there are additionally struggles going on within the 

supply-managed commodities in Canada with respect to 

distribution of quota. There are discussions going on 

constitutionally around interprovincial movement of goods, and 

I think all of those discussions possibly could have more direct 

impact on the internal mechanism than the GATT negotiations 

themselves. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

I'm actually thinking about the need to be anticipatory with . . . 

more anticipatory with this Act rather than at some point 

having to be reactionary and going against your own Act. 

 

Aside from the prospects of a GATT agreement, there are a lot 

of other competitive pressures.  And changes in consumer 

preference, for example, pressures from within are going to 

lead one to suggest that it might be advantageous I think for the 

province to be looking at a prairie-wide alternative, a 

prairie-wide board as an alternative to a provincial one that is 

posed here. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, if I may just . . . if you'll indulge me for a 

moment.  The co-op dairy is building a Saskatoon plant, raising 

the question of whether it should be forced to keep many less 

efficient plants open.  The Beatrice group received permission 

to use the milk barn in Prince Albert, threatening the co-op 

monopoly.  And I've been told that Beatrice may eventually 

begin hauling milk into our province. 

 

All of these pressures may make our system of heavy controls 

very, very difficult to sustain.  And while these restrictions are 

obviously going to bring us short-term benefits in this 

province, they are going to be threatening our long-term 

potential to maintain and create jobs in the milk industry. 

 

So if we don't make it possible to adjust now, our industry may 

be left at the mercy of outside forces which is what we don't 

want to have happen.  So given these pressures, will you please 

consider the possibility of creating a prairie-wide board with 

your colleagues in Alberta and Manitoba. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, appreciate the question.  A 

number of themes are raised within it.  First of all, the Act, the 

new Act is not an entrenchment of anything destructive to the 

industry.  It is a modernization of an Act that has not been 

rewritten in 58 years.  Similar ideas were brought forward in 

terms of a rewriting of the Act in general in the late '80s.  And 

so it is an attempt in fact to modernize the Act. 

 

The other themes though that are raised . . . I just want to 

correct the perception that somehow in the provisions in this 

Act, that they are restrictive.  They are not.  The milk control 

areas presently provide that licences must be granted within 

them in order for people to sell milk. 

The fact that the Dairy Producers Co-op several years ago built 

a very modern plant in Saskatoon makes them capable of 

probably processing most of their Saskatchewan production in 

that plant should they so choose.  So there is nothing unmodern 

or uncompetitive about their structure. 

 

But they do represent producers across the province and it is 

the will of the producers and the will of the communities within 

which producers are functioning and within which plants 

presently exist to continue to process milk in those locations 

because it is in fact decentralized economic activity.  It in many 

ways is very efficient because there is existing investment that's 

very valid investment. 

 

(1645) 

 

To change from the present structure to a different structure 

means many producers would be placed at a disadvantage in 

terms of transportation costs to a more centralized location.  So 

there is the freedom for diary producers to centralize and do 

whatever they want is there. 

 

On the issue of joint provincial activities it was . . . there was a 

substantive discussion going on between the co-ops of the 

western provinces some time ago to consider one large dairy 

producing unit in order to place themselves in a strong position 

relative to marketing and other agencies.  Those have not gone 

forward at this time.  But like other amalgamations, those kinds 

of centralizations of management don't put dairy plants any 

closer to farmers. 

 

And so I think the issue of where the plants locate continue to 

be issues of primary interest to producers.  And through this 

Act they continue to be able to have an influence on that 

through their own company that operates a number of plants.  

And this is the reason why producers have supported the 

amendments . . . or the construction of the new Act, very much 

providing for the flexibility they need. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  I just have one last, short 

comment to make.  And I guess what I'm looking for here is 

some kind of assurance that the government has a plan of 

looking into the future.  And that in fact there are going to be 

contingencies in place that will deal with outside factors.  I do 

believe that it's the responsibility of government to be 

anticipatory about potential issues. 

 

And we know that it hasn't caught up to politicians yet, but 

telecommunications systems are being looked at in joint 

ventures.  We know that environmental policies are being 

examined.  We know similarly that energy policies, as you 

would note in both The Globe and Mail and local papers today, 

are being looked at in terms of interprovincial agreements.  

And I think that it makes some sense to be able to look at this 

in that context as well. 

 

Now I know that the member from -- Where are you from? -- 

Morse has given some indication to me that some of these 

things have 



April 11, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1691 

been tried in the past.  And I guess my sense is that simply 

because some things have been looked at and have not been 

helpful to us in the past or have not proven to be successful, 

perhaps we have to look at a different combination of what 

would make it successful. 

 

But what concerns me most, Mr. Minister, is that we have in 

Saskatchewan a way of being able to ensure that in the long 

term we have a viable industry.  And I know that when people 

are in short-term pain or when they're fearful of being able to 

just simply survive, that they will go with short-term solutions 

that in fact may mean that we will end up with nothing in the 

long run.  And I think we'd be far better off to anticipate some 

of these problems. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, thanks again for the 

opportunity to respond to a number of concerns.  In terms of 

interprovincial co-operation, clearly as a government since 

we've come into office, we've engaged in a number of 

discussions with the other western provinces because we have 

common interests and we need to build on that base.  Because 

clearly there's an interest not only in western Canada but in all 

of Canada to maintain services and economies here that are 

independent. 

 

We have seen the kind of destructive and game-playing 

exercises of our American neighbours.  While they pretend at 

free trade and pretend at non-intervention and may even be 

publicly apologetic about seemingly unfair intervention, they 

go on ad nauseam undermining our pork industry, our 

vegetable processors, anybody they can get their hands on, by 

game-playing -- our beef industry, by playing games with 

inspections at borders.  So clearly there is an interest in having 

us within Canada strengthen our rules and our practices to be 

competitive with people that don't always do the same as they 

talk. 

 

The issue of modernizing the industry . . . I think we have, 

through the co-operative movement in Canada -- very much led 

by Saskatchewan -- we have demonstrated we have an ability 

to work together to provide very, very modern approaches to 

management and production.  Whether we look at Sask Wheat 

Pool or the Dairy Producers or Federated Co-op, these are 

institutions that have adjusted to changing times, that have 

been leaders.  If you look at Sask Wheat Pool in secondary 

processing, in supporting alternate ventures to grain, they have 

made the tough choices, as Federated Co-op did a few years 

ago, in order to adapt to a declining economy. 

 

The Co-op's demonstrating, in creating the very modern plant 

they have in Prince Albert and the very modern plant they have 

in Saskatoon, have demonstrated that they are at the forefront 

in terms of dealing with technology and processing needs.  And 

the fact that they have engaged in discussions in the western 

provinces on amalgamating, demonstrate that they are ready to 

take the actions necessary and we are willing to respond to 

their needs in that regard. 
 

What they are not willing to do, as other dairy producers in 

Canada are not willing to do at this point, is to roll over and 

play dead on the GATT and trade issues.  They believe that it is 

in our interest to maintain ordinary farm-based milk 

production, to maintain the kind of supply-management system 

we have. 

It doesn't make them any less competitive or any less energetic 

than others. It simply says that we have adapted a system here 

in Canada that everybody across Canada continues to favour.  

It has some difficulties right now in terms of the adjustments to 

changing circumstance in milk consumption and those kinds of 

patterns, but it is nevertheless a system that producers across 

Canada continue to support very strongly as evidenced by the 

meeting that was held in Saskatoon earlier this winter 

especially on that topic, by demonstrations at our joint 

federal-provincial meeting in Ottawa this winter as well. 

 

Producers value this system.  They certainly are looking in an 

anticipatory fashion to the future that may be different, but they 

certainly will not roll over and play dead to it.  They will do 

everything they can to maintain the system that has given them 

the strength in the Canadian market-place that they've had.  

And they clearly have an ability to look forward if other 

eventualities emerge because the federal government allows 

them to happen. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to ask a 

couple of questions about specific items in the Bill, but because 

it's comparing one with another, I hope I have the freedom to 

do that. 

 

Item no. 11 on page 7 deals with the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council making: 

 

 . . . regulations prescribing terms and conditions on which 

any person or category of persons may distribute in any area 

prescribed by regulation by the Lieutenant Governor . . . 

 

Would you explain to me the regulations you plan on putting in 

place, give some background as to what you're intending to put 

in there for regulations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman.  If this doesn't offend the opposition, I will give the 

minister an opportunity to consider that question, and he can 

answer another day.  And I'll move the committee rise and 

report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 49 -- An Act to amend The Mortgage Protection 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 50 -- An Act to amend The Financial 

Administration Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 



1692 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1999 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 

 

 

 


