




















































Hansard: April 29, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 35 

 April 29, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 

you, and through you to the members of this Assembly, 30 

students from Wilfrid Walker School within Wascana Plains 

constituency and with them their teacher, Anca Toma.  They 

have presented to me some letters that I have given to the 

Premier, and I'll be meeting with them at 2:30 in the members' 

lounge.  So I would like you to welcome the members of the 

class from Wilfrid Walker School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Changes to GRIP 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I have a question today, Mr. Speaker, for the 

Premier.  The people of Saskatchewan on Monday and 

subsequent to that have given the government the mandate to 

change the deadline for the sign-up of the new GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) program.  Will you now go all the 

way and inform the industry, the agriculture industry, that they 

have an option on the '91 or the '92 GRIP? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that the 

member opposite is now supporting something he voted against 

yesterday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- It's not a surprising reality considering that 

they are continuing to reject the demands of farmers in 

Saskatchewan that the federal government meet its 

responsibility to programs such as this.  As the members 

opposite know, the federal government has not only created the 

methodology that has created pain by increasing premiums for 

Saskatchewan programs that have off-loaded to the 

Saskatchewan province in excess of $200 million in the last 

four years while they have reduced their total program 

payments to Saskatchewan. 

 

We are committed to working with farmers to design the kind 

of program they want.  We've done that.  Farmers who did not 

join in last year's program have signed up for this program 

while only two and one-half per cent have decided to leave this 

program.  We are committed to a program that is going to be 

fair for farmers in the long run, and try to get something 

different than the mess you created last year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of 

Agriculture said in this Assembly that the addition of the lentils 

in the province would cost $200 million.  Manitoba 

is suggesting that they're going to put a cap on what they're 

doing.  I got a news observation from them today. 

 

Would you put that into perspective of what last year's '91 

GRIP would have cost if it would have had a 10 per cent cap 

on it just like it did last year in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the fact that the Manitoba 

government is now considering options which would allow it to 

put a cap on their rental prices or their acreages is a 

consideration that only responds to the comments we've been 

making from day one, and 7,000 farmers made last fall in 

Regina and 4,000 in Rosetown, that that program is very 

seriously flawed and has to be fixed on the run in order to even 

try to survive. 

 

The members opposite know that the threat of what's 

happening in Manitoba, which has gone beyond a fix at the 

moment, is hurting us not only in those provinces but in 

Saskatchewan and internationally.  The changes that 

Saskatchewan has made has addressed those realities.  And the 

difficulties in Manitoba are real, and the Saskatchewan reality, 

if it had followed the same pattern, which we could believe it 

would because Alberta has followed that pattern, would in fact 

result in the very serious problems that Manitoba is 

experiencing now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister made the 

observation of fixing it on the run, and I want to read a term 

and a condition that exists in the contract for revenue 

insurance.  It says: 

 

 No term or condition of this contract is deemed to have been 

waived or altered . . . unless the waiver or alteration is 

expressed . . . (in a written) form authorized by the 

corporation and signed by a duly authorized representative of 

the corporation . . . (on or before the 15th of March.) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also have some information here, if I would be 

permitted, just briefly. The Court of Queen's Bench in the 

judicial centre of Melville today received this affidavit from 

your deputy minister.  And, Mr. Speaker, item no. 5 under this 

affidavit states this: 

 

 I am aware and do verily believe having been advised by the 

Honourable Mr. Wiens that in addition, he intends to 

introduce legislative amendments in the current Session of 

the Legislature. 

 

What are these amendments going to do? 

 

 These amendments will include a provision in which notice 

of the 1992 (GRIP) changes will be deemed to have been 

given to the Producers by March 15, 1992 as required by 

their individual contracts. 

 

Now will you provide some reasonable semblance of 



36 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1992 

suggestion to the people of Saskatchewan, the agriculture 

producers, that they have an option on the '91-92 GRIP, or will 

you continue to break the law? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I will not comment on the 

court proceedings.  But I will say that it's very interesting that 

the members opposite would comment upon deadlines and 

those kinds of things when one might recall back in the days in 

the early '80s when people like myself were trying to make a 

living at the livestock business and you guys decided you 

wanted to diminish the returns in the beef stabilization program 

and the SHARP (Saskatchewan hog assured returns program), 

and you, without any consultation, deferred to the federal 

program, the tripartite program, and undermined it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- And I want to remind you that with 

respect to contractual obligations you may be aware, and then 

on the other hand the members opposite may not be aware, that 

the Saskatchewan federal crop insurance GRIP contract was 

not signed till September 18 last year after our crops were all in 

the bin.  I find it very interesting, the observations you make. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, yesterday this minister identified 

to this House that it was going to cost $200 million for lentils.  

And, Mr. Premier, in the light of the conflict that this minister 

has with the contracts that are illegally being handed out to 

producers in the province of Saskatchewan today, under an 

illegal action by the minister of the Crown, are you going to 

ask for his resignation or do the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan have that right to ask that minister to resign? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I find it very, very 

interesting that the members who designed the consultation 

process which was followed in the design of the revisions to 

the program which was so fatally flawed by their design are the 

processes that were followed in the consultation which brought 

forward the report. 

 

I want it also on public record that by the middle of February 

the Saskatchewan revisions were ready to be implemented, at 

which point the members opposite, in co-operation with their 

members federally, delayed the process for implementation for 

a month and left the Saskatchewan farmers in a position where 

the changes that they had demanded were delayed by a month. 

 

Now we are needing to put an extension on so that we can 

make sure that everybody has proper opportunity.  Take some 

responsibility for the messes you've created. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture 

indicated yesterday that he had agreement from the federal 

government to implement this program.  Today's statement by 

your deputy minister says that you did not legally put the 

contracts into place and give information to farmers of changes 

in those contracts.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, the very inference that the member gives, that the 

federal government is in agreement with an illegal action, is 

again, Mr. Premier, a responsibility that you should address 

with that minister.  Are you ready to call for his resignation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- We could provide, Mr. Speaker, we could 

provide for the member opposite the communication from the 

federal minister, Minister McKnight, about his compliance 

with the Saskatchewan procedures should we have the support 

of the required number of provinces, and that is a matter of 

record and can be shared with you.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, in December we had a piece of 

legislation that says this: 

 

 In this section, "claims for loss or damage" includes any 

claim in damages or debt for unjust dismissal, breach of 

contract, inducing breach of contract, interference with a 

contract . . . 

 

And a whole lot of others.  Are you prepared to foist on the 

agriculture community of Saskatchewan the same kind of 

breach of contract legislation that you initiated, your 

government initiated, Mr. Premier?  In light of that, are you 

going to ask for his resignation, or do the farmers of the 

province of Saskatchewan have to do that for you? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, let me remind the member 

opposite about the abrogation of responsibility the federal 

minister has displayed with respect to Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- In 1988 the province of Saskatchewan had 

no cost for income support for our people, like other countries 

who were engaged in this international trade war.  Since that 

time Saskatchewan has taken on $242 million of program 

support, $242 for every man, woman, and child in 

Saskatchewan, while the federal government has removed their 

responsibility and reduced their contributions. 

 

And you talk about commitment to Saskatchewan farmers.  

The fact is that when Saskatchewan agreed to take on, under 

the members' opposite direction, the responsibilities for these 

programs, the federal government committed itself to help 

farmers when that was inadequate.  And where is that money? 

 

Farmers are waiting for NISA (net income stabilization 

account) money, they're waiting for third line of defence 

money, they're waiting for GRIP money, they're waiting for 

interim payments from the Canadian Wheat Board, and your 

federal minister sits there and plays politics with the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 37 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, in this 

House on Monday last, the Premier of this province gave his 

commitment to the people of this province that he would have 

an open and accountable government.  The farmers of this 

province were on the steps of this legislature on Monday last, 

saying that they were not prepared to accept the dictums of the 

Agriculture minister. 

 

Mr. Premier, today in a court in Melville, your Minister of 

Agriculture is attempting to abrogate his responsibility to 

agriculture because he did not fulfil the contractual obligations 

of the GRIP contract.  Will you this day, Mr. Premier, be an 

open and accountable government and instruct your minister 

not to try and abrogate the judicial process in this province by 

an Act of this legislature with your overwhelming majority? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite 

were listening, farmers who were here on Monday talked about 

their income problems in Saskatchewan.  It doesn't matter with 

whom you speak, if you want to listen, farmers are saying that 

they have an income shortage. 

 

Who created the programs which have delivered to the farmers 

an income shortage to this point?  Why are farmers squeezed 

more now than they were before?  Because they do not have 

the money from GRIP.  They do not have the money from 

NISA.  They do not have the money that was promised last fall, 

and they don't even have the money from the market-place, 

from the Canadian Wheat Board interim payments. 

 

You talk about worrying about what the farmers are saying.  

Farmers have a cash flow problem in Saskatchewan because of 

the designs and the off-loading of your federal counterparts.  

Why don't you ask your federal minister to resign? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, your Minister of Agriculture 

continues to talk about moral hazards associated with the GRIP 

contract.  The farmers of this province have said the only moral 

hazard they face in their 1992 seeding program is that minister. 

 

Mr. Premier, the fact that that minister is now trying to cover 

his tracks in a court in Melville, Saskatchewan, to go against 

the wishes of the farming public in this province, I say to you, 

sir, one final time: will you do the right thing, Mr. Premier, and 

will you offer the farmers of this province the option of 1991 or 

1992 and let that minister prove to the farmers that he has done 

his homework? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the most significant moral 

hazard that this province has been subjected to in the last 10 

years was the government of the members opposite. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The financial ruin that's come to this 

province by the inappropriate decisions and the careless 

management of the government of the members opposite 

previous is a shame that Saskatchewan will be 20 years living 

down. 

 

You talk about moral hazard.  There is no moral hazard in 

farmers in Saskatchewan.  There is moral hazard in the design 

of programs that came from you and there is moral hazard in 

the playing of politics with the lives of farmers from your 

federal counterparts and from your actions.  You stood in the 

House yesterday and voted against $500 million for farmers 

and you voted against third line of defence and you voted 

against an extension and you voted against all of the provisions 

that we need to provide a good replacement program for the 

kind of travesty that you visited on Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gass Commission Report 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Speaking of economic issues I have a 

question for the Minister of Finance.  Mr. Minister, today I was 

provided with a copy of a brief presented to your cabinet this 

morning by the Public Sector Bargaining Coalition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, essentially this brief statement says that the 

government's Gass Commission misrepresented government 

spending, understated revenue potential, and provided no 

evidence to substantiate this government's assertions that we 

are in an extremely serious financial situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I only quote from the various labour 

groups in this province that have banded together. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, will you admit that the Gass 

Commission distorted the financial picture of Saskatchewan's 

financial situation in order to accommodate the NDP's (New 

Democratic Party) political agenda? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I would have thought 

that by this time even the member opposite would have been 

prepared to admit the kind of financial crisis which he and his 

colleagues created during the 10 years, and wouldn't even think 

of asking that kind of a question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I remind members opposite that the 

Financial Management Review Commission chaired by Mr. 

Gass was a commission of qualified people to which the 

Provincial Auditor had a significant input. 

 

And if, Mr. Speaker, the members would look at the auditor's 

report which was tabled for the year when they 



38 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1992 

were in government, they will find on page 84, where the 

auditor clearly says that the public was not able to know what 

the true finances of the province were because the members 

opposite wouldn't provide him the information. 

 

Mr. Gass has provided the information.  Now we know.  And 

now we know what the financial crisis is and what we have to 

do to correct it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, question of the same minister.  

In the document prepared by Professor Jim Sentance of the 

Department of Economics at the University of Prince Edward 

Island, and once again I quote, and this is sponsored by the 

Public Sector Bargaining Coalition.  And I quote: 

 

 . . . given the doom and gloom scenario being painted . . . the 

Province's books are not (all) that out of line with other 

provinces and that the trends do not . . . show bad news. 

 

It goes on to say, and I quote again, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 The near $1 billion deficit estimated for 1990-91 is taken at 

face value despite being padded (padded) by a quarter billion 

dollars in pension liabilities that no other government in the 

country would treat as current expenditure and (padded by) a 

further quarter (of a) billion dollars in one-time write-downs. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you admit that the Gass Commission was 

nothing more than a public relations exercise, a public relations 

exercise, Mr. Minister, that would effectively allow you to 

renege on all those excessive promises which your leader and 

party made to the people of Saskatchewan in the fall of 1991. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, in 1982 when those 

people over there formed the government, they inherited a 

surplus of $139 million.  There was an accumulated debt in the 

province of Saskatchewan of $3.5 billion, all of it 

self-liquidating in the Crown corporations. 

 

In 1992 when the people of this province unceremoniously 

turfed out those mismanagement people, the total debt of this 

province was almost $14 billion, almost all of it to be paid by 

the taxpayers because they have ground down the corporations 

and plundered so that they could not return dividends to the 

treasury. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remind the member from Thunder Creek that it 

was he and the member from Rosthern who provided the kind 

of deals like the GigaTexts, who sold off the potash 

corporations and lost $442 million, who sold off the Cameco 

shares and lost $161 million.  It is those kinds of financial deals 

to treat some of their friends favourably that have caused the 

crisis which we face in Saskatchewan today.  They can keep 

their head in the sand as much as they want, Mr. Speaker, but 

the people of Saskatchewan want their government to act 

responsibly 

and do what has to be done to save this province from the kind 

of financial disaster that it will face if we don't. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- New question to the same minister, Mr. 

Speaker.  Mr. Minister, this report commissioned by the Public 

Sector Bargaining Coalition clearly states that the Gass 

Commission's accounting methods merely presented already 

existing information in a different format and that the deficit 

has not suddenly gone up.  In fact, this coalition rejects the 

Minister of Finance's conclusion that Saskatchewan's lower 

credit rating is a result of our debt position.  Instead, the unions 

of this province state that one of the reasons the credit rating 

has been lowered is because of the election of an NDP 

government. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you admit that the Saskatchewan financial 

review management commission's report was really a 

smoke-screen to cover up your inability to clearly plan?  And 

will you admit that the Gass report purposely distorts the 

financial picture of this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, for the March 31, 

1991 Report of the Provincial Auditor he states the 

following:  legislators and other readers do not have the 

information necessary to understand and assess the financial 

position and the results of operations of the government.  We 

are not able to determine the precise effect of this matter on the 

financial statements.  The adjustments necessary may be 

significant. 

 

That's the record of the members opposite who hid the 

information from the people of Saskatchewan for 10 long 

years.  What the Gass Commission did, Mr. Speaker, is open 

the books, told the people of Saskatchewan in an independent 

way what the situation was, told this government what the 

situation was so that we could start from the right bottom line 

and begin to bring about the financial freedom which this 

province and the people of this province deserves.  And that's 

what we're up to and that's what we'll do when the budget is 

introduced on May 7 in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- It's becoming very clear, Mr. Speaker, in 

questioning this minister, that he does not accept any advice 

from anyone in Saskatchewan society today, even his friends in 

organized labour. 

 

Mr. Premier, it has to be abundantly clear, as Donald Gass said 

in his report, that your government and anyone else who 

wished to look would know what the books of Saskatchewan 

said.  And yet you have said, and you made, sir, literally 

billions of dollars worth of promises in the last election 

campaign. 

 

Today we have evidence that clearly outlines that you have 

intentionally exaggerated the deficit numbers simply to gain 

public acceptance of imposing various revenue measures on the 

public of this province. 



April 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 39 

Mr. Premier, will you admit today that you have intentionally 

exaggerated our province's financial picture to justify huge tax 

increases, service cuts, reductions in transfer payments, and the 

gutting of the GRIP program for Saskatchewan farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Rosthern was quoted in the Star-Phoenix on June 24, 1987 as 

saying the following: the alternative is just to let the deficit 

grow and that would not take courage.  It would just put your 

head in the sand and say, I don't have the money and I have a 

deficit now.  But I will just continue to borrow and it won't 

matter. 

 

I say to the member from Rosthern and to the member from 

Thunder Creek, get your head out of the sand.  Follow your 

own advice. 

 

Any tax increases that will be in this budget, Mr. Speaker, will 

be a direct result and the responsibility of the irresponsibility 

and the mismanagement and the waste that was created in this 

province when those members were sitting on this side of the 

House as the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- New question to the same minister, Mr. 

Speaker.  Mr. Minister, this brief confirms what Saskatchewan 

farmers are saying, what now the labour groups of this 

province are saying, is that the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

Party had no plan in opposition, that they have no plan after 

their election as government, and there is no plan today. 

 

Mr. Minister, you're caught in a corner, I know.  You've 

promised the moon and you can't deliver.  Mr. Minister, are 

you now . . . Are you going to now take the responsibility 

vested upon you by the people of this province and act like a 

government instead of an opposition?  When are you going to 

admit that you are riding on the coat-tails of the previous 

government as far as economic initiatives in this province? 

 

And I say to you, sir, only look at your own throne speech for 

confirmation.  And would you now, sir, would you now, sir, 

listen to the farmers of this province, to the labour groups of 

this province, and the business people who say, get on with the 

plan, sir.  Quit fudging the figures and act like a government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the 

member from Thunder Creek that this government will not ever 

ride on the coat-tails of GigaText. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- This government will never ride on 

the coat-tails of the GigaTexts or the privatizations which lost 

us literally hundreds of millions of dollars or the Guy 

Montpetits or the plundering of Crown corporations that was 

brought about by those members 

opposite even to the point where they forced them to borrow 

money that they didn't have to pay a dividend to make their 

deficit look better. 

 

I tell you, Mr. Speaker, in my final comment, that is not going 

to be the approach of this government.  The approach of this 

government is going to be honest, accountable, straightforward.  

We will look after the interests of the people of Saskatchewan 

and not the interest of a political party as those members did 

for 10 long years, rewarding their political friends at the 

expense of not only the present generation, but of generations 

to come in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Extended Deadline for GRIP 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of great 

interest to the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  As Mr. 

Speaker may already know, I have earlier today announced that 

the deadline for farmers to sign up for the gross revenue 

insurance plan, or GRIP, has been extended two weeks to May 

15.  We are giving farmers this extra time to decide on crop 

insurance coverage and whether to opt out of the revenue 

insurance offered under GRIP or whether to join if they have 

not previously been in the program. 

 

I am pleased to announce that well over 300 farmers who did 

not join GRIP in 1991 have already opted to join the new 

program.  This is clearly because the program corrects a 

number of identified deficiencies in the original program and 

is, for the most part, being accepted by farmers across 

Saskatchewan.  But there are options under the plan, in terms 

of revenue and crop insurance coverages, which farmers should 

look at carefully so that they can make informed decisions on 

what is best for their particular circumstances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am concerned that farmers who may be hit by 

drought could be adversely affected if they don't choose the 

market price option offered under the new program.  This extra 

time will give our agents a chance to talk to farmers again to 

ensure they fully understand the implications of not taking the 

market price insurance option.  This coverage provides the 

most protection to farmers who are concerned about drought. 

 

That is why, Mr. Speaker, our government requested and 

received the federal government's agreement to extend the 

deadline.  This action comes as a result of concerns raised by 

Saskatchewan farmers and farm organizations.  The extension 

was approved by the national GRIP committee yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this extension is the first step towards acting on a 

motion passed by the Saskatchewan legislature on April 28.  

That motion also called for $500 million in cash assistance 

from the federal government, a properly triggered third line of 

defence, an extension to the GRIP deadline, and a review 

commission to design a better long-term safety net program for 

farmers.  We will be actively pursuing those aspects as well. 



40 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, I do not pretend that our actions today correct the 

problems with GRIP.  The truth of the matter is that GRIP 

became impossible to fix the day the previous administration, 

against all advice, entered into the program.  The only thing 

which will fix the program, Mr. Speaker, will be to start all 

over again with the intention of meeting the needs of farmers, 

not the short-term objectives of a political party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of this Assembly to join us in 

our efforts to develop a safety net program for farmers which is 

truly a safety net and is truly designed for farmers.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the public 

of Saskatchewan that I agree with the extension.  However, I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan would have 

been far more impressed by the Minister of Agriculture if he 

would have provided them an option on a '91 GRIP or a '92 

GRIP, and that, Mr. Speaker, would have been the solution to 

the problem. 

 

And that was evidenced on Monday.  It was evidenced the 

week before in Shaunavon.  It was evidenced the week before 

that in Paradise Hill and all through the province. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, would have been the kind of thing that 

this minister could have done in order to give the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, in particular in agriculture, the 

sense of well-being.  And then go and produce a committee 

that will provide the opportunity to develop the GRIP program 

in the light of what the farmers want to have.  That would have 

been the right thing to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Referral of Annual Reports and Financial Statements to the 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a number of 

routine motions that I'd like to make, this being the beginning 

of the session.  And I would move, by leave of the Assembly, 

seconded by the member for Regina Dewdney: 

 

 That the annual reports and financial statements of the 

various Crown corporations and related agencies be referred 

as tabled to the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of  Report of the Provincial Auditor to the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, with leave, 

seconded by the member for Churchill Downs: 

 

 That the Report of the Provincial Auditor for the fiscal year 

ending March 31, 1991 be referred as 

tabled to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of  Public Accounts to the Standing Committee on 

Public Accounts 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Regina Churchill Downs, by leave of the 

Assembly: 

 

 That the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan 

for the fiscal year ended March 31, 1991, tabled as sessional 

paper no. 20 of the first session of this legislature be referred 

to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Retention and Disposal Schedules to the 

Standing Committee on Communication 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Swift Current, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the retention and disposal schedules approved by the 

Public Documents Committee be referred as tabled to the 

Standing Committee on Communication. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of the Bylaws of the Professional Associations and 

Amendments to the Standing Committee on Regulations 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I move, seconded by the member 

for Saskatoon Westmount, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the bylaws of the professional associations and 

amendments thereto be referred as tabled to the Special 

Committee on Regulations. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of the Annual Report of the Legislative Library to 

the Standing Committee on Communication 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Swift Current, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the report of the Saskatchewan Legislative Library be 

referred as tabled to the Standing Committee on 

Communication. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Attendance of Member to the United Kingdom 

Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Conference 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

members of the opposition that this is not a routine  



April 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 41 

motion but deals with an issue that they likely will be aware of, 

but I would move, seconded by the member for Churchill 

Downs: 

 

 That by leave of the Assembly that leave of absence be 

granted to the hon. member for Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain 

from Monday, May 4 to Friday, May 22, 1992 to attend, on 

behalf of this Assembly, the United Kingdom 

Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Conference. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to move by leave 

of the Assembly -- and I would hope that the Acting House 

Leader of the official opposition will consent to second the 

motion -- a motion at the end of my remarks which would read: 

 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and expresses 

its grateful appreciation of the contribution that he made to 

his community, his constituency, and to the province. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you 

members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I refer to: 

 

 Robert Hanson Wooff, (Bob Wooff as he was known), who 

died in Turtleford on March 23, 1992 and was a member of 

this Legislative Assembly for the constituency of Turtleford 

from 1944 to 1948, 1952 to 1956, and 1964 to 1971. 

 

As members will note from those dates, Turtleford 

constituency was a bell-wether constituency which swung back 

and forth between the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) -- as it then was, and subsequently the NDP -- Bob 

Wooff and, I think, Foley, Mr. Foley, as the Liberal candidate, 

were the two main combatants for a long period of time.  And 

one had the kind of feeling that if the seat of Turtleford was 

won by a particular party, it was a pretty good harbinger that 

that party would become the government of the day. 

 

It doesn't always quite always fit the pattern because Bob 

Wooff lost in 1948 election and Tommy Douglas was returned 

to power, but then Bob was re-elected in 1952, and so it went.  

But there was really a see-saw, and I might say rather in a 

cliché way, a ding-dong battle which existed in Turtleford 

between these two outstanding contributors to the community 

and public and political life of this province. 

 

Bob Wooff was born at Dunoops Bridge, Yorkshire, England 

on May 7, 1900 -- 92 years of age.  In 1906, he came to Canada 

with his parents who first settled near Moosomin.  The 

following year, the Wooff family moved to the North 

Battleford area to homestead.  Bob Wooff 

himself went to school in Emmaville, and in 1925 he 

completed a two-year agriculture certificate course at the 

University of Saskatchewan.  He took up farming in the 

Turtleford district and in 1930, he married Elin Larson of 

Spruce Lake, Saskatchewan. 

 

As can already be seen the late Bob Wooff took an active 

interest in community affairs.  But more than simply political 

affairs, he was truly a member of the community and for the 

community.  For example, he was a member of the Warnock 

school board for nine years and served as a member of the 

Turtleford school unit. 

 

As well Bob Wooff was a member of the Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool for several years and served on the local Pool Elevator 

committee.  He was a member of the area United church and 

taught Sunday school, and was very active in the religious 

activities of the church. 

 

(1445) 

 

Bob Wooff's involvement in provincial politics first started 

back in 1940 during the war years, when he was nominated for 

the Turtleford seat.  He was nominated and didn't win, but in 

1944, in the sweep of that election with Tommy Douglas, he 

was elected to the Legislative Assembly and served, as I've 

already pointed out, until 1948. 

 

In 1952 he was re-elected only to be defeated in the 1956 

general election. After having been declared elected in the 

1960 election, Bob Wooff lost his seat on a court appeal.  This 

is really a tough way to lose an election.  It's tough under any 

circumstances, I guess, but to have been declared the winner on 

election night only to have the courts overrule you 

subsequently was really a bit of a heartache for Bob. And I 

happen to have known a little bit about that case too because at 

that stage in the game, I was a would-be young law student 

already showing my own interest in political activity.  I know 

it's hard to believe a young person like myself at such an early 

age being involved in political activity, but that was the case 

none the less. 

 

Determined not to give up, Bob Wooff was re-elected in 1964 

and served as a member for Turtleford until 1971 when he 

retired from politics.  And that's when I really got to know Bob 

Wooff first really well.  Of course I'd met him at various CCF 

and NDP conventions but it was when we served together in 

opposition from 1967 to 1971 that my first appreciation for the 

depth, the scope of this person really struck home. 

 

I was a rookie, and I was seated somewhere in the back rows as 

rookies always are, and Bob because of his record, was in the 

front row.  My party had lost its second election in a row that 

time to the former premier of the province, the late Hon. W. 

Ross Thatcher.  And like all political parties in those 

circumstances a lot of thought is given to re-organization, new 

ideas, new people, and new activities. 

 

One of the great unselfish acts of Bob Wooff . . . and there 

were two others actually who agreed to do the same thing with 

Bob, two long-serving members of the House. One was was 

Frank Meakes from Touchwood constituency 



42 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1992 

and the other one was the late George Willis, long-standing 

minister of the Crown from Melfort constituency.  The three of 

them agreed that what perhaps the party should do was put a 

new face on its image -- even back in 1967 we were conscious 

about such things as image --  and the three of these veterans 

decided to voluntarily take seats in the back row.  And I was 

one of the ones -- fortunately or unfortunately, depending on 

your point of view -- who was asked by the then leader of the 

party, Woodrow Lloyd, to move up to the front seat to join the 

front rows in '67-68. 

 

This might not mean like such a big thing to those people who 

are not directly involved in political activity, but I think all of 

us who know what politics is all about and how it operates will 

know the meaning of the story.  I'm still enough of a 

traditionalist to support the notion that years of service, public 

service, do count.  They count in a political party; they count in 

any organized activity of society. 

 

Today we're under enormous pressure as political parties with 

respect to gender and gender politics, which I think is very 

important, aboriginal issues.  Those have to be accommodated 

and accommodated within the context of the fact that service -- 

long, honourable, devoted service -- must also be recognized. 

 

In 1967-68, Bob Wooff's act of generosity -- not to Roy 

Romanow or to myself, but to the members -- the act of 

generosity to all of the members of the official opposition I 

think told all that you needed to know about this person's 

commitment to the philosophy and to the movement that he 

believed in right from very early days and from his first 

involvement. 

 

As an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), the late 

Mr. Bob Wooff took a special interest in agricultural issues and 

technical education.  He was really one of the true agricultural 

leaders within our caucus.  And while he never was a member 

of the cabinet, what he had to say with respect to farming 

matters carried a lot of weight, both in opposition and after he 

was out of politics in '71, to the Blakeney government of that 

day. 

 

Bob's interests weren't limited to agricultural and technical 

education, although he was very much inclined to head in that 

direction; he had a wide-ranging concern of matters of concern. 

 

If I may again take this moment to reminisce a bit, one of our 

great battles in the session of 1968, the first session right after 

being elected for me, and this was Bob's re-election as well 

again in '67, was the imposition of deterrent fees. 

 

The government of the day, headed by the late former premier, 

Ross Thatcher, imposed what we called utilization fees, and 

this was a matter of certainly novelty at that time and a great 

deal of contention at that time.  And Bob rolled up his sleeves 

and took part in that debate as he did in every debate with a lot 

of vigour and a lot of commitment. 

 

He was a very compassionate and caring person who put the 

good of others above all else.  He was active right 

virtually to his last days.  In this most recent provincial general 

election campaign of September-October of 1991, when I 

attended in the north-west part of the province at speaking 

engagements, there was Bob Wooff, 91 years of age. 

 

He would attend the meetings, and as is the case with New 

Democratic Party meetings, very often a question period 

ensues.  This is a dangerous thing in politics at any time for any 

meeting, but it is in NDP meetings because when you invite 

questions you get them, and they're very embarrassing 

questions often. 

 

Bob Wooff was there.  That was one of my last meetings with 

him.  And he had some very, very tough questions about the 

direction of the New Democratic Party and how we might 

handle the issues facing the province in the 1990s, given the 

fiscal squeeze which faces our province and actually faces 

many of the provinces and countries of the world. 

 

His questions were clearly based on, I would say, a deep 

understanding of the concerns, occasioned by some reading 

which could not be characterized as being light.  He had been 

ploughing through a number of books in the United States, 

about United States financing. 

 

One of the ones that we very briefly talked about, if my 

memory serves me correctly, was a book written by a 

gentleman called Kevin Phillips, called The Politics of Rich 

and Poor.  Perhaps some members have read it.  But this is 

really a fascinating analysis of the Reagan fiscal policy 

between the years of '82 to '90, whenever the period was.  My 

years may not be right on or at least coinciding with the 

American presidential cycle. 

 

Bob's great concern was that in the attempt to get the province 

out of the fiscal morass, we don't develop a society where the 

cleavage between those who have and those who do not have is 

further exacerbated, as was the case in the United States by the 

Reagan years. 

 

And I was just thrilled to see him in what I thought was good 

health.  And I said to myself that if the good Lord should give 

me years to live that long, to be blessed to have a mind that was 

still thinking and working and questioning.  And not doing it in 

any personal way, not doing it in any way which attacked 

motivations -- doing it from the point of view of searching for 

answers to very difficult questions; doing it from the point of 

view of advancing ideas to be either accepted or amended or 

rejected. 

 

He always had that spirit about him.  And I have this image in 

my mind of now a very elderly, not too frail but somewhat 

frail, person who walked on his own, didn't need any particular 

help.  He was suffering from a variety of ailments, never 

complained to anybody about them.  But had this image in my 

own mind of a gentleman, a gentleman in the best and all sense 

. . . all meaning of that word gentleman.  In all senses a person 

who acted with civility and with respect for the interest and the 

concerns of others. 

 

I went to his funeral in Turtleford; I went with heavy heart.  

You can't help but admire a person who's contributed so 



April 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 43 

much for the province and with whom you've worked so long 

and so hard -- and we've been through a lot of battles together, 

Bob and I have been. 

 

Some of his sons have been very active in the NDP; Spencer 

Wooff sought the nomination; actually ran for us on one or two 

occasions in Swift Current.  The Wooff family has been with 

you through the good times and the bad times.  And I went 

there with a real sense of hurt and sorrow.  But you know it 

didn't turn out to be that way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The funeral really was a celebration.  He'd suffered for about 

two to three weeks at most.  Up until that time he was clear, 

coherent in his thoughts, still asking questions about why we 

were doing some things and not doing other things.  Were we 

true to our principles.  Had Romanow forgotten statements that 

I'd made to him earlier in the campaign trail.  He was the happy 

warrior and the sensitive human being right to the end. 

 

He would have been 92 in a few short days from now. And it 

was in a sense a celebration.  A celebration of a life which was 

of a life of a person who was good and decent and honest and 

thoughtful and caring.  And I guess when it comes right down 

to it, Mr. Speaker, if that's what they can say about each and 

every one of us at the end of the day, here was a good person or 

is a good person, there's not much else that can be said.  Bob 

Wooff was such a good person. 

 

On behalf of all of us, record our condolences to his widow, his 

family.  We express our sincere sympathy to all members of 

the bereaved family, and thank Bob Wooff for the contribution 

that he made to the people of this province. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. member 

from Thunder Creek by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and expresses 

its grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 

community, his constituency, and the province. 

 

 Robert Hanson Wooff . . . 

 

I'll avoid reading, with consent, the balance of the rather 

lengthy motion.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's an honour for 

me to second the motion of the Hon. Premier on the 

condolence motion to the Wooff family on behalf of the 

official opposition. 

 

Certainly, from the comments that the Premier has made about 

this gentleman, that he is one who probably went above and 

beyond the call in serving the province of Saskatchewan.  It's 

not often that one encounters an individual in our society, at 

least today, that has been a part of public service for some four 

decades. 

 

I think all of us in this Chamber realize the pressures that are 

upon individuals when they enter public life.  Certainly Mr. 

Wooff's family should be commended for 

the diligence that they must have shown in supporting his 

endeavours while serving the public in this legislature. 

 

Turtleford is a fair ways from Regina and when Mr. Wooff 

started his public life, that probably meant a day's journey on a 

train to get down here.  It meant that communication often was 

difficult with one's family members.  And it's, I think, so 

important that we recognize the family of individuals like Mr. 

Wooff because of the contribution that they also would make in 

his endeavours. 

 

(1500) 

 

Unlike the Premier I didn't have the opportunity to know this 

gentleman, and will make my remarks very brief so that 

members, particularly of the government who knew Mr. 

Wooff, will have an opportunity to speak. 

 

But I do know that coming from a family that takes a deep 

interest in politics over some decades, that Mr. Wooff must 

have had a very singular dedication to his beliefs.  It isn't often 

that you would see three electoral defeats keep an individual in 

the game.  And I guess it also speaks highly of his ability to 

communicate with his constituents because constituents don't 

often give that fourth opportunity to people in our society. 

 

And obviously, as the Premier has said, the man had an intense 

ability to empathize with the needs of others, whether it be 

rookie MLAs in his own caucus or people in his home town 

where he served on other committees.  It's, as I said, a rare 

opportunity to eulogize someone of this calibre, and I just say 

it's been an honour for me on behalf of the opposition to take 

part in it. 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- It is with somewhat of a heavy heart that I rise 

today as the member from the Turtleford constituency to offer 

condolences on the passing of Bob Wooff to his wife Elin, his 

daughter Marilyn, his sons Spencer, David, and Roger, and to 

their families. 

 

Although Bob signed his name as Robert H. Wooff, young and 

old knew him as Bob, a compassionate person, one who would 

take time even to deal with a very young person such as 

myself.  He was always a friend that you could meet any 

where.  I have always considered Bob as a very close personal 

friend, someone I could go to for advice.  He would always 

take the time to hear you out, and he had a wealth of 

knowledge that he would gladly share. 

 

Most people, I believe, have a handful of friends they would 

consider very close.  Bob had many close friends -- everywhere 

and in every walk of life.  And if you measure a man's success 

by the number of his friends, I believe that Bob would without 

a doubt be measured as a very successful man. 

 

He had the knack of meeting people, making them feel 

comfortable, and giving them a feeling of value in themselves 

in just talking about the every day things.  He could provide 

advice in a very gentle way; it never seemed as if he was 

preaching, and he was never obtrusive in doing so. 

 

He had the uncanny ability to analyse the actions of 



44 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1992 

people or events that were taking place or life in general and 

state them in a manner that allowed people to understand.  

Perhaps this occurred because of his lifelong interests in the 

community and the world in general which, as the Premier has 

indicated, in that he was a very great reader. 

 

My first memories of Bob go back to childhood when I 

remember him at my parents' house discussing the issues of the 

day or planning for a campaign.  The discussion would go on 

into the wee hours of the morning, and I would be sent to bed 

before they were finished.  And I recall laying on the floor 

upstairs at the heat vent because sound as well as heat came up 

from the living room below.  And I would listen to the 

conversation that went on.  The Bob Wooff I grew to know and 

respect could make himself understood whether he was 

speaking or writing.  And in both, he had the ability to get and 

keep one's attention.  I believe for a large part of that is because 

he spoke from the heart. 

 

He wrote two short histories.  One of the early history of the 

CCF in the Turtleford constituency detailing the intrigue that 

went on over a period of about six or seven years before the 

organization of the CCF was completed.  The other history 

entitled Following the Gleam is a history of his parents' 

journey to Canada and their life in the Emmaville district. 

 

As was previously stated, he was born on May 7, 1900, which 

would be the day that the budget comes down.  He would have 

been 92 on the day that the budget comes down.  He received 

his elementary education at Emmaville and he attended the 

school of agriculture at the university in 1925-26, supported by 

his sister who is a school teacher. 

 

He married Elin Larson in 1930 and they farmed for 44 years 

before moving into the community of Turtleford in 1974. 

 

In addition to his farming activities, Bob was very active in the 

community.  He served on the Warnock school board; he took 

part in the organization of the Wheat Pool in 1924 and was on 

the committee at Cleeves for some 25 years.  He helped to 

organize as well the Turtleford and district co-op association 

and was one of the directors on the board.  When the credit 

union which was formed later was being organized, he also 

assisted in that. 

 

Bob was always an active participant in his church, and serving 

for some 50 years in one capacity or other from that of a 

Sunday school teacher in the non-denominational Sunday 

school at Emmaville known as the Maple Leaf Sunday School, 

to a lay minister in later years. 

 

Bob's family was very important to his life.  He was very proud 

of his children and their accomplishments.  And his love for his 

children and their family was evident in a number of ways 

when he spoke of them.  He stated public on many occasions 

that his involvement in the community and politics were made 

possible by the continuous support that Elin gave him.  When 

his wife's health failed and she required some help in order for 

them to stay in their home, Bob willingly sacrificed his 

interests, his outside interests, to care for her until she moved to 

the Turtleford nursing home. 

 

In the book that he wrote about his family, and I quote, he said 

this about his wife: I could not have had a better partner for all 

the struggles that lay ahead.  She was magnificent all the way. 

 

I believe those words indicate very clearly what his actions that 

I see in him and what he felt towards his wife. 

 

It was Bob's involvement in the provincial politics where he 

influenced the greatest number of people, from the Premier 

today to myself, at that heat vent in a storey-and-a-half farm 

house many years ago. 

 

Bob represented the CCF or the NDP in every provincial 

election held in the Turtleford constituency from the 1944 one 

until 1967.  He won some, and he lost others with a difference 

of less than 50 votes and in the process picked up the nickname 

"Landslide Bob." 

 

After 1971, no longer the MLA or the candidate, he worked for 

the New Democratic Party in forwarding his belief in a caring 

society.  He solicited funds, he sold memberships, he 

campaigned continuously at coffee row and at the post office.  

And I'm told that, although not often, when he felt it was 

necessary, he did so even as he attended church. 

 

For many years, when he would no longer accept the 

nomination to the executive of the Turtleford constituency, we 

considered him an honorary member and invited him to all the 

executive meetings.  His contribution to the executive was 

appreciated and valued because of the experience and the 

knowledge that he brought and that ability to analyse the 

situation at hand. 

 

Bob's intensive political activity continued until his wife's 

deteriorating health and his own health forced him to ease off 

in the mid-'80s.  And during the 1991 provincial election, as I 

had done many times before, I visited with Bob asking his 

advice and discussing some of the problems that were 

occurring in the campaign.  But the conversation very quickly 

turned to the economy where Bob expressed his deep concern 

about the desperate economic conditions of the province.  And 

I must say that over the last six months I have come to realize 

that his concerns were very well founded. 

 

Bob will be missed by many in the Turtleford constituency.  I 

thank him for his friendship, for his warmth, and for his advice, 

but most of all for his commitment to make this world a fair, 

compassionate place for all to live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to extend my personal condolences to his 

wife Elin, his children -- two of whom I know, Spencer and 

David -- as well as the rest of the family.  I believe that all of us 

who knew Bob are more caring persons for having had the 

opportunity.  Thank you. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

add my sincere condolences to those who knew and loved Mr. 

Wooff.  I attended Swift Current Collegiate Institute as well as 

the Beatty Collegiate Institute, where 



April 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 45 

his son Spencer taught for many, many years.  And I had the 

privilege this week to actually see Spencer Wooff after some 

25 years.  It was a great privilege for me. 

 

After hearing so much about the character of this gentleman, I 

feel that I have lost by not knowing him.  And I did understand 

that he was an absolutely incredible opponent in the elections 

in the Turtleford constituency.  It's obvious that he had an 

extraordinary commitment to public service, and for that we 

should all be grateful. 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise also with my 

colleagues here in the Assembly, to extend my sincere 

condolences and sympathy to the family of Mr. Bob Wooff as 

well. 

 

When Goodsoil and Pierceland were part of the Turtleford 

constituency, Mr. Wooff, or Bob, as he was more affectionately 

know by everyone, used to . . . represented our area, I should 

say.  Bob was one of the very few people who influenced me 

and persuaded me to let my name stand as a candidate for the 

New Democratic Party in the constituency of Meadow Lake, 

and I will never forget what he said to me.  He said: young 

fellow, you'll never, ever regret it.  And he certainly was 

accurate; I have never regretted it. 

 

The first time I heard of Bob was when my parents spoke of 

him when I was a very young person.  They talked of this 

gentleman that used to campaign on horseback in the early 

1940s, riding through the bush country up around Goodsoil and 

Pierceland.  They spoke of an individual absolutely committed 

to the cause. 

 

Bob seldom ever raised his voice and I believe was liked by 

everyone regardless of political persuasion, which is evidenced 

here today.  I think also very well evidenced by the large 

attendance at the funeral -- well over 500 people.  And I concur 

with my colleague, the Premier, who said that when he 

attended he was expecting a sad ceremony and it was not at all; 

it was a joyous celebration, in fact. 

 

As an example of how caring and concerned he was, during the 

election campaign last fall he phoned our office several times 

just to make sure that we were running the campaign correctly. 

 

In closing, I would once again like to convey on behalf of 

myself, my parents who knew him very well, and the 

constituents of Meadow Lake who were represented by him, 

my sincere condolences to the Wooff family. 

 

Mr. Kujawa: -- Mr. Speaker, I have listened to all of these 

wonderful remarks about Bob Wooff. I want to join with the 

speakers who have made them. 

 

I come from a little place called St. Walburg which used to be 

just the other side of . . . it still is the other side of Turtleford, 

when Bob Wooff lived in a place called Cleeves, which no 

longer is on the map of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think that perhaps if there was one simple test for evaluating a 

human being, it would be his consideration for other people.  If 

that's a test, then Bob Wooff is one of the finest persons any of 

us will ever know, and from what 

I know of his family, which is quite a bit, they're following in 

his footsteps. 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- At this time I would like to ask permission 

of the Assembly for the Speaker to say a few words on behalf 

of the . . . Is that permitted?  I would be remiss if I didn't say 

some words on behalf of Bob Wooff and his family. 

 

I met his family in 1970 actually, when his son Dave sought me 

out to run for the NDP for the first time.  Dave later on became 

the . . . the next following year became the president of my 

constituency and certainly was responsible for getting me 

elected in what was probably the toughest seat at that time.  

And in fact in the NDP, the expression was, win Nutana South 

and we'll sweep the province.  And as I think most of you 

know, we won Nutana South and I give a lot of credit to the 

Wooff family for that; and we also swept the province. 

 

I want to also today say that I got to know Spencer very well 

through the education system.  Spencer and I spent 

approximately 20 years together, not in the same schools, but 

certainly our paths crossed on a number of times. 

 

All the words that have been used about Bob today, that he was 

compassionate, that he was generous, that he was a humble 

man, he was a committed individual, are certainly true. 

 

And Bob was certainly very generous with the wealth that he 

had accumulated.  And he was also very, very generous with 

the advice that he would give to a rookie cabinet minister.  I 

remember being the minister of Social Services, and later on 

the minister of Health, two areas that Bob was keenly 

interested in and wanted to make absolutely certain that the 

government at that time was aware of some of the problems of 

the poor people in our province, and that we would meet that 

commitment to the poor. 

 

And at any NDP convention Bob would corner me and give me 

some very friendly and good advice.  I want to thank Bob for 

that and I do want to also thank his family, Dave and Spencer, 

for their friendship, for what they have done for me in 

improving my life.  I know that if it hadn't been for Dave and 

the rest of the family, that I would not have been able to serve 

the public in the number of years that I was able to. 

 

So I want to express my appreciation to the Wooff family and I 

certainly want to convey my condolences to Mrs. Wooff, to 

Dave, and to Spencer.  Thank you very much. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to move, 

seconded by my colleague, the House Leader for the official 

opposition and member for Rosthern, that by leave of the 

Assembly: 

 

 That the resolutions just passed, together with a transcript of 

oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 

communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this 

Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 



46 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1992 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Sonntag, seconded by Ms. 

Hamilton. 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, it is truly an honour to be called 

upon by the Premier to second the Speech from the Throne and 

the words of my eloquent colleague from Meadow Lake. 

 

Yesterday when he said the government would be judged by 

their actions and not their rhetoric, he was certainly correct.  

Sadly, the past government has exploited even our own 

language by too often saying one thing and then doing the 

opposite.  It is no wonder the public has become cynical.  The 

words of politicians have come to mean nothing.  It has been 

all too easy for the Tory government to say the words that the 

latest poll claims that people want to hear.  But too often in the 

past the words have been hollow and empty.  Words that are 

not tied to meaningful action and principles are useless. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we in this government will be judged by our 

actions.  We will be judged on whether or not we have used 

common sense and are competent in our administration of the 

public purse.  We will be judged on whether our decisions have 

been made in the public interest.  We will be judged on 

whether we have given hope to those who are presently 

disadvantaged.  We will be judged on whether we have 

implemented policies that will bring people together in times of 

adversity.  Make no mistake: we will be judged, and we should 

be judged on our actions -- just as the members of the 

opposition were judged this last October. 

 

The people have harshly judged the previous regime, and it is a 

sad commentary to know that because of their empty words 

politicians are neither respected nor trusted by the population at 

large.  Think about it.  The very people that are charged with 

the responsibility of making major decisions about running the 

province or the country, these people are neither trusted nor 

respected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, something is clearly very wrong.  That is the 

reality that was left to this caucus and to the New Democratic 

government.  That is the reality that a New Democrat 

government is going to change. 

 

I take the whole matter of integrity and accountability very 

seriously.  My colleagues and I take these matters seriously and 

we're willing to act upon them.  We will ensure that a code of 

ethical conduct will be passed that will set a high standard of 

behaviour to which all public office holders should aspire.  A 

new conflict of interests Act will be introduced to provide strict 

guidelines for all elected representatives in the performance of 

their public 

duties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of my constituency, Wascana Plains, 

from Douglas Park to the very new Wascana View, they all ask 

one thing.  They just want everyone in this province to be 

treated fairly and honestly. 

 

My conviction that politicians should work hard for their 

constituents and should be accountable to the people that elect 

them was a major motivating factor for me to seek election and 

seek office at the provincial level.  I have served these people 

as a member of city council.  Their trust allowed me to see first 

hand the total disregard of the Tories for the capital of this 

province. 

 

In one year alone the past government removed over $9.2 

million in transfer grants and payments.  Not in March, Mr. 

Speaker, but by July, far after a city can adjust to that kind of 

transfer.  A few months later, what do we hear?  The 

announcement that Saskatchewan is going to celebrate an 85th 

birthday party.  The birthday party would cost us all -- you 

guessed it -- $9 million. 

 

Despite the lack of support from the government who touted 

economic diversification, Regina did not give up.  We formed 

the Regina Economic Development Authority which includes a 

broad cross-section of our community.  It brought together 

business, labour, aboriginal people, our university, and civic 

government.  It brought them together to hold their heads high 

with pride for Regina and for Saskatchewan. 

 

I am proud of those people who with vision, commitment, and 

dedication have given to us an example of the successes of 

community-based economic development strategies. 

 

Our action as government is also informing the people and 

forming together a group, the Premier's Economic Action 

Committee, with representation from all sectors.  And they will 

in the same way advise and assist us in the economic 

rejuvenation of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, local government is no stranger 

to public involvement and accountability.  These past six years 

have been a good experience.  It is now my intent to work hard 

for my Premier and with my fellow caucus colleagues to 

provide the integrity and accountability demonstrated by local 

government to now the provincial level.  Our team effort will 

be judged on how we restore the public's faith in elected 

people. 

 

So yes, my colleague from the North is quite correct; words of 

politicians and governments mean nothing, nothing at all until 

they're followed with concrete and responsible action. 

 

The throne speech that we heard on Monday makes very clear 

that this government is prepared to take action, prepared to take 

action now.  The model is very simple really.  Words are 

spoken based on principle, based on beliefs and values.  Then 

action is taken to support those words. 



April 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 47 

But, Mr. Speaker, before we can get our own plans 

implemented, we're required to mop up the mess.  What a 

mess.  I personally feel like someone who's lived through one 

of Regina's infamous tornadoes.  Everything is laying in ruin 

and shambles around us. 

 

The member opposite from Rosthern has been trying to absolve 

himself from any responsibility of the present financial mess.  

Well that member, he's been farming in Saskatchewan long 

enough to know that after a tornado has struck the land, signs 

of destruction are clearly visible everywhere -- long, long after 

the storm has died away.  The damage caused by the Tory 

tornado that hit this province will remain with us long after 

their term of office. 

 

We are prepared to clean up the debris.  Before any positive 

construction can be started we must clean up the mess, so 

understand the course of action that we must now take is also 

essential.  We must understand first how we got to the point of 

this mess and destruction, and we must all remember. 

 

When we were in opposition and when we were on the 

campaign trail last fall, we raised strenuous objections to how 

the previous government mismanaged the finances of the 

province.  We made a commitment, a promise to the people of 

Saskatchewan that we would restore responsible fiscal 

management to the running of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our party understands, along with the people in 

this province -- which is unlike the opposition members that 

huddled together yesterday -- we understand the importance of 

sound financial management and a sound financial base.  

Surely this should be painfully obvious to everyone, because 

after all we are talking here economics at the kindergarten 

level. 

 

When you run up bills, you have to think about how you're 

going to pay them.  School children know that much.  If you 

are borrowing money, then you have to sit down and develop a 

plan on how you're going to pay the money back. 

 

So what were you people thinking about when you were on this 

side of the House?  How could you stand by and watch the 

province go deeper and deeper into debt until we're now faced 

with a total debt of nearly $14 billion? 

 

How is it possible that you could remain silent while Crown 

corporations, the people's assets, the assets of the people of this 

province, were gutted financially or sold at huge losses?  How 

is it possible that you felt you could justify to your own 

constituents an annual interest charge of $700 million? 

 

To put these numbers in some perspective, with $700 million 

we could resurface the Trans-Canada Highway from 

Vancouver to Montreal.  Yet you were prepared to keep 

funnelling this incredible amount of money off to financial 

institutions.  Now with total provincial revenue at just over $4 

billion, the interest payments are the third largest item of 

government expenditure. 

 

Didn't you think the banks make enough money without 

turning over 20 per cent of our revenue every year?  How is it 

possible that you're able to look yourself in the mirror knowing 

that you were bankrupting what was once a strong and healthy 

economy?  We wonder, the people of Saskatchewan wonder 

how you could do this to your own children and your own 

grandchildren. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Speaker, people keep asking me over and over again, how 

could this possibly have happened?  And I can only think really 

of two possible explanations.  Maybe the previous government 

really honestly didn't know what they were doing.  It is 

possible.  It is possible they just didn't understand what 

happens if you continuously spend the people's money that you 

just don't have.  So by not understanding the reality of 

bankruptcy, perhaps they really believed that it didn't matter if 

in a province when you're in debt, somehow magically it would 

all take care of itself. 

 

It's just like a very young child who has no concept of money, 

only the immediate desires.  A toddler in a store only 

understands that he wants to eat the candy or play with the toy 

and take it home with him.  It never occurs to the child that 

there's any reason why he can't help himself to whatever he 

wants.  A child of that age requires patience and kind guidance, 

but he is certainly not capable of taking responsibility for doing 

the family shopping. 

 

So was that how this province came to financial ruin?  Can we 

really credit you with childlike innocence? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Hardly. 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Hardly?  Well-meaning but naive?  Just not 

capable of understanding or fulfilling your responsibilities?  

Like the two-year-old, left to tend the family business matters, 

is that how you can explain your actions? 

 

If you were not totally juvenile and incompetent, then the 

explanation for this financial mess becomes a lot more sinister 

because then you had to have been acting deliberately and 

because then you had to have known full well the hardships 

that you were placing on Saskatchewan people. 

 

Your party leadership has never made any secret of your 

disdain for social programs.  Neither have you offered any 

apologies for your actions -- actions that have imposed hurt and 

hardship, actions that all too often have increased inequities 

and unfairness in this province. 

 

This government has opened the books on Tory 

mismanagement because we believe the public has a right to 

know where their tax dollars went.  What the Gass Commission 

revealed has been truly shocking.  One thing that everyone can 

agree on, after reading that report, is that the Conservatives 

certainly knew how to live the high life at the taxpayers' 

expense. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- The people of this province will never 



48 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1992 

forget who benefitted from the former regime while services 

were cut.  They will never forget who continually hiked our 

taxes, and they will never forget who put us into this massive 

debt. 

 

The senior on limited income will never forget that members 

opposite defended a $1.3 million pension plan for George Hill.  

Single mothers trying to scrape together enough money to buy 

food for their children; they won't forget members opposite 

condoning spending $16,000 of money -- the taxpayers' money 

-- so cabinet ministers could have free booze. 

 

University students will not forget that while university funds 

and loans were cut, money was always found for Tory friends 

and big business megaprojects -- even against the advice of 

their own advisors. 

 

Farmers forced off their land and small-business people forced 

into bankruptcy these last long 10 years, they will never forget 

that our future was recklessly mortgaged away for short-term 

political gain.  And they won't forget that just yesterday you 

voted against what?  Fighting Ottawa for the $500 million 

owing to them. 

 

They voted to extend with the federal government's consent, 

the deadline to be mutually agreed upon extended on the GRIP 

program, and they voted against a request by farmers to 

establish a review commission to design a long-term farm 

stability program that would be based on the cost of production 

-- in this Chamber yesterday, voted against that for the farmer, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We all will never forget that the previous government operated 

irresponsibly in the managing of the public purse.  But worse, 

they ran the affairs of the province to benefit a small elite 

group of their friends while the rest of us suffered the results. 

 

The members opposite have spent hours in the House warning 

of the dangers of socialism -- denouncing a concept that 

believes government has a responsibility to ensure that social 

and human needs of all its citizens are met. 

 

Was bankrupting this fair and beautiful province how you 

thought you could prevent Saskatchewan from returning to a 

compassionate and social-minded community?  With the 

massive and crippling debt, did you honestly believe that you 

could publicly argue the province could no longer afford to 

take care of any of those who were disadvantaged?  Did you 

think that by destroying the financial base of this province you 

would be able to kill our vision of social fairness and equality? 

 

Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, the human spirit and the will to do 

good cannot be snuffed out that easily.  Yes it's true we've been 

left with a horrific financial legacy; and yes it's true it will not 

be that easy to pull the province back from the brink of total 

economic collapse.  It will now take longer to restore the 

economy, to create the jobs, to implement programs and 

policies that ensure all people can live in dignity, that all 

people can have the basics of food and shelter. 

 

But as difficult as it may be, the throne speech pointed out 

we have already begun to put actions behind our words.  I see 

the government members of this legislature as already 

embarking on a very difficult journey, but we're not going to be 

put off.  We, along with the people of Saskatchewan, we're on 

this road together, and together we will overcome the obstacles. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Together we are recapturing the vision of 

responsible government.  We in this province will once again 

be the masters of our own destiny. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- To take responsible fiscal action is merely 

the tool, albeit an important one.  It is the tool required to 

create the kind of society that will reflect our beliefs and our 

values of fairness, of equity, and of compassion. 

 

We are doing that with our actions.  The first action this 

government took was to keep the promise of eliminating the 

unfair PST (provincial sales tax).  We didn't take months, we 

didn't takes years, we didn't take a week; we did it the same 

night we were elected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- And why?  Because it was an unfair tax.  We 

are determined to have a tax system that is fair -- taxation 

based on the ability to pay. 

 

We also promised to conduct an audit of the province's 

finances and to review the PCs' (Progressive Conservative) 

privatization and business deals.  That promise too we have 

kept.  Less than a month after taking power the Financial 

Management Review Commission was established by the 

Premier, and on February 18 the commission released its report 

-- on time and within budget.  We promise to bring to the light 

of day the whole sorry financial mess that the previous 

administration created. 

 

I remember how, as in opposition, my fellow colleagues -- and 

it was not easy -- but my fellow colleagues like the member 

from The Battlefords, the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote, from Regina North West spoke strongly against 

how the Tories were using Crown corporations to hide their 

financial mismanagement from public view. 

 

At the time my colleagues were accused of being overly 

partisan, of inflating issues for political gain.  Well this 

situation has now been brought out in the open too, been 

brought out in the open by our government. 

 

Our senior members have worked hard to reveal the truth 

because they believe in accountable government.  Now the 

report of the Gass Commission has revealed that if anything, 

my colleagues understated the magnitude of the problem of 

mismanagement.  The people of this province also realize that 

forcing the Crowns into debt in order to pay dividends to the 

province makes about as much sense as using a credit card to 

make mortgage payments. 



April 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 49 

We the people of this province will never forget the long, dark 

journey of the past 10 years.  We will never forget the 

governing party that brought us to this rocky and barren 

wasteland. 
 

An Hon. Member: -- The people won't forget. 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Not forget.  But now the light is beginning to 

dawn.  We are still in rough terrain, but we are determined to 

find our way back to the province that Saskatchewan people 

believe in.  We know exactly how we got into this mess and 

who is responsible, but it's time to move forward, to slowly 

begin implementing our vision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we did not create this mess.  The people of the 

province did not create this mess. But we promised to get our 

financial house in order when we formed government, and 

we're acting on that promise. 

 

But what I want to stress to this Assembly is why we are doing 

this.  We do believe in sound financial management, and we 

will eventually restore health to the provincial treasury, but let's 

make it very clear that this is not an end unto itself.  We know 

that human and social needs must be addressed for any society 

to call itself civilized.  It is essential to gain control over our 

finances in order to have the freedom to do what is needed and 

what is right.  Financial security does mean freedom for the 

people of Saskatchewan, but I also want to commend this 

government in the steps that they're taking to enhance freedom 

in other ways as well. 

 

That's the promise for freedom from government secrecy and 

manipulation.  It's the promise of freedom to ask questions and 

state differing opinions.  Mr. Speaker, it also returns the 

promise of freedom to participate in meaningful consultation, 

evaluation of government, fair criticism without fear of 

reprisal. 

 

To be successful today and into the future, governments must 

adapt and share decision-making powers.  Individuals and 

communities are rightfully insisting on the freedom to make 

their own decisions and to solve their own problems.  In 

solving problems, government's role must become more 

facilitating and co-operative. 

 

The throne speech, Mr. Speaker, is putting into practice this 

new approach.  Initiatives like the economic development 

bank, the co-generation energy projects, the changes to the 

community bonds program, the initiatives on the environment 

-- these all show that our government is acting on its 

commitment to bring people together to solve their own 

problems.  Meaningful consultation will allow the people to 

make decisions today toward a better future for all of us 

tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- We recognize government expenditures, 

programs, and services must benefit all our citizens, not just the 

few.  That is the essence of ensuring that human and social 

needs are being met.  That is the essence of why we are starting 

now to develop plans for a guaranteed income for seniors; 

where we're starting now to ensure that in the future our elderly 

can have the choice 

of remaining in their own homes.  We not only respect the 

wisdom and experience of our elders, but this government 

wants to ensure that all seniors can live out their lives in 

dignity. 

 

An essential part of equality and fairness is also having the 

opportunity of employment.  This government is acting on its 

commitment to make jobs a priority.  We understand how 

absolutely critical it is to get Saskatchewan people working 

again.  Individuals, families, and communities cannot survive 

without employment opportunities.  But neither can our 

economy.  A fundamental requirement in getting people 

working is to ensure appropriate education is available.  

Having the right training is a key factor in order for people to 

achieve economic independence in our society and economic 

security. 

 

(1545) 

 

I commend my colleagues for their vision and commitment in 

this area.  Clearly our new government understands the close 

connection between employment and training.  They not only 

understand but they're initiating measures to solve a major 

problem.  Having a co-ordinated education system is essential 

to ensure that our people will get the skills required by business 

and by industry. 

 

I am proud to be a part of a government that will hold these 

ideals above all else.  And I'm proud that in spite of the 

necessity for severe financial management, this government 

has set its priorities on people first. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- What limited resources we do have will be 

targeted to those greatest in need.  We will feed hungry 

children.  We cannot stand idly by waiting for the recession to 

end when a future generation is becoming an innocent and 

sorry victim of the mistakes of the past government the past 10 

years. 

 

Instead of dwelling on heart-tugging rhetoric, this government 

has acted on their belief in the importance of equality.  We are 

taking measures to improve and enhance job training for both 

women and for our aboriginal community.  This is one small 

step but it reveals our government's commitment and 

understanding of equality issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the throne speech that we all listened to on 

Monday is about a government that is willing to take action 

today for our children and for their tomorrow; a government 

that is willing to do this together in co-operation with the 

people who love this province, who will make their homes 

here, have their farms and businesses here, and yes, want to 

relax and play here too. 

 

This government acknowledges that there are hungry children.  

It has made a commitment to help the community feed those 

who are hungry.  Our government has taken long-term steps to 

ensure dignity to our seniors, and to develop fair access to jobs 

for the rest of us; to have fair labour practices; to restore 

democratic principles; and to safeguard our environment. 



50 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Well I would say, Mr. Speaker, that that is 

not a bad plan for a government who is accused by the leader 

of the members opposite of not having any plan.  I am proud of 

this plan, because if we can do all of this in a year when we 

have no money, think of what we will be able to do when our 

financial base is restored.  If we can do all this, our public will 

once again have faith in its leaders and the democratic process. 

 

The members of the previous government may have thought 

for a while that by taking this province to the brink of financial 

ruin, that they would kill the spirit of our people. But out of 

adversity, Saskatchewan people always rise to a challenge in a 

spirit of innovation, co-operation, and fairness. 

 

From the ruin around us we now have the opportunity to work 

together to recreate our institutions like health, education, local 

government, and social programs into something even better.  

Once again our party and this government is going to create 

something positive out of hardship and out of difficult times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be a part of this province and this 

government during difficult times -- but yes also very exciting 

times.  This government, just like the people that elected it, is 

equal to the challenges ahead. Working together and making 

tough choices today will reclaim this province for our future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, I am indeed honoured to 

second this Speech from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's indeed a 

pleasure for me, Mr. Speaker, to enter this throne speech debate 

to have the opportunity as the MLA from Thunder Creek to 

finally come to this place of debate and do my duty.  I 

wondered for a while, Mr. Speaker, if I was ever going to get 

the opportunity. 

 

During the last session of this legislature I heard a lot of 

pronouncements from the government as to their ability to stay 

on schedule, how budgets would be brought in on time, how 

special warrants would never be used again in this particular 

government, that we had a government that was going to 

respect many of the principles of democracy which they 

claimed others had abrogated over the years.  So as we head 

into the month of May, Mr. Speaker, when the farmers are 

hoping to get out on the land, it is good that I've had that 

opportunity to finally come here. 

 

I'd like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I once again would like to 

congratulate Her Honour on the job that she did.  And I was 

outside the legislature on Monday when Her Honour came up 

in the landau, and I was standing amongst several hundred 

Saskatchewan citizens who weren't feeling particularly good 

about their government that day.  But when Her Honour came 

and walked on parade with the troops and stood at the salute, 

you heard a lot of 

comments about what a great personage she was.  Her 

contribution to our province is well-known in a number of 

areas.  And people, I think, out there on the steps of the 

legislature on Monday were truly respectful of Her Honour and 

the way that she carries out her duties.  And certainly she came 

into this Chamber and once again showed us why she has the 

position that she has, both within our legislature and within 

society in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think one of the central issues of the throne 

speech that was delivered to us on Monday is the fact that I see 

a less than honest approach to the taxpayers of this province in 

this throne speech.  I see a government that makes all sorts of 

pronouncements about what they're going to do, how they're 

going to set in place various commissions, groups of people to 

look at the way that our province governs itself.  This coming 

from a Premier and a party which roundly criticized similar 

processes by the former government. 

 

Consensus Saskatchewan which brought in a report that truly, I 

believe, represented a broad view of Saskatchewan and our 

province was roundly criticized.  The Murray Commission -- 

member after member in this legislature from the then 

opposition stood and condemned the Murray Commission 

because it went out and talked to people about the health care 

system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government would like the now opposition to 

give them their due and allow them to enter into this great 

consultative process without being critical.  And I'd like to say 

to you, Mr. Speaker, that I think this opposition will be very 

responsible in viewing the works of the various bodies put in 

place by this government, that it will not use cheap partisan 

politics in discussing the issues that those particular people are 

endeavouring to find out. 

 

I see a throne speech that takes a great deal of credit for some 

economic agenda items.  I see them refer to specific businesses 

that are providing employment to the province of 

Saskatchewan -- businesses that were all either started or 

helped by the previous administration.  And yet they say they 

would never come into this legislature piggybacking on the 

deeds of the former government. 

 

And I guess that's the difference between this opposition and 

the one that previously sat in this legislature.  Because it didn't 

matter what the former government said or did or wished; that 

opposition was always very vitriolic and against whatever the 

government talked about. 

 

And I think this opposition has demonstrated to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that where credit is due, then recognize it.  That when 

there are reforms to be made in this legislature, that by having 

an all-party consultation that this opposition will fulfil its 

mandate of opposing but of being reasonable and when 

necessary, standing firm. 

 

This throne speech also talks about the way that our 

government is going to put people first.  And I think we're 

going to have to have a diametric change, Mr. Speaker, from 

this government if we're going to put people first, if we don't 

come clean with the way the financial situation 



April 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 51 

is in this province. 

 

As came up earlier in the day in question period, many people 

in our society and indeed around Canada, are questioning some 

of the numbers that the government is using.  They're 

questioning the motives behind the use of those numbers.  And 

they're really wondering if this government is simply not trying 

to pull the wool over the taxpayers' eyes in Saskatchewan so 

that, number one, they don't have to live up to the agenda that 

they promised the people of Saskatchewan in last year's 

election campaign; but, number two, so that they can position 

themselves politically in three or four years to say: gee, 

taxpayer, what a wonderful job we've done in this province.  

We'll fudge the numbers sufficiently at the beginning so that 

we can look good politically at the end. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that it's incumbent upon government 

in this province or anywhere in Canada today, given the tight 

economic situation that we're in, that government not be 

fudging the numbers simply for their own political gain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm going to lay out some premise today in my 

speech that I think . . . and I would ask all members of this 

legislature to follow along fairly carefully as I outline a case 

and use quite a lot of numbers.  It's very difficult I know, Mr. 

Speaker, when one talks about numbers that have several zeros 

behind them, to make any sense out of what truly is going on.  

But I think it's important, given the pronouncements of the 

government and indeed the speech that was just delivered prior 

to mine in this legislature where a lot of economic issues were 

talked about, that we do make an attempt to follow along with 

the arguments that I'll make today. 

 

And the first proposition that I'm going to make, Mr. Speaker, 

is that the Premier, the now Premier, when he was leader of the 

opposition in this province, was irresponsible in not taking into 

account some numbers and some facts that would be 

well-known to an individual who has been in politics in this 

province for a quarter of a century -- numbers that I'm sure a 

former deputy premier of this province would have known 

about, would have availed himself of when going out and 

promising the taxpayers of this province several billion dollars 

in promises, when going out and criticizing the former 

government of the province of Saskatchewan for certain 

economic initiatives which were undertaken. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, the NDP leader, the Premier of this 

province, appointed a gentlemen named Donald Gass, a 

chartered accountant from Saskatoon, to head up a review of 

the province's financial position.  The member from Regina has 

just mentioned this particular individual and that commission a 

number of times in her speech and drawn certain conclusions 

from the findings of that commission. 

 

The Premier of the province expressed every confidence in Mr. 

Gass.  And I would say to him, if he has changed his mind 

recently, even as recently as this morning when the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour and others presented 

counter-arguments to the cabinet of this province, it is 

incumbent upon the Premier to stand in his place in this 

legislature and repudiate Mr. Gass. 

(1600) 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, until he does that, until he does that, 

then this Assembly must give credence to some of the 

statements that Mr. Gass has made.  And I refer first of all to an 

interview with CKCK-TV on February 18, 1992, and I quote.  

Mr. Gass said:  The books were open all along to credit 

agencies or anyone else who was interested. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, we had a leader of the 

opposition who'd been in politics for a quarter of a century, has 

obviously displayed a burning desire to be Premier of this 

province for some time.  I would have thought he would have 

taken the opportunity to avail himself of knowledge which 

seems to have been shared by people all over this country and 

indeed this continent. 

 

Mr. Gass personally wanted to say that the new NDP 

government would not be surprised by his findings; they would 

not be surprised.  That is the position of the officially appointed 

Financial Management Review Commission chairman -- a man 

appointed by this government.  The books were always open 

and there would be no surprises. 

 

The second issue is the Premier's claim that the financial books 

of the province were not kept in a way which fairly reflected 

the province's financial position and that he did not know what 

was going on. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, aside from Mr. Gass's report that this was 

not the case, we have the sworn word of the Minister of 

Finance.  And I would refer members and the public to a 

document known as a shelf filing that was made by the 

Minister of Finance in Washington, D.C., by his 

representatives a short time ago. 

 

This filing is a sworn legal document to prepare the way for the 

government to borrow up to $1 billion -- $1 billion by the way, 

which was not approved by this legislature -- $1 billion.  That's 

a one with I believe nine zeros behind it.  It's a lot of money, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now members of the media I know have seen this document, 

but I think one of the things that they have failed to report is 

the sworn statements of the Minister of Finance found on page 

11 of this particular filing.  And I quote page 11, and I'll be 

tabling this document, Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks 

so that any member of the legislature may view it.  And I 

quote: 

 

 The report of the Provincial Auditor on prior financial 

statements has not been adverse and the Department of 

Finance of the Province believes the 1991 Financial 

Statements present fairly the financial position of the 

Consolidated Fund, Saskatchewan Heritage Fund and the 

Combined Funds and the results of their operations and the 

changes in financial position for the year then ended. 

 

Note, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Finance states that the 

previous government's financial statements were not adverse 

and that they are fair.  The minister's sworn statement then goes 

on to take into the account Mr. Gass's 



52 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1992 

comments and recommendations.  And it says also on page 11, 

and I quote: "Application of the PSAAC . . ." commonly called 

PSAAC (Public Sector Accounting and Auditing Committee) ". 

. . guidelines would not change the total level of the Province's 

debt currently outstanding . . . 

 

So here we have, Mr. Speaker, the NDP Minister of Finance 

saying the former PC government kept financial records that 

were fair, that accurately represented the financial position of 

the province, and that accepting the Gass recommendations 

would have no effect on the size of the provincial debt.  And 

that is the sworn statement of the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, lest the Premier of this province say that his 

own minister had insufficient information and that there was 

information missing that makes the above sworn statements 

misleading, let me further quote the minister's own document. 

 

First of all, let us be clear about what time period the minister 

swears was reviewed as fair and accurate.  On page 12 of the 

same document we read, and I quote: 

 

 All the financial information set forth or incorporated by 

reference in this Prospectus is derived from financial 

statements and supplementary schedules of the Combined 

Funds which have been examined by the Provincial Auditor 

for the five years ended March 31, 1991, and has been 

included or incorporated by reference in this Prospectus in 

reliance upon his authority as an expert in accounting and 

auditing. 

 

So the Minister of Finance swears that based upon the work of 

the Provincial Auditor, that the bookkeeping of a former 

government was up to snuff at least since the year ended March 

31, 1985. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, it's important for members of this 

legislature and of the public to understand the enormity of this 

and the contradiction that it represents from the propaganda 

that we have seen come out of this government in the last six 

months. 

 

This Minister of Finance swears, swears to the courts of New 

York and Washington and to investors who buy the bonds of 

the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that the former 

Tory government kept solid, fair, and open books at least since 

1985.  This is what he tells the legal authorities in the United 

States of America, that he is so confident in the bookkeeping of 

the previous government that for these statements he makes the 

Government of Saskatchewan liable before the courts of the 

United States of America. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that is a fairly significant statement for 

our Minister of Finance to make.  And yet here in 

Saskatchewan he and his Premier are telling the people of 

Saskatchewan exactly the opposite, exactly the opposite what 

they would put in a document this thick which costs several 

hundreds of thousands of dollars to put together, delivered into 

the securities exchange in Washington, D.C. 

He's been telling the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, that 

the books were closed, that it was all a surprise to a man that 

had been in public life for 25 years, that the Tories kept the 

books in a mess.  Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance 

goes on through a great ritual every time he sees the media, 

repeating, the books are open now.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the 

books, according to Mr. Gass, were never closed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- The NDP leader tells us that he never knew 

how bad it was when he stood in this legislature, and I 

remember those times well, when he stood in this legislature 

and asked for more and more money for all of the various 

things that the NDP supposedly espouse.  He campaigned on 

promises of everything for everybody all over this province for 

two years.  And now all of a sudden the poor fellow is 

surprised when he opens the books. 

 

I guess the question I would have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for 

members of this legislature and for the public of Saskatchewan 

is, exactly where does the Minister of Finance want to 

announce that he has told the truth?  Does he want to announce 

it to the bankers in New York or does he want to announce it to 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we know about the truth according to Gass, at least until 

the Premier repudiates him. So we have to accept that the New 

Democratic government which now governs this province is 

going to tell the truth to the American investors whom they're 

going to borrow a billion dollars from, but they won't tell it to 

the people of Saskatchewan.  And instead they will have a 

purely cynical, reprehensible political agenda for the taxpayers 

in this province. 

 

You know it's sad, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we think about 

going to New York to borrow a billion dollars, that some of the 

practices of the former government, which I think most people 

in this province considered good and reasonable, are not being 

followed.  Because, Mr. Speaker, why should we pay interest 

to the people in New York when we in fact could be borrowing 

monies from our own people and paying the interest here, as 

we did with Power bonds, TeleBonds, Potash bonds. 

 

Indeed this morning, this very morning, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

this very morning a coalition representing the various labour 

groups came in and presented a submission, and I believe this 

is the submission here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the cabinet of 

this province.  And it's from the coalition on public sector 

bargaining, saying that very thing -- that this government 

should be making a pact with the credit unions; that it should 

be doing things to borrow money within our own province so 

that the interest stays in this province, that it doesn't go to the 

New York bankers; that the mechanisms are already in place to 

do that borrowing; and that we don't have to sneak off in the 

dark of night and ask the Americans for a billion dollars with a 

statement that directly contradicts everything that we've heard 

out of this government in the last six months. 

 

In his first Economic Review, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 



April 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 53 

Finance minister of this province said on page 6 of that 

particular document, and I quote: 

 

 . . . the construction of a second heavy oil upgrader, a 

fertilizer plant and a pulp mill will help support economic 

growth . . . as well as offer opportunities for more growth in 

future when these new facilities come on stream . . . 

 

The Minister of Finance says that the investment in 

diversifying Saskatchewan's economy made by the previous 

government is precisely what is keeping us going through some 

very difficult times, particularly in the construction industry.  

And yet he would have the people of this province believe -- if 

you can believe the rhetoric which we hear spouted all around 

this province by members of this government -- he would have 

us believe, when he is out in the public with the taxpayers, that 

this money was all wasted. 

 

You base some of the economic foundations of your province 

and your economic forecast, which are read by financial people 

all across this country and indeed around the world, on some 

corner-stones, some major initiatives.  And yet you tell a 

different story when you're out there with the people. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to directly address the issues of the 

provincial debt.  Let us start, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with a 

surface review of some easily agreed upon numbers, with the 

possible exception of the size of the accumulated debt itself.  

Every cabinet minister on the other side has his own opinion it 

seems these days, on what that number is.  And it's sort of 

randomly used around the province.  But anyway, let us put out 

some numbers that I think have been pretty well agreed upon 

by people in the financial circles at least, and others around this 

province. 

 

Let us take, for the sake of argument, the numbers produced by 

the government's Financial Management Review Commission.  

That shouldn't be too hard for members of this legislature to 

take -- the numbers from the Gass report.  And I know, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this is going to be a bit tedious, but I think 

knowing the Deputy Speaker's diligence in Public Accounts 

that he's used to going through lots of numbers, and that other 

members of this legislature are going to be faced with looking 

at lots of numbers over the next few months.  So please, 

members of the legislature, pay attention because I think these 

numbers are fairly significant. 

 

Donald Gass reported on the day before the New Democratic 

Party assumed government in this province, October 31, '91, 

using new accounting methods, that the accumulated debt stood 

at $8.697 billion.  You will find that number on page 32 of his 

report. 

 

(1615) 

 

Now we can work with that figure, or we can work with the 

figure that the Premier of this province uses most often -- 

though he does use so many figures, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's 

hard to believe that he has any number in his mind.  In any 

event, the Premier of the province most frequently cites the 

debt of the province as being just over 

$14 billion including Crown debt.  And we will do our first 

accounting using that number, and come back to the Gass 

Commission in a few minutes. 

 

Now the government themselves, this NDP government, admits 

that they left a debt of $2.8 billion in the Crowns in 1982 

dollars.  And I can refer you to the Public Accounts of 

December 1, 1982, where the now Associate Minister of 

Finance, the member from Churchill Downs, uses that number 

in the verbatim of the report -- former cabinet minister in the 

regime of the Hon. Allan Blakeney.  Someone who would be 

fairly conversant, I think, with those kind of numbers. 

 

You can find the calculations for that number on page 18 of 

what is commonly known as the Wolfgang Wolff report -- the 

report of the Crown Investments Review Commission of 

December, 1982.  Now that 2.8 billion in current dollars is 

something close to $5 billion in 1992 dollars.  But I think to be 

charitable to the members of the government, I will call it 4 

billion.  And believe me, that is charitable. 

 

So you subtract the 4 billion from the Premier's 14 billion, and 

we have 10 billion to work with.  The NDP also conceded at 

that time that they left a debt in the Heritage Fund of $250 

million in 1982 dollars.  So once again, let's be charitable and 

call that 500 million in 1992 dollars.  We now have a debt of 

9.5 billion to account for. 

 

There was a $235 million equity investment in the NewGrade 

heavy oil upgrader.  We are now at 9.37 billion.  There was 

110 million for the new City Hospital in Saskatoon.  Some 

would argue that it should have never been built, but at the time 

it seemed reasonable to the people of Saskatoon that they have 

that facility.  That leaves us at $9.26 billion. 

 

And please note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I am rounding the 

numbers down to be totally fair, so for example, the upgrader 

investment was actually 235.4 million but I reduced the debt 

side by only 230 million in making my analogy. 

 

There was $544 million in school capital projects, including 

new schools, repairs and renovations, since 1982.  Once again, 

I suppose some would argue if some of those repairs and 

renovations and new schools were necessary.  But to the people 

in those areas they seemed very important, I'm sure, at the time. 

 

We are now at $8.7 billion.  There was $120 million spent for 

underground power lines in this province.  And I can tell you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 60,000 farmers in this province 

particularly, and also in many of our resort villages, have 

totally agreed with the burying of power lines.  There are 

several deaths associated each year with the interaction of farm 

machinery and power lines in this province.  The burying of 

lines around yards, around schools, around many of our public 

facilities, has been deemed by most to be reasonable.  And 

indeed the Power Corporation has for decades run advertising 

saying that it is the proper thing to do. 

 

So that leaves us at $8.68 billion.  There was 225 million in 

capital funding to our universities.  Once again you can 



54 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1992 

take issue, but to the students in our universities it seemed 

reasonable. 

 

That leaves us with 8.46 billion.  There was $244 million in 

rural natural gas network construction.  I don't think, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, you will find very many people, particularly 

in rural Saskatchewan, in our towns and villages and on the 

farm, who do not appreciate the taxpayers of this province 

allowing them the opportunity that our larger cities have 

enjoyed for decades. 

 

That leaves us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with $8.22 billion.  There 

was $264 million spent for individual rural telephone lines.  In 

other words, the local telephone company and later on SaskTel 

did not have to go out and fix several hundred poles in this 

province every time we had a hail storm or a lightning storm 

and that service would be disrupted to large portions of its 

subscribership, because of the burying of telephone lines which 

allowed farm people and people in our smaller communities to 

use on-line computer services, to avail themselves of 

emergency numbers, to do a lot of things that are necessary 

when you are miles and miles from your school, your hospital, 

the rink, and the other services that we in rural Saskatchewan 

think are pretty darned important. 

 

That leaves us with $8.16 billion.  There was 317 million in the 

Meadow Lake pulp mill and the Bi-Provincial upgrader -- 

projects which the Minister of Finance, in his financial review 

of the province, says are absolutely fundamental to this 

province to provide jobs and some continuance until new 

things come along.  The very financial prospectus that he put 

together for people across this country to look at, he says those 

are good things. 

 

That leaves us with $7.79 billion.  There was 155 million spent 

on Rafferty-Alameda.  And I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

many members of the New Democratic Party stood in this 

legislature and condemned that water project, that water power 

project. 

 

And I guess maybe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that only time will 

tell, but that particular project was used over and over and over 

again for political purposes and political purposes only in this 

legislature and around the province.  A project that is 

universally subscribed to by people in south-east Saskatchewan 

and a project which the now government has seen fit to back up 

in the courts of our land and see through to its fruition. 

 

That leaves us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with $7.64 billion.  We 

had a $64 million investment in a fertilizer plant, a fertilizer 

plant which once again the Minister of Finance in this 

province, in this NDP government, says is a good thing for our 

province.  A project which I know the people of the city of 

Moose Jaw support in a big way, and a project which is going 

to pay back its investment to the people of this province in 

approximately two years, because it will be the single largest 

consumer of natural gas in our province and will pay large 

amounts of royalties and taxes to the taxpayers of this province.  

There aren't many things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that you can 

invest $64 million in and have it returned to you over a period 

of two years. 

That leaves us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with $7.58 billion.  

Between 1985 and 1989 in this province -- and I'm going to use 

a very modest number here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I 

think members opposite would appreciate that I've been trying 

to keep these numbers down and very reasonable -- there was 

$888 million paid in agricultural support programs. 

 

Now that's a lot less than what the NDP opposition of the day 

was crying for.  They said we should have been spending four, 

five, ten times that amount, and it's well recorded in Hansard 

what those comments were from the members that sat over 

here at that time.  They said that simply wasn't enough; there 

had to be more. 

 

But the true fact is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, being on the modest 

side, that there was $888 million in agricultural support to a 

farm community that was being ravaged, particularly by 

international price wars and the ravages of nature.  That leaves 

us with $6.69 billion. 

 

We had $200 million paid out to home owners in this province, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, on mortgage interest protection payments.  

And that plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was put in place, as you 

well know, back in the early '80s because people were losing 

their homes in our province at an alarming rate.  And the then 

government of the day, the Allan Blakeney administration said 

there's not a thing we can do about it. 

 

So there was $200 million spent on home owners in this 

province so that they could keep their homes.  That leaves us 

with $6.29 billion.  Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I haven't 

touched hospital construction in a general way, nursing home 

construction, highway construction, and on and on and on in 

this province. 

 

As well there was the Nipawin hydro project; the Digital 

equipment upgrade at SaskTel; the building of things like the 

Regina-Moose Jaw water treatment plant; Saskatchewan Place 

in Saskatoon; trade and convention centre here; rural service 

centres throughout the province; the community physiotherapy 

program; New Careers; Saskatchewan Pension Plan; home care 

services; municipal recreation grants; home improvement 

grants; gas tax rebate; the exemption of clothing from the sales 

tax.  It goes on and on and on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

You take that list and you'd be so far over the $6 billion that we 

were left at after we got through my last page.  And I don't 

think it's particularly difficult, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to see 

where the money went. 

 

Our health care system, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has consumed 

over the billion dollar mark for years.  And that doesn't include 

the capital spending part of it. The annual operating budget of 

Health has been over a billion and a half dollars for the last 

three years, excluding capital site construction.  And the same 

goes for education.  An annual operating budget approaching a 

billion dollars and then all of the capital stuff besides. 

 

Either one of those, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would give you $6 

billion, I'm sure, between 1982 and 1991.  As I said, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, one doesn't have to be a particular 



April 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 55 

financial genius to follow the addition and subtraction of those 

numbers. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I go back to the fact that our 

Minister of Finance, the current Minister of Finance, the 

member from Regina Dewdney, in a sworn testament to the 

American Exchange Commission says that the numbers from 

1985 at least on, were fair and reasonable and accountable -- in 

his own sworn testament. 

 

And you know, while all of this was going on, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the then NDP leader of the opposition kept saying we 

need more, more, more.  We can do better with less, less, less.  

He could find the money no matter what, and he promised 

them that at election time. 

 

He said he could get rid of harmonization, and at the same time 

he would come up with -- and I use those words because they 

are his, sir -- he would come up with the extra money needed to 

finance additional spending in education and health and in the 

elimination of poverty.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don't 

believe, given the scenario that I have just laid out to this 

Assembly, that he was being entirely honest with the voters of 

this province. 

 

(1630) 

 

He now tells us what a crisis we're in, that most of those things 

can't be done because of the waste and mismanagement of the 

former government.  It's all right that his buddies over in 

SaskPower had a Lexus in the garage till they were caught with 

it; that they can't even move into the executive suites which 

many have occupied for years without having a redecorating 

program in place. 

 

It doesn't matter that in the throne speech that he even admits to 

580 appointments to boards and commissions already, and that 

doesn't include the people that are in this building that are 

probably sliding into the civil service unbeknownst to this 

legislature. 

 

It doesn't talk about the verbal contract of Jack Messer.  And 

I'm sure that with the loss of the Lexus that the verbal contract 

will make up for it in some way.  I am sure that probably Mr. 

Reg Gross and Mr. David Dombowsky and others also have 

verbal contracts that at some point in time will probably be 

revealed to the people of this province.  But contracts, I would 

suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, these verbal contracts with the 

friends of the government, that probably breach his very own 

Crown employment contracts Act. 

 

And I'm really surprised, Mr. Speaker, that certain members of 

this legislature, particularly some of the government members 

who I came to know quite well in the way that they conducted 

themselves in this House in the previous five years, would put 

up with that sort of manipulation and gross misinformation that 

is being perpetrated on the taxpayers of this province.  I'm 

really surprised because I heard so much righteous indignation 

coming from members of the then NDP opposition about perks 

like Lexuses and about things . . . I can just imagine, Mr. 

Speaker, if they had come into this House and said, so and so's 

got a verbal contract. 

And do you know what would have happened, Mr. Speaker?  

There'd have been a great uproar and probably bells would 

have started ringing and there would have been all sorts of 

indignation coming forth from the members of the New 

Democratic Party.  Because that was the standard practice, for 

five years at least, that I viewed in this House.  If one of the 

employees of the previous administration had had a verbal 

contract, I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that a verbal contract 

isn't worth the paper that it's printed on. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, how can the members of this 

government caucus live with the president and the 

vice-president of SaskPower having verbal contracts?  I guess 

what it does, Mr. Speaker, is it speaks to the pronouncements 

that were made by that party while in opposition about their 

true dedication to democratic reform in our province.  And I 

guess we'll leave that topic because I think the taxpayer of this 

province, Mr. Speaker, will pass judgement on the verbal 

contracts of the friends of the NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I heard the Minister of Finance in December in 

this House say that he was going to refer the Gass Commission 

report to the Public Accounts Committee.  And I hope that he 

does.  I urge him to do so.  As I said earlier in my delivery, I 

think a lot of people are questioning that report.  A lot of 

people are finding flaws.  A lot of people are saying that 

perhaps the government had ulterior motives in commissioning 

the Gass report. 

 

I think that that referral needs to happen fairly soon and that the 

Public Accounts Committee take a look at it, at some of the 

recommendations.  I personally am very interested in the idea 

of accrual accounting being introduced to the books of the 

Government of Saskatchewan.  I think other governments 

across Canada have seen some good in moving to that system.  

Many say that it would be impossible to move immediately, but 

that all governments should look at combining numbers that 

have never been used before to paint a broader picture of the 

financial position of provinces and indeed our federal 

government in Canada. 

 

But I think I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that rather than 

members of this government using all of their energies as we 

have seen in the last six months anyway in still acting like an 

opposition to continue attacking the previous administration 

because they have no plan of their own, why don't they actually 

use the tools that exist in this legislature to help govern this 

province? 

 

Specifically, Mr. Speaker, I am asking you to refer to the 

Public Accounts Committee, through a request to the Provincial 

Auditor, a special study on the financing and the financial 

management and the husbandry of the finances in 

Saskatchewan's health care system.  Understand very clearly, 

Mr. Speaker, what I'm talking about.  I'm not suggesting that 

we duplicate the apparent mandate of the new Health Research 

Board which I'm sure will deal with many of the actual medical 

procedures that are performed in our hospital system.  I am 

specifically asking for a financial review, including a 

value-for-money audit. 

 

Secondly, that this opposition feels very strongly about 



56 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1992 

this issue.  Before this government starts dismantling our health 

care system with phoney taxes disguised as health care 

premiums, I don't think this government has any choice but to 

appoint a full-scale public hearing process for health care 

funding in this province. 

 

This government and its candidates in the last election were 

absolutely unequivocal in their opposition to any kind of user 

fees or premiums.  There was no question in the voters' minds 

of this province that voting NDP clearly and certainly included 

a vote against such fees.  That being the case, the government 

has no mandate and certainly no moral authority to impose 

such fees without at least some kind of public hearing. 

 

I think people want to propose alternatives to what has been 

bandied about in the press.  I think the government of the day 

might be surprised to find that Saskatchewan people will be 

very willing to participate in addressing this issue. 

 

Neither the opposition nor I think the people of this province 

are opposed in principle to people having a direct financial 

participation in the health care system.  But we are opposed to 

a flat tax.  And we are opposed to the concept of imposing fees 

without public consultation. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I think it will be a very long session if this 

government should choose to impose user fees without public 

hearings. 

 

And I want to refer to a recent precedent in Canada. The NDP 

Government of Ontario brought in a budget a year ago that was 

highly controversial to say the least.  The opposition demanded 

that public hearings be held, and eventually, Mr. Speaker, after 

a long exercise in bell-ringing, the NDP government agreed to 

the public hearings. 

 

I don't think that this particular House should be reduced to 

that, Mr. Speaker. And that is why I ask you as the Speaker of 

this Assembly, through the appropriate channels, to institute a 

process that would be fair and reasonable to all.  Because I 

have noted, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately, and the Premier 

referred to it in the last session, unfortunately, that I felt a fair 

degree of arrogance and disrespect, that we are a small 

opposition, and that our ability to bring the government and 

hold the government accountable is limited to a certain degree. 

 

So I think it's incumbent upon us to use all the tools available 

to us to make sure that this government does not make those 

types of radical changes which I don't believe it has the 

electoral or the moral authority to implement. 

 

And I guess in passing, Mr. Speaker . . . and I know members 

opposite like to chuckle at some of the things the opposition 

says, but I'd like to tell the member from Saskatoon in passing, 

Mr. Speaker, that a hundred dollar deductible for chiropractic 

services is a specific line item in the budget.  It is a line item in 

the budget.  And if it turns out that this particular leak is 

accurate, then I expect this Minister of Finance had better be 

prepared to resign. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Swenson: -- It was not a trial balloon or a suggested 

possibility; it was a statement that the government will impose 

a hundred dollar deductible user fee on patients of chiropractic 

services.  And if that is the case, then that member had better 

be prepared to follow the traditions of the British parliamentary 

system. 

 

This has affected the financial course of the province because, 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you right now that in my home town and 

other home towns around this province, that chiropractic 

patients are scrambling -- are scrambling, Mr. Speaker -- to get 

their normal appointments in advance of May 7 so that they 

won't be the first to feel the impact of user fees. 

 

So I say to the Minister of Finance, note.  We will watch 

carefully to see if on May 7 the deductible of a hundred dollars 

in fact is there.  And we hope that you will honour the 

traditions of this system. 

 

I think it's important, Mr. Speaker, that we return to the basic 

question that I asked at the beginning of my remarks.  What 

exactly is the truth for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan? 

 

And make no mistake, Mr. Speaker, this NDP government is 

taking charges that would normally accrue in the 1992-93 year, 

and at least in one case that I know of, those costs would have 

been spread over the next four years, and is by executive order 

-- by executive order -- paying for those charges out of the 

'91-92 year. 

 

The fact that cabinet is willing to back-charge makes us 

wonder in the opposition how much of the same thing is going 

on in the departments, invisibly and unannounced to this 

Assembly.  This takes tens and possibly hundreds of millions 

of dollars of spending out of the future accounts and puts it into 

the old account, swelling the deficit. 

 

This is not only deceptive, Mr. Speaker, it is also a serious, 

financial mismanagement question.  By inflating the 1991-92 

deficit, the NDP and its Premier is incurring additional interest 

charges for the future.  And I think by doing so, Mr. Speaker, 

he is grossly misusing taxpayers' money for obviously political 

reasons. 

 

And that is why, in the comments that were brought to the 

cabinet this morning from the people of the coalition and their 

analysis of our fiscal situation in this province, they said there 

was an extra half a billion dollars being put on to bloat the 

deficit. 

 

(1645) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm afraid that our Premier, the member 

from Riversdale, is doing this in a blatant way to deceive the 

people of this province.  One day he says the deficit is 800 

million.  The next day it's 980, and then it's up to 1.2.  And now 

we are to believe, now we are to believe, Mr. Speaker, that it 

has grown to 1.6 plus the deficit in CIC (Crown Investment 

Corporation of Saskatchewan).  The deficit in CIC alone, he 

says, is $900 million in non-recoverable losses, plus 600 

million in recoverable losses. 

 

The table, Mr. Speaker . . . And I wish the members would 



April 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 57 

listen closely to these numbers because a lot of these numbers 

are the ones generated by Donald Gass.  The member from 

Churchill Downs will be very familiar with these numbers; the 

table produced by Donald Gass which shows that the Crowns 

made a net profit of 348 million on net assets of 1.2 billion.  So 

the turnaround, according to the member from Riversdale, is 

actually 1.6 billion plus.  The 348 million profits that somehow 

have disappeared, or a total turnaround of $2 billion. 

 

Now I've heard fishing stories before, Mr. Speaker.  You know 

-- the size of the fish is this one day and the size of the fish is 

this the next day and all of a sudden I caught a whale. 

 

Well it's evident the member from Riversdale has caught a 

whole ocean full of whales the way he uses numbers.  You can 

see what he's doing.  But I'm afraid, Mr. Speaker, it's one of 

those words in the English language which we hon. members 

are not permitted to use in this House. 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker, is he not being forthright and factual with 

the people of Saskatchewan?  Well just like his Minister of 

Finance; his Minister of Finance got into this game of telling 

fishing stories.  He told everyone in the province that he'd 

made $115 million in cuts.  Well he actually misrepresented the 

value of the cut by 400 per cent.  Not a bad fishing story. 

 

We're not talking about a projection here, Mr. Speaker, a 

prediction, an estimate, or something down the road.  We're 

talking about a statement, a fact that is easily checked by the 

minister himself.  Yet he purposely, I believe, mistook a $30 

million reduction for 115. 

 

So let's do a little math and see what the deficit should be.  Not 

accounting for any of the extraordinary spending that the 

government has done on its own agenda, let's take that 265 

million projected in the last Tory budget.  Let's add $180 

million that the NDP gave up when they cancelled 

harmonization.  Well my math, Mr. Speaker, is that 265 plus a 

180 equals 445. 

 

Now during the election campaign the member from 

Riversdale, our now Premier, claimed that the deficit was 

dramatically higher than forecast.  As a matter of fact, in the 

middle of the election campaign, Mr. Speaker -- and it must be 

emphasized that this was he was out shaking hands with voters, 

saying vote for me -- the former minister of Finance, the 

member who formerly represented Weyburn, wrote the 

member from Riversdale a letter explaining the financial 

position of the province of Saskatchewan.  And included in that 

explanation was the provision that there'd been a $58 million 

over-expenditure on farm support due to a larger than expected 

uptake in the GRIP program.  Very up front about it, Mr. 

Speaker, that farmers in this province felt so threatened by the 

international scene, by the things that Mother Nature has 

ravaged upon this province in the last several years, that they 

signed up in droves for a program which they felt gave them 

sufficient protection that they could keep the banker off their 

back for another year. 

 

So now, Mr. Speaker, let's add 265 plus 180 plus 58.  And my 

math says that those three items, and we get a deficit of 503.  

So without taking anything else into account, the 

member from Riversdale was fully aware by his own agenda 

that there was a minimum deficit of over $500 million. 

 

Now we can look at the Minister of Finance's own statement 

titled: 1991-92 financial report, December '91.  And we can 

add in some other numbers if we choose to believe them.  In 

that document he says on page 4 that there will be an additional 

122 million added to the deficit through what he calls, quote 

"economic changes."  Add that to the 503 million and you have 

a deficit of 625. 

 

He also states that there are a number of other changes, Mr. 

Speaker, but what is most interesting is what he leaves out.  He 

leaves out 45 million in the Liquor Board's retained earnings.  

Why?  Well as for the games being played with the Crown 

Investments Corporation, Mr. Speaker, I think they would 

almost be fraudulent misinformation. 

 

If the same principles were applied in 1982 to inflate the deficit 

of the day . . . I'll give you a partial list.  There was the SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) reinsurance problem 

that SGI experienced.  In today's dollars it would have 

amounted to 54.4 million.  There was the problem that CIC 

picked up for SGI with a bill of 47.6 million in 1991 dollars.  

And then we had $313 million in a thing called PAPCO (Prince 

Albert Pulp Company), and we didn't create one new job, we 

didn't build anything new, we simply invested a whole pile of 

taxpayers' money in an investment that was worthless. 

 

The New Democrats have always tried to hang on the losses of 

the potash nationalization and hang them on the previous 

government.  But the fact is that the New Democrats carried 

the investment of the potash mines at a value that was far in 

excess of its real worth.  While clearly not worthless like 

PAPCO's investment, the potash nationalization, in everyone's 

opinion, I think, cost the people of Saskatchewan more than a 

billion dollars -- most of it out of our country into the hands of 

American bankers and companies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were all sorts of other little ventures.  There 

was the attempt to enhance the Ontario economy with a thing 

called Nabu computer corporation -- another 5 or $6 billion 

that had to be written off. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have two pages of similar losses which I could 

read into the record.  But I don't think that's important, Mr. 

Speaker, because I know from experience the government from 

time to time does make mistakes.  That as the NDP did from 

'71 to '82, they made mistakes, so did the government from 

1982 to 1992. 

 

That yes, GigaText did lose as much money as Nabu, and it's 

very unfortunate that those losses occur.  But, Mr. Speaker, the 

government that took over in 1982 did appoint an investment 

review commission. And I think if you find it and read it, you 

will find a very dispassionate report about the structure of the 

Crown investments and how to maximize them for the 

taxpayer.  You did not find a witch-hunt. 

 

And I think that is why it will be important, Mr. Speaker, as 

more information comes out that this government 



58 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1992 

repudiate certain parts of the Gass Commission for its own 

credibility.  Because the way it stands right now, I believe it is 

the member from Riversdale, our Premier, who is keeping our 

books closed. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that if this Premier would approach his 

job as other premiers have done upon election in our province 

-- and there have been some very good premiers -- that he 

would get over his opposition mentality, that he would make 

his members realize that their responsibility is to now govern 

this province.  And all the rhetoric that came from the 

opposition benches in the previous five years needs to be put 

aside and the job of governing taken upon themselves. 

 

Clearly, Mr. Speaker, this government was offered an 

opportunity in the throne speech presented on Monday last, an 

opportunity to set that agenda for the people of this province, 

an opportunity to say that we do have a plan, we do have an 

agenda that is moral and right, and we'll take our province into 

the next century in the way that people in this province would 

expect. 

 

And instead I see no plan, and I certainly haven't seen the 

moral authority from the way that this government has acted 

and no desire given -- what we have just experienced in this 

legislature -- to be honest with Saskatchewan voters to the 

point that they would not try and fudge the numbers as the 

gentleman from Prince Edward Island says.  But they would 

truly represent to the people of this province where we're at, 

and come clean on some of the promises they made to the 

people of this province as they went out and solicited votes last 

fall. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I'm afraid I will be voting against 

the Speech from the Throne as presented by this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure this 

afternoon to rise in support of the government's Speech from 

the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you may not know this but I was not able to 

participate in the Speech from the Throne prior to Christmas.  

This is my first opportunity so I'd like to extend my 

congratulations to you on your election as Speaker of this 

Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- You are known, sir, as being a fair and a firm 

legislator over the time of your career.  And I know that you 

have respected the tradition and the laws of this Assembly over 

the past, and you will continue to do so.  And I look forward to 

representing my constituents in this Assembly in your capacity 

as Speaker while you are here. 

 

I would also, Mr. Speaker, like to take this opportunity to 

congratulate the mover and seconder of the Speech from the 

Throne prior to Christmas -- the member from 

Qu'Appelle-Lumsden that prior to Christmas moved it, and the 

member from Last Mountain-Touchwood seconded.  And they 

did an excellent job and I convey my 

belated congratulations to them. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to convey my congratulations to the 

mover and seconder of this Speech from the Throne which we 

believe is a commencement of the blueprint for the solution for 

the 1990s. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, being near 5 o'clock, and I have 

many more things I would like to say on this address in reply, I 

would beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 


