




















































Hansard: May 21, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 517 

 May 21, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish at this time, 

Mr. Speaker, to present several pages of petition on behalf of 

the farmers and urban people in province of Saskatchewan with 

regards to the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

program that has been gutted by our government.  And they 

wish to show their opposition to the things that have been done. 

 

 To the Honourable the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan in Legislature Assembled: 

 The Petition of the undersigned farmers and citizens of the 

Province of Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 The Government of Saskatchewan entered into legally 

binding contracts with them to provide a Gross Revenue 

Insurance Program explicitly guaranteeing that the provisions 

of the contract would not be changed without notice being 

given to farmers by March 15, 1992, and that the 

Government has announced its intention before the Courts in 

Melville that it proposes to pass a law saying farmers 

received such notice when in actual fact they did not and 

concerned that the crisis on the farm is being made much 

worse by these actions: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

Government to 

 (1) allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand for this year, 

 (2) start working with the federal government and farmers 

to design a program that will be a true "REVENUE 

INSURANCE" program by the end of this calendar 

year, and 

 (3) ensure that the new revenue insurance program be set 

up on an individual cost-of-production to return 

ratio instead of risk area formula. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petition will ever pray. 

 

And we have several names and several sheets.  And if a page 

would come forward, I would have these laid on the table, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have a petition 

here today with respect to the GRIP changes.  I won't go 

through . . . it basically covers the same format as the petition 

that my colleague presented.  There are names on the petition 

from all over western Saskatchewan -- south-western 

Saskatchewan.  One that stands out, I'm having a little 

difficulty making out the name, but it's Bernie Weins, of 

Richmound, Saskatchewan.  At this time, I'd like to present this 

petition, Mr. Speaker. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure 

today to introduce to you and through you to members of the 

Assembly, sitting in your Speaker's gallery, 74 grade 5 students 

and their teachers and chaperon from McLurg School in my 

constituency.  I will be pleased to meet with them after 

question period, Mr. Speaker, to discuss the events of the day 

and to answer any questions they may have.  I look forward to 

doing that. 

 

Accompanying the students are the teachers, Mrs. Carol Grant, 

Mrs. Joddy Graham, Mrs. Verna Taylor, and a chaperon, Mrs. 

Anderson.  I would ask all members to join with me this 

afternoon in welcoming them to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the other members of the 

legislature, 14 grade 8 students from Cudworth, Saskatchewan.  

And they're accompanied by their schoolteacher Tom Thomas.  

They're seated in your east gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I'd also like to introduce to you and through you, 19 

students from Bruno.  They're in my colleague's riding from 

Humboldt.  They're accompanied by their schoolteacher Tom 

Schwinghammer and Arlene Julé.  I would ask all members of 

the legislature to welcome them here today in the legislature.  

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly, 47 grade 

4 students from Wadena Elementary School.  They're seated in 

the west gallery, Mr. Speaker.  The grade 4 class from Wadena 

has made the annual trip to this legislature for many, many 

years.  I see they're here again today. 

 

The teachers are Reg Glennie and Denise Nelson.  Chaperons 

are Wendy Gauthier, Isabel Fidelack, Gloria Jesmer and 

Bernice Burtnack.  Bus driver is Tony Lipinski.  I would ask 

that all members of the Assembly greet them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, 11 students, 

their teachers and chaperons, from the Manor School.  They are 

seated in the opposition gallery. 

 

Their teachers are Maria Hanson and Muriel Parrott, and their 

chaperons are Chris Wiggins and Darlene Entwistle.  I hope to 

be able to meet with these students after question period.  I 

would ask all members to welcome them to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you 



518 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1992 

and through you and to other members of the House, visitors 

from northern Saskatchewan from the community of the 

Opawigosciguneek, which is Pelican Narrows. 

 

Mr. Speaker, up on your gallery to the right here we have the 

Elder Fred Ballantyne; James Swan, the mayor; Mel Linklater, 

who is a councillor; and James Linklater, Richard Highway, 

and Pat McCallum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to express the greetings as usual in the 

language of the Opawigosciguneek. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

I'll be meeting with them a little bit later on, Mr. Speaker.  

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Development of Mainprize Park 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question, Mr. 

Speaker, is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, I'm going to ask you if 

you know of this event that I'm about to describe, and if you 

do, if you'll step in to stop it.  I say with great respect that the 

event looks like it's revenge, and the revenge is starting to cost 

people dearly. 

 

Today we have learned that you intend to damage our 

reputation as a province and particularly the previous 

administration's reputation because we were involved in 

building this project.  You have announced the cancellation of 

Dr. Mainprize Park. 

 

In the park, as you know, is thousands of trees.  We've spent up 

to $6 million on it now.  It would generate tourism, jobs, 

economic opportunity, and a park that is the pride of the 

south-east of Saskatchewan.  It is close to the U.S. (United 

States) border.  And just let me say before I ask you if you 

knew about this again: on one hand your minister of SEDCO 

(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) has been 

announcing loans for golf courses -- and I have the list of them 

here, loans for flower shops all over the province; and on the 

other hand, you have this minister from Canora announcing the 

cancellation of Dr. Mainprize Park. 

 

Mr. Premier, did you know, did you recommend it, and would 

you please consider stopping this revengeful activity on the 

people of south-eastern Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased 

to lighten the mood of the Leader of the Opposition and tell 

him that the Mainprize Park has not been cancelled. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, obviously the minister or the 

Premier has not read the news release.  The news release says 

that . . . the news release has stopped all further economic 

development and funding in Dr. Mainprize  

Park.  Now we have contributed up to $6 million in the renewal 

of the park for trees and for the golf course and for the tourism, 

and it's completely wildlife mitigated.  And the minister 

announced today that they were going to stop funding and not 

complete the park, seed over the golf course. 

 

I want to ask the minister: is he aware of this activity?  And if 

he's aware of this activity, how can he justify not finishing the 

park in a proper fashion when we put that money into it 

already, when in fact you have $155 million . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Let the minister answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The park has not been cancelled, 

whatever that might mean.  It is partially completed.  It is true 

that the completion of the park is going to be slowed in some of 

its aspects.  That has as much to do with the fact that the 

Rafferty dam, the water levels of the Rafferty dam are not what 

you predicted they would be.  They're just something less than 

what you predicted they would be, and that impacts itself on 

the Mainprize Park. 

 

The completion of the Dr. Mainprize Park is being 

slow-walked if you like, but the park has not been cancelled, 

and I'm not sure what that term would mean with a park that's 

already partially completed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll go back to the minister.  If you 

have any idea at all about the water that is up to Mainprize 

Park, there's substantial water there because Rafferty is being 

filled from the west.  We've put $6 million into the 

development of the park, and it is to be finished. 

 

And as I just pointed out to the Premier, there is ample retained 

earnings and profits in SaskPower to complete this park 

because we want to attract Americans to come into 

Saskatchewan as tourists.  We have cross-border shopping.  

You're familiar with the economic development associated with 

that. 

 

Would you consider an independent viability . . . or an 

independent assessment of the viability of Dr. Mainprize Park 

before you decide not to complete and not to put the money in 

as was designed as we fully mitigated the park so that in fact 

the people of south-eastern Saskatchewan know that you will 

stay with the commitment that was made on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan to build a park that has been there and 

part of south-eastern Saskatchewan for decades. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  In a fashion 

which was so typical of the former administration you 

budgeted $1.3 million for the park.  By the time the park was 

partially completed the budgetary figures were a multiple of 

that, some $10 million.  That, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, is 

an inordinate amount to pay for a regional park, if not in your 

riding, then in the riding adjacent to your own. 

 

We felt that that expenditure was excessive.  It was 



May 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 519 

certainly excessive by the amount you budgeted.  And we felt it 

was excessive by any standards.  So the funding has been 

scaled back.  The park has not been cancelled, to use your term.  

It has certainly been scaled back.  And, Mr. Leader of the 

Opposition, if you had had any concern for the taxpayers of 

this province, you'd have done that yourself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the member if he 

would agree to an independent viability assessment of the park.  

I want to ask him if he would table Jack Chapman's report.  

The former member of the legislature, Jack Chapman, from 

Estevan was asked to review the park. 

 

Now it's my understanding, and the minister may know and the 

Premier may know, that he's released that study that you've 

done to private members in society, to NDPers (New 

Democratic Party), to people like Rod MacDonald who go 

around suing the government.  But he has not tabled it here.  

Would you table Jack Chapman's report to this legislature?  

And would you agree to an independent study to look at the 

viability of Mainprize Park now that we've made that 

investment so that we could consider whether you should seed 

it over, as the news release says, so that . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I think the member has asked his 

question.  Let the minister answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I want to read from the press release 

which the member purported to quote from.  In the bottom of 

the first page on a press release dated May 21, 1992 headline, 

"Government announces plans for Rafferty-Alameda and 

Mainprize Park," it says: 

 

 The new Mainprize Park will be much smaller in scale than 

was planned by the former administration, which will save 

taxpayers $5 million; 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, 

the licence you take with the English language is truly 

legendary, but I'm surprised even you think that that is a 

cancellation.  It's not a cancellation; it's scaling it back to a 

reasonable scale. And that's what we're doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, again I will ask the hon. member, 

will he table a Jack Chapman report for this legislature, 

because I'm going to ask for it through the media.  Will he go 

for an independent study of the viability of that park if you 

spent $6 million in the construction of this . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Of course we spent it. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I want to call the member from 

Saskatoon University to order.  That is inappropriate 

parliamentary performance in yelling at someone when he's 

trying to ask a question. 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I just ask the member again -- and 

I appeal to the Premier -- if in fact you've done a study that 

recommends you do that, would you table the study, Jack 

Chapman's report that says you should stop funding this 

because cutting $5 million out of the completion ends it.  You 

can't finish it. 

 

And in here you say you're going to seed over the golf course.  

Well that's the major attraction for the South-east and for the 

people in the United States that come in, and you're going to 

seed it over.  Read that release. 

 

Will you table the report, would you look at an independent 

study to make sure that we can all be confident, and would you 

list in this legislature the people you have consulted that 

recommended that you not finish the completion of this park. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the 

Leader of the Opposition what happened to this project under 

your administration.  A nine-hole golf course became a 21-hole 

golf course, something that would be worthy of a major city, 

much less an area which is located some distance from a major 

city. 

 

A $1.3 million budget had a cost overrun of $11 million.  It is 

being scaled back.  Any sane person would scale back a project 

with such a gross cost overrun as that. 

 

Mr. Leader of the Opposition, this project does not need any 

more studies.  It needs a bit of sound administration and that's 

what we're going to give it, is some sound, decent 

administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Let me just say, Mr. Speaker, that the utilities 

reports that we talked about yesterday clearly showed that our 

administration made something like $400 million in profit and 

retained earning in the utilities.  One is SaskPower.  That 

money is obviously there. 

 

If in fact, Mr. Speaker, we spent something in the 

neighbourhood of $6 million to develop this park in 

south-eastern Saskatchewan and the people now on the NDP 

are saying, oh we don't have have any money but we've got all 

this money in the utility, and if in fact they said that they are 

going to cancel this, cancel the finishing of the development of 

this park when they've cancelled the GRIP, when they've 

cancelled programs like Saskatchewan Pension, when they've 

cancelled programs . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Does the Leader of the 

Opposition have a question?  Well let's have the question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask the member if he will table 

Jack Chapman's report; and if he will do an independent 

analysis, if he would table the people he's consulted with in the 

south-eastern part of Saskatchewan; and will he table any 

recommendations or any history on wildlife mitigation in the 

development of that project, raised by the member from Indian 

Head-Wolseley or 



520 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1992 

raised by the member from Regina Rosemont who over and 

over again said, you'd better spend some more money on 

mitigation . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  Let the minister 

answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I remind the Leader of the Opposition 

that he refers repeatedly to the profit of SPC (Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation).  I remind the Leader of the Opposition 

this is a project of the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, not 

SPC, and the Saskatchewan Water Corporation does not enjoy 

$100 million profit, I want to tell you.  It enjoys much the 

opposite. 

 

I say as well to the Leader of the Opposition that in a day when 

we are struggling to feed hungry children, in a day when we are 

struggling to maintain the social safety net as a result of your 

gross overexpenditures and waste, a $10 million overrun on a 

park is simply not a priority that any sane person would adopt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask the minister again if you are 

aware of any legal obligations, either through federal or 

provincial licences, mitigation orders, or other agreements that 

will be affected by your decision to cancel the development of 

the park. 

 

Are you aware of any legal obligations, any mitigation reasons 

that would prevent you from not finishing the park as it is 

designed out and pass the federal licences, provincial licences 

and the rest of it?  And if you are, will you table them?  And if 

you're absolutely sure, will you also table the reason that you're 

sure that you can do this without any consequences? 

 

So once again . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Let the minister answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I have answered this question several 

times.  I don't know why you should feel the need to continue 

to ask it. 

 

Let me say this with respect to mitigation and legal obligations.  

I've said this on this subject and I'll say it on additional subjects 

in the future.  This government lives up to its legal obligations.  

We've done so in this case, and we will do so . . . We've done 

so in past cases, and we're going to continue to do so.  We live 

up to our legal obligations; we have, with respect to this park.  

And we don't break the agreement.  We don't break the 

agreements. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Expansion of SGI 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance).  Mr. Minister, your party takes great pride in 

opposing and, in some cases, stopping economic development 

and job creation for the people of Saskatchewan.  And I 

congratulate the 

minister for that.  I'm sure that the unemployed are very proud 

of him. 

 

One such project was the expansion of SGI's general insurance 

business into other provinces -- an initiative that could've 

meant hundreds of jobs for local residents.  But because of 

your philosophy and political opposition to public investment, 

this was not accomplished. 

 

Mr. Minister, in January you indicated that your government 

now intends to finish the job, and are pursuing the expansion of 

SGI into Manitoba, Alberta, British Columbia, and Ontario.  

Mr. Minister, you indicated at that time that you had applied to 

these jurisdictions.  Can you table those applications in this 

legislature, and can you table any responses that you have 

received? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The matter 

to which the member refers is under review by the government.  

The discussions are sensitive, and we are not in a position to 

make any further comment at this time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell this Assembly 

how you plan to accomplish this expansion, given that a new 

corporation such as that would be unfair competition . . . have 

an unfair competitive advantage over other insurance 

companies in other jurisdictions -- these other insurance 

companies that don't have the government subsidies to operate 

with in those provinces. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, the suggestion that SGI 

could not expand because it was a Crown corporation is what it 

always has been, that is, a hoax by the Progressive 

Conservative caucus to sell an unpopular privatization.  There's 

simply no truth to the comment you just made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, I find that interesting 

because I believe that other jurisdictions are not going to look 

favourably on your government subsidizing an insurance 

company setting up shop in their provinces.  And in fact the 

member from The Battlefords even agrees with that. 

 

New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, can you confirm 

information that you have restructured SGI CANADA 

insurance services in order to facilitate the expansion, and can 

you tell this Assembly how the composition of ownership is 

now arranged? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

The member says he believes it not to be so.  I'm afraid there's 

not much I can do about what members opposite believe.  

We've been trying to deal with that problem for the last few 

days, quite unsuccessfully. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, I believe the question has 

not been answered.  The minister has not answered my 

question.  How is the new corporation being structured? 



May 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 521 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I say, as I said in the answer to the 

first one, government policy will be announced in due course.  

And in due course, we'll be in a position to share with the 

Assembly restructuring plans.  At the moment, this matter is 

under consideration.  It is sensitive and delicate and a statement 

by myself at this point in time would not be productive. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you.  A question to the 

Premier on principle. 

 

Mr. Premier, does your administration agree or disagree with a 

Crown corporation being subsidized by taxpayers in competing 

in other provinces?  Like, if SGI went into Manitoba, could it 

draw on the Saskatchewan people as taxpayers to subsidize its 

operations if in fact it got in trouble or went in the hole, and 

would you describe that philosophy to us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, just a very brief answer 

to the Leader of the Opposition.  We take the view that 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance office should be run as a 

commercially viable operation and corporation, and it is done 

so on that basis as best as possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, two points to the Premier.  You 

recall, Mr. Premier, that in the '70s you lost $54 million in SGI 

on some international and out-of-province ventures.  The 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan had to pay for that. 

 

Now are you telling me now that if SGI as a taxpayer owned 

company goes off into another part of Canada, loses money, 

that the taxpayers will never have to bail out that company?  

And if that's the principle, I want you to say so today.  And if 

it's not, then I want you to tell the people of Saskatchewan and 

this Assembly how you plan to get into other provinces and 

compete with taxpayers' money from Saskatchewan and 

Alberta and Manitoba and get away with it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 

Opposition, with the greatest of respect, I think confuses his 

terminology and his concepts.  And I mean this with the 

greatest of respect. 

 

What the Leader of the Opposition should understand is that in 

this case the shareholders who own Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance, SGI, like any shareholders, expect that the enterprise 

is to be run on a commercially viable and efficient basis.  And 

the fact that the shareholders happen to be, in this case, the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan, where his confusion comes into 

place, is largely irrelevant.  What he does is he mixes the 

concept by the argument that it is subsidization.  And I say to 

him that of course as we saw in his privatization scheme, this 

kind of reasoning got him into a whole lot of trouble -- and 

Saskatchewan, unfortunately, during the 1980s. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Clearly, Mr. Premier, 

you did not answer my question.  You didn't say whether the 

taxpayers would be involved and would subsidize this 

interprovincial joint venture.  If you think that they might be, 

then I raise, and I ask you, what you think of the Minister of 

Agriculture's statement who says, when it comes to the 

FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment program) program competing 

internationally, interprovincially with Alberta or anybody else, 

the Saskatchewan government now has a philosophy where it 

will not compete with taxpayers' money against other 

provinces.  Now how do you square that circle, Mr. Premier? 

 

You are saying now that SGI is going to run about and take 

taxpayers' money and go invest in Manitoba and Alberta, put 

the taxpayers' money at risk -- and you've just admitted that -- 

and your minister over here, for political reasons says, we will 

not do that in Saskatchewan now because the NDP doesn't 

believe in it. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you tell the people of Saskatchewan one way 

or the other, are they involved in interprovincial subsidization 

of economic activities like Crown corporations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm afraid there's not 

very much I can add by way of a further answer to the Leader 

of the Opposition because he insists on these words of 

subsidization.  I've said to the Leader of the Opposition, I've 

said to the House before, that SGI seeks to operate -- and he 

should know this, and he does know this -- on the basis of a 

commercially viable operation. 

 

Like any commercially viable operation, there are years of 

profit, there are years of non-profit. But none the less, the 

yardstick is the yardstick of commercial enterprise and the test 

of the market-place.  The fact that it happens to be a publicly 

owned corporation doesn't change that central fact.  

Accordingly, whatever SGI does internally or externally is 

guided by the principle it's to be a commercially viable 

enterprise in competition with all of the other insurance 

industries that are here or extraprovincially. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Premier, would not you agree that the 50 to 

60,000 farmers that we have in Saskatchewan have to compete 

with people across Canada and indeed across the world?  And 

your minister stood in his place and says that the NDP 

Government of Saskatchewan doesn't have the money to 

protect Saskatchewan farmers or to help them compete in the 

international hog business, international cattle business or the 

feedlot business because we will not get involved with 

interprovincial subsidization using Saskatchewan taxpayers' 

money. 

 

Now you're going to go out into a very risky business: life 

insurance or general insurance, auto insurance or whatever it is.  

Mr. Premier, are you telling -- just so we 



522 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1992 

got it clear -- are you saying to this Assembly and to the people 

of Saskatchewan and to farmers: yes we'll risk taxpayers' 

money out in the insurance business interprovincially, but we 

will not stand up for farmers so that they can compete in the 

international market.  Is that what you're saying? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, no, I'm not saying that.  

That's what he is saying.  I am saying to the Leader of the 

Opposition what I've been saying.  If SGI decides to move 

extraprovincially . . . And by the way, I may add that if there's 

logic to his argument, the logic would be traced all the way 

back to a privatization of SGI in its internal operations too, 

because the logic would be you should get rid of it internally.  

And the Leader of the Opposition is nodding his head in 

support because his argument is if you lose money, taxpayers' 

money, as he describes it, not shareholders' money, internally 

and you can't use it for something else, that's bad. 

 

Well that's an interesting philosophy because I think he did 

want to in fact privatize auto insurance.  We do not support 

that. 

 

Our idea is that if we go extraprovincially, we will conduct SGI 

on the same basis as we do internally on a commercially viable 

basis. 

 

As regards farmers and the problems that they face, as all the 

other people in the province of Saskatchewan face a lack of 

money, that, sir . . . do not point the finger at us.  That, sir, 

should be pointed at you and your administration and 10 years 

of horrendous mismanagement and debt.  We have no money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day I wish to, pursuant to 

subsection 1 of section 30 of The Ombudsman Act, table The 

Ombudsman Act today . . . or the Report of the Ombudsman.  

I'm sorry. 

 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 

 

Federal Opposition to Leaseback Program 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I rise 

pursuant to rule 17 to ask leave of this Assembly to debate a 

matter of urgent public importance.  I have provided the Clerk 

with two hours notice of this action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan plans to take 

steps to deal with the crisis that farmers are facing, and we 

need the support of the Farm Credit Corporation, the federal 

government's farm lender.  However, Mr. Speaker, the minister 

responsible for the Farm Credit Corporation has stated on May 

20 that he will order that corporation not to co-operate with the 

Government of Saskatchewan to help solve the problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a matter of grave concern for all the people 

in this province.  And if I am given leave I will 

present a motion urging the federal government to actually 

become part of the solution instead of part of the problem.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Will the members just give me a moment. 

 

A notice regarding this matter proposed for priority of debate 

was received in the Clerk's office at 11:59 a.m. today, for 

which I thank the member.  I agree with the member that the 

matter raised is of great public importance.  The key question 

whether it is urgent enough to set aside the business of the 

Assembly in order to debate it at this time is what we must 

consider. 

 

While the issue proposed for priority of debate is of serious 

importance to the people of Saskatchewan, the member has not 

established the urgent need to debate the matter immediately.  

It is a concern of a continuing nature, and opportunities do still 

exist for the member to debate it in the usual manner in this 

Assembly without invoking rule 17. 

 

I rule that the member has not substantiated the case for 

priority of debate on this issue which therefore does not qualify 

under rule 17. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 11 -- An Act to amend The Marriage Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased . . . I am 

pleased to rise . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Point of order.  Yes, what's your 

point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The memo that we got from the Government 

House Leader indicates that prior to second readings there will 

be the government motion on the mandate for the Standing 

Committee on Constitutional Affairs. 

 

The Speaker: -- If I may make just a brief statement here.  My 

Clerk just informs me that she has errored on giving the wrong 

item, and therefore it is our fault here.  And if the members 

would allow us, we would revert back to orders of the day and 

government orders.  And the Clerk will now call the right 

order. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

Authorization of the Standing Committee on Constitutional 

Affairs 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to 

speak on the amendment and the motion.  The amendment and 

the motion, Mr. Speaker, are not 



May 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 523 

complex matters.  If we are to charge the committee that was 

just established, then we must put in its mandate the terms and 

conditions this Assembly feels are the basis of its purpose. 

 

I was very pleased to hear the Premier yesterday state in this 

Assembly that the creation of yet another committee did not 

mean he would not endorse a referendum.  He then went on to 

state that no one else understood the constitution, understood 

federalism or the constitution-making except himself. 

 

In his discussion about the need for a referendum -- the subject 

matter of this amendment, Mr. Speaker -- the Leader of the 

NDP once again showed just how pompous and narrow and 

egotistical he really is.  He stood in his place and shouted 

across the floor that we did not understand federalism if we 

thought a referendum was so hot.  He stood in his place and 

made the most political remarks on the matter of the 

constitution that have been made in this House since the 

process began. 

 

And I will say very bluntly, Mr. Speaker, that this NDP leader 

traded away the interests not only of Saskatchewan, not only of 

the West -- that man traded away the interests of Canada in his 

own rush to be a big man in history.  He may have a law 

degree, he may have political science degrees, but the man who 

is the Premier of Saskatchewan today betrayed his country in 

1982 and did so again in 1990. 

 

How dare he, Mr. Speaker, how dare that man lecture this 

Assembly about what this country means, what federalism 

means, or what the dangers are of allowing the people into the 

process through a referendum.  That guy, Mr. Speaker, does 

not really know anything about federalism.  And I don't care 

how many NDP professors he has stashed away in little 

constitutional units around this province, because whatever this 

country means it certainly is not the constitutional playground 

of a one-man game show from Riversdale. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I wish to draw to the attention 

of the member from Souris-Cannington, Erskine May, page 

337, Amendments modifying a question: 

 

 If it is intended only to modify the question by leaving out or 

adding words, debate should be restricted to the desirability 

of the omission or the addition of those words.  Similarly, if it 

is intended to leave out certain words only and to substitute 

other words, then although both the original and the proposed 

words may be discussed, debate should not range over the 

other words of the motion to which the amendment is not 

directed. 

 

I ask therefore the member that he restrict his comments to the 

amendment and the purpose of the amendment. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am trying to 

direct my comments to the need for a referendum. 

 

Whatever this country means, it's certainly not the 

constitutional playground of a one-man game show, Mr. 

Speaker, from Riversdale.  A referendum for all of us, Mr. 

Speaker.  This country belongs to the people, and the people 

have spoken unequivocally.  They did not all run off to the 

University of Regina for NDP politics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they went to the voting booth and told this 

legislature that they demand a vote.  Not for the one guy who 

almost destroyed their country on two separate occasions, but 

for themselves, Mr. Speaker.  They want to vote in a 

referendum.  They want to be standing over the shoulder of this 

government or of any other government because they do not 

believe the member from Riversdale has proven that he is 

trustworthy in these matters. 

 

Why is a referendum necessary, Mr. Speaker?  The NDP leader 

has made it necessary.  First he is the man who invented the art 

of constitutional making cooked up in kitchens in the dark of 

night. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I will have to ask the member to 

restrict his comments on the amendments -- order, order -- on 

the amendment, and why the member feels that that 

amendment needs to be into the main motion. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's what he's talking about, the 

referendum. 

 

The Speaker: -- No he is not. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will try and 

keep my comments germane to the issue. 

 

We want a referendum, Mr. Speaker.  We need a referendum, 

and it's absolutely incredible that the Premier stands in this 

Assembly and says that while it's worth noting what the people 

have to say, that's about all there is to it. 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the Premier said that a referendum is 

for the rich and the elite.  It's the old bugaboo fear tactics.  But 

this time he's put his foot into it, Mr. Speaker, because the 

people themselves have said they want a vote.  The people 

themselves have said they want to vote.  They do not want to 

repeat the NDP's leader hiding from the vote on Meech Lake as 

he did in this Assembly.  Then while the NDP leader was 

hiding in a kitchen somewhere, the NDP MLAs (Member of 

the Legislative Assembly) voted for Meech Lake.  They stood 

here, Mr. Speaker, and voted for it.  That's not well-known in 

the public. 

 

The NDP leader has stood here and spoke up against voting on 

a referendum, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we must vote on the 

referendum.  And why is it necessary to have a referendum?  

Why is this amendment necessary?  If nothing else, it is 

necessary because of who occupies the Premier's office.  This 

Premier is so pompous that we see it reflected in the House 

every day.  Yesterday is a prime example, Mr. Speaker.  He 

deigned to participate in the question period.  He gave us his 

royal moment. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this institution is a democracy.  We practise 

parliamentary tactics . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That is the 

whole attitude, Mr. Speaker, why the people of this province 

feel they need a referendum.  They feel they need the 

opportunity to judge whether or not the actions 



524 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1992 

of the government are the actions that the people of this 

province want.  They need the opportunity to be able to stand 

up and speak as to whether or not the government is making 

the decisions that are in the best interest of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the simple facts are that not only do the people 

have the right to vote on their own future but they have a 

responsibility.  The people, Mr. Speaker, want to accept that 

responsibility for the fate of that country.  They understand that 

until they do, until they take personal responsibility, the 

constitution will for ever belong to people like the member 

from Riversdale. 

 

They want to take their constitution back, Mr. Speaker.  They 

grow weary of the games.  They grow tired and frustrated with 

all the committees that people like the member from Riversdale 

love to force on them.  The people say it's time that they took 

ownership of the process and of the constitution itself.  Mr. 

Speaker, the Premier of Saskatchewan in all his pompous 

indignation has no right to deny the people that option, no right 

at all. 

 

The vote of this amendment will be an important and powerful 

signal.  And I want you to note a comparison, Mr. Speaker.  

Yesterday the Premier of Saskatchewan thought that a vote on 

whatever, whether or not to establish yet another committee, 

was so important that he let the bells ring and forced a roll-call 

vote.  He thought this was real important, that he wanted to get 

everyone on the record how they felt about setting up another 

committee for him to play with. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this Premier thinks voting on committees is 

important.  We will today show how important letting the 

people vote on their own constitution is to this Premier.  We 

will see whether he has the courage to be present in this House 

to be counted.  We will see how he votes.  We will see how his 

colleagues vote.  Because it is time that the people knew for 

certain whether this Premier still thinks the constitution 

belongs to him or whether he is ready to give it back to those it 

serves.  And it will, Mr. Speaker, be a recorded vote. 

 

Before I sit down, I would like to say one very heartfelt thing 

to the Premier of Saskatchewan.  I say to the Premier from the 

bottom of my heart, shame on you; you ought to know better.  

You want to poison the atmosphere of the constitutional 

process once again.  And you as much as said you want this 

committee to be a bash Ottawa committee.  Shame on you, Mr. 

Speaker.  History will remember your actions. 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today 

to express my support for the Standing Committee on 

Constitutional Affairs.  At the end of my remarks, I will be 

moving a subamendment to the amendment proposed yesterday 

by the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Speaker, fellow members of the legislature, I have a 

personal interest in constitutional affairs and the future of this 

country, Mr. Speaker.  My family, Mr. Speaker, came to . . . 

my ancestors came to this country in 1625, Mr. Speaker.  They 

were at the Plains of Abraham, Mr. Speaker, and they have 

been in this country at every step of constitutional affairs and 

nation building, Mr. Speaker. 

So I take a great interest in this debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the process of nation building is a process that 

takes . . . it's an ongoing and a very delicate and arduous 

process.  And, Mr. Speaker, it's something that we keep on 

working at. 

 

In 1982, Mr. Speaker, there was the federal government in 

conduit with the nine provinces.  And the people of this 

country felt that it was important to bring the constitution 

home, Mr. Speaker, to get it patriated.  And, Mr. Speaker, we 

did that.  And some will suggest that we should have waited 

and made sure that Quebec was included in this process.  Well 

let me tell you that it would have been very, very difficult at 

that particular time to find an agreement with the Government 

of Quebec because of the government in that province at that 

time. 

 

Five years later, Mr. Speaker, we entered into the Meech Lake 

round of constitutional negotiations, and it was a very closed 

door secretive process.  And because of that, Mr. Speaker, the 

people of this country felt that they did not have an input into 

this particular process and felt very betrayed by the process. 

 

We've now reached a point, Mr. Speaker, where we are trying 

today to find some kind of constitutional agreement.  It's a 

delicate process, a process in which you must exercise 

flexibility at all times.  The Standing Committee on 

Constitutional Affairs, as you know, will be authorized to 

review and make recommendations to the Legislative 

Assembly on proposed constitutional amendments brought 

forward by the federal, provincial, and territorial governments 

or legislatures in Canada. 

 

The Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs will invite 

presentations and the expression of views from individuals and 

groups, and will report from time to time to meet the 

constitutional time lines arising out of the nation-wide 

negotiations and amendment processes.  This committee will 

be non-partisan and open in its operation.  It will include 

members of the opposition as well as an independent member. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is appropriate that this committee consider 

whether or not a referendum should be held on any proposed 

constitutional resolution.  Mr. Speaker, it is important that this 

committee take its considerations and recommendations from 

the legislature. 

 

I therefore move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 

Idylwyld: 

 

 That the amendment moved by the member from Thunder 

Creek be amended by deleting all the words after the word 

"committee" and substituting the following therefor: 

 

 be asked, at the appropriate time, to consider and recommend 

to the legislature whether or not a referendum should be held 

on any proposed constitutional resolution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I stand 



May 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 525 

today in my place to speak to, first of all, the amendment and 

also address the subamendment. And possibly, Mr. Speaker, I 

wonder if it would be as well in order to have someone deliver 

a copy of the subamendment so I could have it at my perusal 

here, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this constitutional committee that has been agreed 

to by the members of the Assembly yesterday and the 

discussion that has taken place, and then we've moved into this 

second motion about talking about what the Standing 

Committee on Constitutional Affairs be authorized to do. 

 

This standing committee has been authorized, or at least if the 

motion passes, Mr. Speaker, will: 

 

 . . . be authorized to review and make recommendations to 

the Legislative Assembly on proposed constitutional 

amendments brought forward by the Saskatchewan 

legislature and by the Parliament of Canada or any other 

legislatures . . . to invite presentations and the expression of 

views from individuals and groups; and that the Committee 

report from time to time to meet the constitutional 

(guidelines) . . . arising out of the nation-wide negotiations 

and amendment processes . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, the then amendment that was placed forward to 

this motion was placed forward, Mr. Speaker, in order to 

address the fact that the original motion put forward suggested 

that the House wouldn't really have to convene to address the 

views or the expressions or the guidelines that the Standing 

Committee on Constitutional Affairs had come up with. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we have suggested that before the 

committee report and make a final report, we also want to 

make sure that the people of Saskatchewan are able to express 

their opinion on any kind of constitutional forum or debate or 

process that will take place in this province, or 

recommendations that will certainly be passed on from the 

province through, we would probably assume the Premier or 

indeed maybe the Minister of Justice I believe, who is 

responsible for constitutional affairs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess the question that we're talking about in 

giving a referendum, and when I look at the subamendment to 

the amendment, I read that the subamendment adds that: 

 

 . . . recommend to the legislature whether or not a referendum 

should be held on any proposed (constitution) . . . 

 

It's suggesting that this legislature should certainly sit and give 

an opportunity, I believe -- if I understand what the 

subamendment is indicating . . . rather than being open-ended, 

such as the motion that was put forward by the Premier 

yesterday indicating that if the House wasn't in session when 

the committee gave their report, that the report would be given 

to the Clerk. 

 

(1500) 

And, Mr. Speaker, our question is:  well then how do we 

address the concerns or how do we address the report that 

would be presented?  How do we let the people of 

Saskatchewan really know or really feel that they have been 

involved? 

 

Mr. Speaker, in speaking to this amendment on the referendum 

debate, there are three or four points that I would just like to 

bring out that I think are very important for each one of us in 

this Assembly to realize -- for the government as well as us on 

the opposition side of the House -- that there are some timely 

guidelines.  And our amendment to the original motion 

yesterday dealt with the fact that we felt there should be some 

time line set out, laid out for the committee so they would then 

know what framework they were operating within and would 

be able to come back in a reasonable time with some 

suggestions. 

 

Because I believe, Mr. Speaker -- certainly if I understand it 

right -- the reason for the committee is to give the government 

and the Premier, the government of the day, the opportunity to 

lay out some of the concerns that Saskatchewan has and how 

Saskatchewan is going to be involved in the process of 

developing and addressing the problems that we have been 

facing over the past number of years regarding the constitution. 

 

So I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that is the reason first of all we had 

the amendment discussing timely reporting.  Because, Mr. 

Speaker, we are all aware of the fact that the Quebec 

government is going to be offering the people of Quebec a vote 

come this fall.  And I believe, if I'm not mistaken, and I believe 

very sincerely that the people of Saskatchewan certainly want 

to have involvement in this constitutional debate.  They want to 

be able to express to their government and to us as opposition 

members their views and their feelings.  And yes the standing 

committee will give them that process. 

 

But as well, Mr. Speaker, by listening to the plebiscite question 

that was placed last fall, Mr. Speaker, we do involve the public 

even in a greater way as to the process and the question that 

will be raised. 

 

We also have to remind ourselves of the fact that there will be a 

federal election possibly within a year's time, Mr. Speaker.  

And certainly there are some . . . So as I've indicated, there are 

some time guidelines or timely processes and time periods that 

are going to have to be met.  And that's why we have raised the 

questions, raised the concerns, and raised the amendments to 

the following motions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well, I believe when you talk about laying out 

a plebiscite or laying out a referendum, as I've followed with 

interest the debate in the House of Commons, I guess one of 

the major concerns raised by all members of the House . . . and 

if you're going to lay out a referendum or lay out a question, 

what kind of a question are you going to lay out?  And I'm sure 

that's maybe one of the concerns.  I believe the Premier may 

have indicated that yesterday too. 

 

Like, the issue we face is so complex.  What kind of a question 

do you lay out so that the public are aware of the question?  

And when it comes to voting on it and having a 



526 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1992 

plebiscite or laying a referendum before this House, before the 

people, I believe the people in Saskatchewan, and not only in 

Saskatchewan but across Canada, want to know what kind of a 

question. 

 

We want, I believe, a simple, clear definition of what we 

believe Canada is so that we as Canadians can make a very 

clear, qualified . . . speak out very clearly and very qualified 

regarding the question, regarding the constitution so that indeed 

our premiers, including the Premier of Saskatchewan and our 

constitutional leaders of this province and Canada, including all 

the provinces of Canada and the aboriginal peoples of this 

country working together with the federal government, can 

come to an agreement on a constitutional format and on the 

constitutional question that is laid out before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what about aboriginal rights?  I believe when we 

look at the format for this committee, I believe there are a 

number of areas that need to be addressed and should be laid 

out so even the aboriginal community has an idea of what they 

can expect from this committee, how this committee will 

address the questions that they have been raising. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also note, Mr. Speaker, that over the past 

number of years our aboriginal community has been speaking 

up very loudly.  They want to be in on the process.  After all, 

Mr. Speaker, they are certainly the original settlers of this great 

nation, of this country.  They were here even before, if you 

will, the white man came and settled this country. 

 

And so I believe that we've been hearing about it, and I believe 

again that we must work together with our aboriginal 

community, as all of us have to work together.  We all have to 

put our heads together.  Mr. Speaker, there's going to be give 

and take on all sides.  There's no way we're going to reach a 

conclusion to this constitution.  And as the Premier indicated 

yesterday, certainly it's a debate that's going to be ongoing.  

Even if we do arrive at a reasonable solution, it will be a debate 

that will continue. 

 

What about property rights, Mr. Speaker?  Mr. Speaker, the 

members opposite indicated that they're more than willing to 

enshrine social rights in the charter, but what about property 

rights for individuals, Mr. Speaker.  Maybe that's a question 

that should be laid out for the committee.  The committee 

should be addressing that factor.  And there are so many 

questions that can be laid out for people to address and to bring 

before this committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well, I'm not totally aware of the total format 

of the committee or who all the members may be.  But when 

we look at the make-up of the committee, it would appear to 

me that it would be a responsible move to at least have the 

minister responsible for the constitution as part of the 

committee. 

 

I believe it would be very imperative that the minister be part 

of the committee members, for the simple reason that it would 

give the minister an opportunity to keep his cabinet colleagues 

and certainly other government members more informed and 

keep them well informed of 

the process, what was going on, the discussion that was taking 

place, the general feeling that they were running into in the 

province as this standing committee meets . . . would take the 

time to meet and listen to people around the province. 

 

So I would suggest and I would ask that the government give 

serious consideration to including the minister responsible for 

the constitution to be part of the committee as well. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the most important question that still arises 

and still comes before this Assembly, and that's why we really 

feel that the people of Saskatchewan should have an 

opportunity to speak and to voice their opinions as they 

indicated through the plebiscite, is that it would appear to me 

that the whole format and the whole process is, it would appear 

to me, just another way of and another format of ongoing 

committees. 

 

And I'm not sure if this committee will be able to reach any 

kind of a conclusion.  In fact, it would appear to me just to be 

just another tool by the member from Riversdale and the 

government to side-step many of the major issues that we are 

facing in this province today.  I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, many 

people across the province would like to have a plebiscite on 

other questions as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well, when we look at the make-up of the 

committee -- and I believe the member from Kinistino 

indicated that the make-up of the committee would have 

members from all sides of the House -- well we would ask that 

the committee be fair and be made up of a fair representation 

from all members of the House, not just a group, a large group 

from the government side of the House basically to do as . . . or 

to follow the guidelines of the government or that the 

government would have laid out before them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it is imperative that before the 

committee give its final report, or indeed before it lays out its 

final report, the people of Saskatchewan indeed should have an 

opportunity to voice their opinions, voice their concerns, and 

even give . . . they should be given an opportunity to speak 

through the most important format that they have that gives 

everybody that opportunity, is through a plebiscite or a forum 

or a referendum. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to speak today and lay some of 

these thoughts before the Assembly so that we are aware of the 

concerns, and laying out some points and guidelines for the 

government to follow.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Having already 

spoken on the amendment, I realize that my remarks must be 

confined to the narrowness of the subamendment as proposed 

by the member from Kinistino, and I will attempt to do that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendment, the subamendment as I gather, as 

proposed by the member, says that the constitutional committee 

that will be struck by this legislature will ultimately determine 

or not of whether the people of this province have the ability to 

speak in either a plebiscite or a referendum. 



May 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 527 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that defeats the well-voiced concern 

of Saskatchewan people last October.  Over 60 per cent of 

Saskatchewan people said they wished to have a say in the 

constitutional opinion of Saskatchewan.  The member from 

Kinistino has proposed that 10 members of this Assembly, be 

they government, opposition members together, will ultimately 

determine whether the people will have that option or not. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am surprised that the government, 

knowing full well that the committee as struck by this 

legislature will be weighted in favour of government members, 

that the government would try and subordinate that widely held 

belief of Saskatchewan people by having this committee which 

is being charged, as I understand the main motion, with going 

out and consulting, with seeking opinion, not forming opinion 

themselves but giving Saskatchewan people the voice that they 

desire in these constitutional matters; that that committee 

would go out and seek out a very broadly based opinion of 

Saskatchewan people.  I don't believe, Mr. Speaker, that the 

people of Saskatchewan will find it acceptable for 10 members 

of this House, make-up yet unknown, to be the final 

determining element in whether they have that broad-based 

opinion or not. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I really wonder if the member from 

Riversdale, our Premier, coming in with a motion such as this 

that clearly, that clearly in my view, Mr. Speaker, tries to take 

away that ability from Saskatchewan people . . . It means that 

the member from Riversdale can take his five or six or seven 

members of that committee and say, boys this is the agenda; I 

want you to follow through.  I want you to come back into this 

House and I want you to recommend, I want you to 

recommend that Saskatchewan people not have that ability to 

have that broadly based view on constitutional matters. 

 

And I would say to the Premier today, if he is deadly serious 

about this business, if he is deadly serious about not repeating 

the mistakes of 1982, if he is deadly serious about making sure 

that Saskatchewan people have the utmost confidence in this 

committee, then I think it would be appropriate today for the 

government to withdraw this subamendment, withdraw this 

subamendment and not put the burden on 10 members of this 

Assembly, 10 members who are charged with going out, not 

telling the people of Saskatchewan the way it's going to be, but 

10 members charged with listening to the people of 

Saskatchewan as to what they want. 

 

And I would think if the government were serious, if the 

Premier were serious in these constitutional negotiations, that 

he would not want a committee of his legislature, of his 

province marred with that mark -- marred with the suspicion, 

sir, marred with the suspicion that there was some type of 

manipulation, because the government will have the majority 

on that committee. 

 

The Premier laid out many points yesterday, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in debate in this House of why he does not think that 

referendums or plebiscites are appropriate in constitutional 

matters.  He said on one hand, I don't rule them out but here is 

a long list of reasons of why I don't personally want 

referendum or plebiscite involved in 

determining Saskatchewan's constitutional make-up. 

 

Given the Premier's stand of yesterday, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

on that issue, I would suggest that it would make many people 

in this province -- our aboriginal people, people from ethnic 

backgrounds, people from the same ethnic background as the 

member from Kinistino . . . I would think they would be 

slightly suspicious, sir, that if 10 members of this Assembly 

were going to be the ultimate determination of whether they 

would have that broad-based say in the make-up of Canada's 

constitution . . . And I say again to the Premier, do the right 

thing, sir, if you do not want this process marred, and withdraw 

this subamendment to the amendment today in this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1515) 

 

Subamendment agreed to. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:18 p.m. until 3:29 p.m. 

 

Amendment agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Romanow Calvert 

Wiens Hamilton 

Simard Johnson 

Tchorzewski Trew 

Lingenfelter Draper 

Teichrob Serby 

Shillington Sonntag 

Koskie Cline 

Anguish McPherson 

Goulet Wormsbecker 

Solomon Crofford 

Atkinson Stanger 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

MacKinnon Harper 

Penner Keeping 

Hagel Kluz 

Bradley Carlson 

Koenker Langford 

Lautermilch Jess 

-- 38 

 

Nays 

Neudorf Boyd 

Swenson Goohsen 

Toth D'Autremont 

Britton Haverstock 

Martens  

-- 9 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to move 

another amendment, and this will be seconded by the member 

from Regina North West, and it reads: 

 

 That the motion be amended by deleting the words "the 

Saskatchewan legislature, the Parliament of Canada, or any 

other legislatures in Canada" and substituting the following 

therefor: 



528 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1992 

 "federal, provincial, and territorial governments or 

legislatures in Canada" 

 

And I so move the amendment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- If it was the intention of the member 

to make some remarks, I'll not put the amendment until he does 

so. 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to make my 

remarks in regards to the amendment of including federal, 

provincial, and territorial governments or legislatures in 

Canada. 

 

And basically I'd like to reflect back on the issue of the 

standing committee as it relates to that, and also the issue of the 

referendum as it relates to the provincial, federal, and territorial 

governments or legislatures. 

 

I suppose, to put it very precisely, right off the bat there was a 

question from one of the members from the other side as to the 

reasons why.  I think the member from Moosomin was asking 

whether or not we'd be able to receive things, whether or not 

our legislature was in process here in the province or from 

other places in Canada or whether the Government of Canada 

was in session.  And this particular amendment addresses that 

particular question.  I think that the question of including 

governments and legislatures addresses that particular issue. 

 

In regards to the committee, the amendment on the standing 

committee, I must state that the amendment itself speaks to the 

standing committee as part of the parliamentary, democratic 

history of Canada.  We know that there's been a long history en 

route to committees and en route to amendments and 

processes and amendments. 

 

And one has to look back to the original BNA (British North 

America) Act and later on the Statute of Westminster of 1931 

and the right of our Supreme Court to make decisions in 1947 

and right up to the 1982 Constitution Act which includes not 

only fundamental rights and freedoms, but ability and equality 

clauses as well as democratic rights.  So we're part of . . . This 

issue of including this amendment on federal and provincial 

and territorial governments is basically to reaffirm the tradition 

of committees in the legislatures and the Parliament of Canada. 

 

And some members asked us to why we were having a 

standing committee instead of a select committee.  And I think 

it's important to recognize that the committee has to be an 

ongoing matter of the legislature.  Even on the recent history in 

regards to amendments, we've had quite a bit of debate in the 

past 30 years.  One only has to look at the attempt on an 

amending formula back in 1964 called Fulton-Favreau formula. 

 

Later on in '68 to '71 there ended up to be a lot of constitutional 

discussion, and at that time we had the Victoria Charter, and 

they had a formula which was there at that time.  Then later on 

we had the Constitution Act process from '78 to '81, and then 

we had the formula of seven and fifty in the 1982 Constitution 

Act. 

Now some members were worried about the input and that type 

of thing of people, and I might say that when I was in the 

legislature in 1987 after being elected in '86 I was of course 

going through the process of Meech Lake.  And when I looked 

at Meech Lake and some of the issues that the members from 

across were looking at in terms of public involvement, this 

committee of course addresses that particular issue because we 

are saying in that committee that we will invite presentations 

and expressions of view from individuals and groups. 

 

So the argument from across therefore rings hollow in that 

regard, and it's a very positive aspect of this mandate on the 

committee that we will be listening to the expression and views 

from individuals and groups in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Also heard the comment on time lines, and I must say that the 

members from across probably didn't read the main motion 

which says that we will be meeting the time lines arising out of 

the nation-wide negotiations and amendment processes.  So the 

members from across are simply not reading the main 

amendment of which I am speaking to. 

 

Now getting back to the issue on the referendum, I would like 

to say this much.  This morning I was listening to the debate in 

the House of Commons on the issue of referendum that is 

before parliament right now which is Bill 81.  And these are the 

types of arguments that we heard in regards to the issue of the 

referendum that the members from across were talking about, 

and which we proceeded then to pass another amendment just 

prior to this. 

 

And a lot of the people were worried at parliament, and I'm 

addressing the issue at the parliamentary level this morning.  

They were very concerned about the issue of unlimited dollars.  

A lot of the members in the debate this morning said that the 

rich and powerful . . . a lot of the strong corporations would 

have a much easier time in communicating their positions, 

sometimes from a very simple basis, to the people in Canada 

and have the edge over a lot of the people who don't have the 

money to be able to put their arguments across.  So that was 

clearly stated by a lot of members in the argumentation this 

morning at the House of Commons. 

 

The other thing that was mentioned was this: that the issue of 

the constitution at this time is quite complex.  We are dealing 

right now with the unity question of Canada and trying to 

expound on a new vision as we move forward to the future.  

And we want to make sure that in this vision we include the 

questions relating to Quebec as well as other provinces.  The 

questions dealing with aboriginal peoples and the inherent right 

to self-government is before not only the House of Commons 

but for all legislatures across Canada, and it becomes a very 

important question in this regard. 

 

The other thing that's very important is the division of powers, 

and other provinces are dealing with social charter.  So what 

we are dealing with is a very, very complex issues -- 

equalization payments, and so on.  So when you're looking at a 

referendum, if you had a 



May 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 529 

referendum dealing with all the issues, if would be a highly 

long referendum, highly complex.  And it's very, very difficult 

to be able to come out with something that would be simple 

and straightforward. 

 

And most of the referendums in the world . . . even when I look 

back at referendum issues in Australia, in all of the 32 historic 

referendums that they've had, only about eight were of practical 

value throughout that whole history.  So we were looking only 

about 25 per cent success in that regard. 

 

And so referendums from the members opposite, as they were 

saying, was supposed to have been a question of uniting 

Canada.  And I might question that on this complex process, 

you know, that is taking place right now at the House of 

Commons. 

 

Now the other thing that was very important is that a 

referendum is only a tiny step in a democratic process.  The 

democratic process of involving the legislatures, you know, 

right across Canada and the Parliament of Canada and the 

public through the processes is a very important question.  And 

when we are looking at it, we don't want to be able to say that a 

particular unifying theme . . . that Canada will break apart just 

because, you know, if a referendum is not brought about. 

 

I mean the history of referendums in Canada is very limited 

indeed, because when you look at the history, we're only 

looking at the referendums back in 1898 on the issue of 

prohibition and the one in 1942 on conscription.  It would be 

indeed looking and really extending the impact of those by 

saying that those united Canada.  In many cases, one would 

have argued that they were quite divisive, you know, during 

that point in time in history. 

 

Of course we are not saying that we will not do referendums 

and so on.  We're relating the matter back to the committee 

level.  And it's very interesting when we're looking at 

referendums and we're dealing with the other legislatures in 

Canada, other than the major two historic points of 

referendums, the 1898 one on prohibition and the one on 

conscription in 1942, the only other major place in recent 

Canadian history on referendums happened to take place in 

Quebec. 

 

(1545) 

 

And when the members were talking about it unifying Canada, 

one would hardly say that the referendum in Quebec created a 

unified Canada.  The separatist government in Quebec, the 

Lévesque government, was the one who introduced a 

referendum in Canada.  One would find it very hard to say that 

because it was in a provincial legislature and because it was a 

Quebec government, it was hardly another thing to say that it 

unified Canada. 

 

So when a lot of the members from across say from an historic 

basis that a specific item, a specific procedure such as a 

referendum, will solve the unity question, is definitely drawing 

a long bow. 

 

So I guess, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to place the amendment 

before because we know that the processes of involving not 

only the legislatures but the governments, you know, the 

provincial and territorial governments and also the Government 

of Canada, is important in regards to not only their 

involvements at a governmental and legislature level, but also 

the process of establishing the committee that we have here 

today, which is a standing committee, an ongoing committee, 

because we are dealing with the reality of ongoing problems at 

the constitutional level. 

 

The members from across and . . . both the Conservatives and 

the Liberals always see things in a very short-term basis.  What 

we're talking about is a standing committee for a long run 

because we believe that future legislatures and future members 

have the right to create amendments and changes in the history 

of Canada such as we've had today and in the past histories of 

Canada. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to put my arguments 

across and support the amendment, and therefore move it, and 

seconded again by the member from the North West, and so I'll 

read it again: 

 

 That the motion be amended by deleting the words "the 

Saskatchewan Legislature, the Parliament of Canada or any 

other legislatures in Canada" and substituting the following 

therefor: 

 

 "federal, provincial and territorial governments or legislatures 

in Canada" 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 3:51 p.m. until 3:56 p.m. 
 

Amendment agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 

Romanow Serby 

Wiens Sonntag 

Simard Roy 

Tchorzewski Cline 

Lingenfelter McPherson 

Teichrob Wormsbecker 

Shillington Crofford 

Koskie Knezacek 

Anguish Harper 

Goulet Keeping 

Solomon Kluz 

Atkinson Carlson 

Kowalsky Langford 

MacKinnon Jess 

Hagel Neudorf 

Bradley Swenson 

Koenker Boyd 

Lautermilch Martens 

Calvert Britton 

Hamilton Toth 

Johnson Goohsen 

Trew D'Autremont 

Draper Haverstock 

-- 46 

Nays 

-- Nil 



530 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1992 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my pleasure 

indeed to address you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and through you 

the Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan on this 

extremely important issue. 

 

We are about to embark on a process, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of 

putting a committee on the road throughout our province to 

discuss the questions and issues of our constitution.  And now 

the question is, how do we mandate that committee.  And the 

question becomes then, what does mandate mean and what 

conclusion will we arrive at with that mandate. 

 

Our concern, to put it in a nutshell, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 

at the end of the day when the committee has completed its 

work, that we end up with a desired result.  And that desired 

result should be that for the people of Saskatchewan and for the 

people of Canada we come up with a clear and concise 

message from all of the people as to how they want the future 

of their country to be run. 

 

It happens I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to be a fact that a 

mandate is a term of reference.  And the terms of references 

that are used will determine very possibly the conclusion that a 

committee can come to. 

 

And that is an important point because if you set out with a 

committee that is mandated or given terms of references that it 

can only act in certain ways, that it can only talk to certain 

people, you could end up predetermining the only conclusion 

that a committee could come to.  And that is the danger we see 

in the process that we're embarked on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We kind of wonder as we go through this process whether this 

is going to be a class B fair or a class A fair or some kind of a 

road show or a dog-and-pony show, or if it's going to be just a 

fed-bashing exercise. Will the mandate given to this committee 

provide it with only those options to become a show-piece for 

the Premier and our present government, or will it genuinely be 

mandated so that it can do the work of consulting with the 

people.  That is where our concern lies. 

 

We understand as we read this motion that it can possibly be 

that this committee would sit throughout the entire province 

and talk to a lot of folks and we could end up with the 

conclusion being delivered to the Clerk rather than to this 

Assembly.  In which case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no one in this 

Assembly would have an opportunity to debate the conclusions 

or the methods that the conclusions were drawn from.  And that 

gives us serious concern. 

 

Because now it appears that we will not necessarily be heading 

in the direction of providing a vote for the people to give their 

final conclusion on the matter.  And without that as a bottom 

line at the end of the day for this exercise, there is only one 

alternative left for the people to truly have their expressions 

aired. 

 

And let me go into the possibilities of error for a minute.  I've 

already been involved in one of these committees, the 

Committee of Municipal Law.  And the exercise, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, was in fact a good exercise in principle.  

However, it has some flaws and I want to point them out for 

you and for the people of this province. 

 

To begin with, committees sometimes find it hard to get past 

the apathy of people who believe that the committee may be 

predetermined in its conclusion and therefore they don't spend 

the time to go there.  So in fact, with our Municipal Law 

Committee, we found ourselves in a situation where people 

were actually having to be called and reminded that we existed 

in order to get enough people out to justify our trips into the 

country to go to listen to the reports that we solicited. 

 

If that's to happen in a constitutional debate, we run into the 

same situation perhaps.  The next step comes that -- and I guess 

in a democracy it has to work this way -- but the committee 

gathers all its information, has all of its meetings, pulls it all 

together and then they take it to the caucus of the government 

of the day.  It wouldn't matter which party it is; I guess that's 

the way the process works. 

 

Unfortunately, the only part of the committee that is invited to 

that caucus is members of that very political party that holds 

that caucus.  The other members of that committee, in my 

opinion, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- and maybe I'm wrong here -- 

from the other political parties should also be invited to that 

caucus meeting. 

 

Now I'm not saying we would have the right to vote for the 

final conclusion there.  Obviously that caucus is the caucus of 

the government of the day and they will, by the majority they 

have won in a democratic process, finish the process by making 

that final decision.  But how can they in all fairness say that 

they are doing a democratic viewing of the situation if they 

don't include those of us who are on the committee from the 

opposite parties in the final conclusions of listening to the 

debate within their caucus?  After all, the committee went out, 

and the caucus members who weren't on that committee didn't 

have access to the information that we as a committee had. 

 

So their first real briefing by the committee comes within that 

caucus structure and they are making their final decision then 

based only on the information that they get from their own 

members on the committee.  So it makes the whole committee 

process of including opposition parties a farce, because we are 

really not heard in the final conclusions or before the final 

decision is made. 

 

And so that concerns me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we now 

find ourselves looking at an issue as complex and as critical to 

our country as the constitution itself, perhaps going in the same 

process where the final conclusion will be made by a 

government that doesn't have to hear the opposing points of 

view and may want to neglect hearing them, or may in fact be 

better off to hear them but will never have that opportunity in 

the way the process is played. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we caution this process be done 

right.  The mandating, the terms of reference that are given to 

these people, can in fact become, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 

self-fulfilling prophecy. 

 

I want to give just a little example here of how a 



May 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 531 

self-fulfilling prophecy could be designed in this kind of a 

committee.  You could, for example, send the committee out 

into the country and mandate them only with enough funds to 

go to two places.  Those two places, for example, might be 

Gravelbourg, Saskatchewan and perhaps Cumberland House. 

 

At Gravelbourg you have a French community who very 

probably, in my scenario, would explain to the committee their 

needs for the inclusion of French within our structure of our 

constitution.  On the other hand, at the Cumberland area you 

would have a meeting where our native people would probably 

be the most likely to attend, because I expect that they are the 

biggest part of the population there -- and I have never been 

there so I'm guessing at that, but I think I'm on good authority 

from some of my colleagues here -- and I expect that they 

would express the needs and concerns of the aboriginal people 

and the native people.  And that's good.  It's necessary -- just as 

necessary as Gravelbourg putting in the points of view of the 

French needs and that sort of thing. 

 

But if the mandate were that those were the only two 

communities that this committee were allowed to sit in and 

they only got those two points of view, then you could 

self-fulfil the prophecy that the biggest concerns you would 

take from Saskatchewan into a constitutional debate would be 

the concerns of our aboriginals and the French people, and the 

rest of Saskatchewan could be totally left out. 

 

So mandating the terms of reference under which this process 

works is extremely important.  It's extremely important to those 

of us here to know that the mandate of this committee will 

allow everyone a fair and complete access to the process to be 

heard. 

 

And it's too bad that we haven't been able to convince our 

colleagues on the opposite side of the House to go along with 

guaranteeing that there will be a vote at the end of the day 

because I do honestly believe yet that the people of 

Saskatchewan want a final say in this matter.  And I think it's 

important for the democratic process. 

 

As I pointed out in this Assembly yesterday, it is important that 

politicians now be perceived to be trying to go to the people to 

get their answers and to allow them to participate in our 

process rather than to be dictated to all the time after the 

elections are over. 

 

We could have increased our self-esteem in this one fell swoop 

of providing one opportunity for the people of this province, 

and that would simply be in guaranteeing them a vote on this 

critical issue.  No one said that it wouldn't be complicated, but 

complicated matters can be understood by a lot of people. 

 

We are led to believe by our Premier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

through his discussions that somehow a lot of us may not 

understand the federal process.  Perhaps we're too dumb or too 

naive to be able to grasp the complexity of it all. 

 

Well I'm not a lawyer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I think quite 

honestly that if you take a little time to educate me 

-- and I think my colleagues can fall into this category as well 

-- I think if you take a little time and explain the matters to us, 

and while you're doing that if you let the rest of the folks in the 

province listen, I'll just bet you that we've got enough brains to 

figure it out.  I'll just bet you that we could probably get a few 

farmers that could actually come up with a constitution that 

would work.  It might not have a lot of big seven-letter words, 

but at least we'd live in peace and harmony, and I think that's 

what it's basically all about in the end. 

 

So I don't think we have to have a complicated formula that's 

too glitzy for anybody to understand.  I don't think we want to 

have a class A or a class B dog show.  I don't think we want to 

be into that kind of a process.  I don't believe, quite honestly, 

that the people opposite want to be in that process, and I don't 

think they want to get caught up in this self-fulfilling prophecy 

either.  But they are trapping themselves by not listening to 

reason at the start of the process.  They are making it a political 

football right out to start with. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I complete this process of my inclusion 

in this debate, I want you to know that I intend to pass an 

amendment to the motion.  And once again I'm going to 

encourage the members of the government to allow a moment 

of thought before they immediately jump and vote against it 

just because it happens to be one of our ideas. 

 

It may be true that a lot of the ideas that we've had aren't the 

best.  But I would caution the government that everything we 

come up with can't possibly be wrong.  And maybe it might 

just be time to take a look, because this is the constitution of 

our country we're talking about, it is an important issue, and we 

need to deal with it very seriously. 

 

There are some issues that will be determined as to how we as 

a province will stand in the constitutional debate, that need to 

be understood and predetermined into which direction the 

government is going to go. 

 

I don't know, as a citizen of Saskatchewan, where our Premier 

is taking us in the constitutional debate, for example, on the 

issue of property rights.  Because I don't know what he and his 

government, who are going to have the final say in this process 

as to what they will deliver to the bargaining table, I don't 

know yet what their position is.  And I believe that I and the 

people of Saskatchewan should know what that position is. 

 

I want to just dwell on property rights for a minute because I 

think it's the most misunderstood concept that has ever come 

around.  I heard a CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 

reporter on the radio the other day, and he was interviewing 

some people and they were discussing this issue.  And one of 

the people, of course, was probably playing devil's advocate 

and was saying that property rights are a terrible thing because 

it would restrict all of society too much because too many 

people that owned things wouldn't allow the general good of 

the public to go on and to work. 

 

An example was used that if you needed a road, that someone 

who owned the piece of property might in fact 



532 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1992 

then say no, I have property rights, you can't then build the 

road.  And the public good then would not be served. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let's be reasonable.  When you put in 

any kind of a package into a constitution of rights, you also 

have the opportunity to protect the rights of the other people 

against that right.  And you have the opportunity to write into 

that constitution that the public good shall be served above the 

interests of the person with the property right. 

 

In other words, you can still expropriate the land and have a 

dump where you want it, and you can still build roads where 

you want it, and you can still have a public well to get water.  

So the concept need not become a great dark terror. 

 

It simply would mean that people have the right to own their 

own home in our country -- that ranchers and farmers would 

have the right to own the piece of property that they run their 

cattle on and grow their wheat on.  It would give them that 

feeling of well-being that obviously must have been missing in 

countries like the Soviet Union in order for their system to have 

collapsed so completely and so quickly. 

 

I think this pride that people can have in themselves is so very 

important that I have dwelt on it here for a few minutes today.  

And it need not be the giving away of a right that would totally 

destroy everybody's interests within society. 

 

Some people even say that property rights, of course, would be 

taken out of context, and that you would claim to have the right 

to your kidney and nobody else could give it away.  And I don't 

really think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the process needs to 

include all those kinds of things.  If you're going to give a right, 

you can draw the line as to how far it goes. 

 

And so within our constitution, I think it's important that we go 

back to what I started in here, is that we have to know where 

the Premier and his government stand on these issues.  Because 

they, in the process of this committee set-up, will be the ones 

that will make the final decision as to what direction our 

province will take at the negotiating tables -- what will be 

traded for what, what we will ask for, what we will hope to get, 

and what we will be offering to trade off in exchange for what 

we want and need -- those kinds of negotiating techniques.  We 

don't know, and we don't have any indication yet from our 

Premier as to where he's going. 

 

And I believe that in all honesty with the constitution at stake, 

we have to know these things before the Premier goes to those 

tables. Before he goes to the dark of the night at somebody's 

kitchen table again, we have to know where we stand.  We 

demand the right to know as a citizenry in this province, to 

know where the government stands on these issues. 

 

And we're going to ask very seriously, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that this package be delivered to this Assembly for debate 

when the committee gets finished.  Because if all else fails and 

we can't have at the end of the day, at the end of this process, a 

vote allowing the people all to 

decide, at least we should have the right for those of us who are 

elected by the people, to debate the conclusions and findings of 

the committee before the government takes its last final 

decision-making process to the bargaining table. 

 

It has to be done somehow in a form of openness where the 

people can have at least the feeling that they're watching 

something that they participate in.  Otherwise it gets this 

cloak-and-dagger reputation again of people doing things 

behind their back. 

 

And that is why politicians have gotten to be in such low 

esteem by the people in our communities.  All through our 

country politicians are probably the least high on the scale of 

respectability . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I can't repeat the 

things that I'm hearing beside me. 

 

(1615) 

 

There are many issues, Mr. Speaker, that are important to us, 

and I mentioned a couple of them.  But I want to talk a little bit 

about resource ownership because this is so very important to 

western Canada. 

 

In a constitution we will decide very critical issues like who 

will share the resources of an area or a region of the country; 

who will have the right to tax those resources; who will have 

the right to even explore for them or to find them; will it be 

done by state ownership; will it be done by private ownership?  

Those kinds of questions are questions that will be dealt with in 

our constitution, or could be, and they likely will be. 

 

So if we are not very careful what we do when we open up this 

whole package of constitutional discussion, we could end up 

with a constitution that takes us down the road in the future 

some place that we never intended to go.  And yet we don't 

know in this process where our Premier is going to lead us in 

these debates. 

 

What will he be putting on the table?  Will he be saying to 

Quebec, if you guys give up French, we'll give you half our oil 

revenue from western Canada?  Wouldn't that be a shocker.  

But it could be happening.  We don't know, because this 

government has not clearly indicated to us what its position on 

the constitution is, and we're waiting to find out. 

 

And I don't believe, quite honestly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

this committee process is going to provide those answers.  

We're going to hear from the people in this committee what 

they think, but will that information be passed on in such a way 

to the government and the Premier so as to influence the final 

decision of the direction they take?  I think not.  And the proof, 

I say, is in the pudding.  And the pudding in this case, 

metaphorically speaking, has already been the Municipal Law 

process, where the conclusion was taken by only party 

members of the government of day to that caucus, and they 

make the final decision without input from anybody else. 

 

And so somehow the process, while it started out as a good 

idea to go and talk to the people, it didn't deliver in fact to the 

end result.  It got cut off in the middle some 



May 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 533 

place and the people were not truly heard.  And it won't happen 

this time either. 

 

What is our province's position on bilingualism with our new 

administration?  I knew it and I understood it with the past 

administration, but this one hasn't told us yet.  And if we are 

going to set up a committee that is mandated to go out and find 

out from the people what their position is on this issue, will that 

mandate allow that this information be passed on to the 

government before they make their decision of how they're 

going to represent us?  I fear that it won't.  I don't know what 

the opinion of the people will be for sure because I haven't 

talked to a lot of them.  I know about the opinion of the people 

in my constituency -- that's very clear -- but I haven't been to 

the rest of the province. 

 

So I'm saying to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the process of 

talking to people is a good idea, but we must ensure that we get 

the answers to the government and that somehow we put an 

onus of responsibility on that government to actually enact 

what the people are saying they want.  And I don't know how 

we can put credibility into this process if we don't end up with 

a vote at the end of the day showing the people voting on what 

the government says they're going to do as to whether they like 

it or don't like it. 

 

What other choice do we have except a direct referendum?  We 

could say that we could judge the government on its past 

performance.  In all fairness, that wouldn't be fair because the 

government hasn't been in power for very long and we've seen 

a rather negative look at this administration so far.  And if you 

were to judge it so far, a lot of folks, I think, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, would quite simply say that, well we're upset with the 

increases that we've had in taxation and so on and therefore we 

don't trust the administration and we are against it. 

 

So it would not be fair at this time to judge the administration 

in that way on their short performance.  Because I'm sure that 

as time goes by they will attempt to clean up their act and 

become more respectable to the voters of this province.  We 

don't know that, but we can hope. 

 

We don't know either what the timing of our reporting is going 

to be, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it is again important to the 

process that people understand what's going on on a timely 

basis.  If this committee is mandated to report back to the 

government or to the legislature, then of course we can get the 

information that they're gathering.  If, on the other hand, they 

are mandated not to deliver anything to anybody until the end 

of the process, an awful lot of good and valuable time can be 

lost. 

 

And remember, we are on a time schedule here.  Quebec has 

basically set a time schedule that the federal government is 

now working within.  There are constraints of time.  And so we 

could be playing games with time, and I worry about that.  And 

we must have reports on a timely basis as this committee goes 

around the province to inform the people . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I'm sorry.  I can't understand the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I say, why are we buying into 

Quebec's timetable?  Why don't we have our own timetable?  

Why is Quebec setting the timetable? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well it's rather irrelevant, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, as I listen across the way to the debate as to how we 

mandate a committee.  What is happening in Quebec right now, 

I would hope would be a process similar to this.  It would seem 

to me that if they are doing their job over there, as the members 

chirp across the way, it would seem to me that they would be 

also going through a process of finding out from their people 

what they want included in this constitutional debate, and what 

their final result in the constitution would be as well. 

 

So I expect that's what they're doing, but I have no way of 

being sure of that.  I would hope that if they are doing this 

process of a committee approach, that they would at least have 

the good sense to report back to their legislature occasionally to 

let the folks know what they're finding out. 

 

And this is not clearly spelled out.  But maybe by debating it 

and discussing it, we are serving the democratic process by 

allowing our views to be known and allowing our Premier the 

option to think it over and consider it.  That's what the 

democratic adversary process is designed to do, to allow the 

time for differing points of view, differing ideas, to be 

expressed openly so that everyone can consider them. 

 

Because sometimes we may find -- and this could be a shock to 

some folks -- we may find that we don't always have all the 

right answers ourselves.  Sometimes the other fellow may 

know something about what's going on too.  So, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it is important, the timing of the mandating of the 

process and how it works. 

 

We don't also know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where we're going in 

the areas of this province representing the Saskatchewan 

people on issues of interprovincial trade.  We have some idea 

about the position of this administration with regards to 

international trade.  We have heard some things about that.  I 

have to say that most of them seem to me to be very negative to 

a modern and progressive world. 

 

However interprovincial trade is going to become more and 

more important if this country's going to stay together.  If we're 

going to debate the constitution, how it's supposed to work, I 

bet you that on the table will be the issue of how we're going to 

conduct ourselves in the future with regards to trading from 

one province to the other.  And I think it is important for the 

people of Saskatchewan to know what the position of this 

government is when they go to the table on that issue. 

 

And if we're going to talk about a committee going around the 

province, I think we have to mandate that committee to ask that 

specific question of the people, just in case they don't get a 

chance to vote on it in the end. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the mandate will provide that 

this committee asks specifically of all the people the question 

as to where Saskatchewan stands on issues of interprovincial 

jurisdiction or provincial jurisdiction or federal jurisdiction; 

which areas of 



534 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1992 

government should be run by our federal government; which 

areas of our lives should be administered by provincial 

government. 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that a conscientious 

approach to the constitution would have to include who's going 

to run which segments of our lives throughout the years to 

come.  And I'll bet you that if we read the constitution as 

carefully as our Premier has probably done, that he likely, he 

likely would find that that part of our lives is structured within 

our constitution. 

 

But I think what he fails to realize is that an awful lot of 

Saskatchewan people have opinions that may somewhat differ 

from his as to which areas of jurisdiction the provinces should 

have and which areas of jurisdiction the federal government 

should have. 

 

And if the committee is not mandated to go out and ask that 

specific question to come up with an answer, then the people of 

Saskatchewan will not have truly had their opportunity to put 

their direct input into this debate and into the final conclusion 

of what our constitution is going to read. 

 

These are the rules of how we live our lives for the next 

number of years.  And obviously the constitution may be 

hauled out on the table from time to time again.  I doubt that 

this is the last time that we'll ever see this thing happen. 

 

But for a good length of time, whatever we put into it this time 

we will have to live with, and it would be better that we took a 

minute or two to get it right.  And it would be better that the 

people of the province felt that they had actually had an 

opportunity to give some input. 

 

And they must not only have that opportunity but they must 

perceive to have had that opportunity, because people are 

getting the impression that they're getting a snow job from 

politicians in just about everything that we do. 

 

I have heard a little bit of discussion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

about the position our administration in the province has taken 

on the Triple E Senate question.  But it is not clearly defined in 

my mind, and it's certainly not clearly defined in my mind what 

the people of this province believe.  In my constituency I can 

tell you what most of the people think about on this issue.  But 

outside of my constituency I have to admit that I don't know, 

for example, what the people in Regina think about the issue of 

a Triple E Senate. 

 

I don't know if the issue has been discussed and I don't know if 

this committee is being mandated to ask that question.  I 

believe it should.  And I mention it here today with the hope 

that somebody will be maybe taking a few notes and that they 

will -- if they at least won't give the people a vote -- that they 

will at least allow them to take the committee through this city 

and others and ask the question:  what do you thing about this 

and how do you think it would work best for western Canada? 

 

This is an issue that affects western Canada, not just 

Saskatchewan.  But it's an important issue, and the stand 

that our government takes on that final day of reckoning is 

important to everyone.  We've got to know where our 

government is taking us in this debate and in this negotiation 

because this is a negotiation.  There will be trade-offs made.  

Everything we want, we won't get. 

 

And I think it's important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we know 

which things this government plans on trading off to get what 

other things.  What are you laying on the table for us?  Is our 

resource industry safe?  Are our rights as individuals safe?  Do 

you believe in property rights?  Do you believe in 

interprovincial trade?  Are our people's options to drive over to 

Medicine Hat to buy groceries a safe thing or not?  Will we 

seal the borders up and have border patrols? 

 

We don't know.  We've got the mandate for our committee to 

go out and ask these questions of the people -- do they want 

those things? -- and see to it that these messages are delivered 

to the government.  And the government has to be answerable 

to us in this Legislative Assembly as to what direction they're 

going to take before they go to that table and start trading away 

our things and our rights.  We've got to know where they stand. 

 

And they can only do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this 

Assembly, short of not having a vote among all the people on 

each of these issues. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No blank cheques. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- That's exactly right.  My colleague calls it 

right -- no blank cheques.  This issue is too big and too 

complex and too important to write the government a blank 

cheque. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I've made my point.  I 

hope I have.  And with that I want to move an amendment to 

the motion.  Moved by myself and seconded by the member for 

Wilkie: 

 

 That the following words be deleted from the motion (we're 

not adding; we're just going to delete): and in this regard the 

committee is authorized to release its report when the House 

is not sitting by filing it with the Clerk for distribution. 

 

Simply that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker and members of this Assembly, I strongly 

urge you to support this amendment because it truly will get 

you off the hook.  Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- I want to thank the member for his 

motion, but I want to refer the member to Beauchesne's, 465(3) 

where it states that: 

 

 Having moved the adjournment of the debate, a Member has 

spoken on the question and cannot make a second motion 

during the same debate. 

 

And I note that the member has . . . or in fact yesterday moved 

adjournment of the debate.  So I find that the motion . . . that 

it's not in order for the member to move this particular 

amendment. 



May 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 535 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, on a point of order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- On a point or order?  What is your 

point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I understand that the 

member that made the adjournment yesterday on the debate 

was not the member from Maple Creek but rather the member 

from Souris-Cannington that made that adjournment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- I'll clarify that, but I refer the 

members to the Votes and Proceedings, no. 17, where it is 

clear on page 4, and I quote: the debate continuing -- it was on 

motion of Mr. Goohsen -- adjourned.  Therefore the record 

shows that it was the member for Maple Creek that adjourned 

the debate. 

 

I thank the member for that, and I'm advised by the Clerk that 

in fact it was the member for Souris-Cannington, that it was not 

the member for Maple Creek.  Therefore I find the amendment 

by the member for Maple Creek to be in order. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I rise to my 

feet to speak to this amendment which I think is very 

important, and I also concur with my colleagues that if we're 

going to do something about the constitution, we should very 

well make sure that we're right.  And, Mr. Speaker, at the end 

of my remarks I will be seconding the motion moved by my 

colleague from Maple Creek. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's important that we take this amendment into 

account, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  The role of this Assembly is to 

speak for the people, to represent those who elected us.  That's 

what we're here for, Mr. Speaker.  This motion must be done 

right, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  That's why we should not try to 

hurry this through and not know exactly where we're going. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the NDP feel the forming of a committee to 

discuss the constitution is as important as they say it is, then we 

should have no problem with this amendment.  Firstly the 

members opposite don't think changes to the constitution are 

important enough to bring choices before the people of this 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And now they are trying to 

undermine the very process of this Assembly.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, 79.32 per cent of the people said they wanted a vote 

by referendum on the constitution question.  Only 20 per cent 

said no. 

 

My colleagues and myself have to have the right to debate the 

outcome of this committee in this Legislative Assembly, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  We need that, and it's our right to have that.  

We must be able to bring the concerns, ideas and inputs from 

our home constituencies to this Assembly, and nothing short of 

that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will do.  I cannot accept and my 

colleagues cannot accept and this Assembly should not accept a 

document of this magnitude not to be discussed in this 

Assembly.  That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would be inexcusable. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know the NDP hasn't been 

especially open with respect to plebiscites and referendums, but 

that is as far as they can go.  The constitution does not have and 

should not have anything to do with politics.  But it certainly 

has everything to do with democracy. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, every person in this province needs to 

have the right to express themselves. It is a very basic right but 

a right the NDP don't seem to be taking seriously.  And I 

listened to the member from Riversdale yesterday, and he 

spoke on the issue.  I listened to his comments about federal 

off-loading, federal referendums, and federal everything else. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are not talking about federal politics.  

We are talking about our home province and our country.  This 

debate is much too serious to be dragged into party politics.  

We are talking about the future of this country of ours, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, a country called Canada.  And what the 

member from Riversdale failed to accept is that a referendum 

on the constitution and the tabling of the committee's results 

will be the only means by which this Assembly can examine 

the true wishes of the Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do not want to presume that the 

members opposite will vote against this amendment.  But it 

would seem that if an amendment comes from this side of the 

House, it is voted down no matter what the content.  And I ask 

the members across the way to consider this amendment 

carefully.  We are asking only that this matter be given the 

appropriate consideration.  The constitution is an extremely 

important issue.  The country of Canada is at stake. 

 

For the Assembly not to be in session when the report is tabled 

does not make any sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it flies in 

the face of democracy as we know it.  Surely the members 

opposite will agree that the constitution is important enough for 

them to receive this report in this House. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they too, they too have constituents to 

talk to and to listen to.  And I'm sure many of you across the 

way from me today feel a little too far removed from this issue.  

The MLAs, the public, and the committee on the constitution 

must be partners, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the results of the 

partnership have to be discussed here in this Assembly on a 

non-partisan basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must remind the members across from me today 

that in October the people voted almost 80 per cent of the 

population to have a say in any changes to the constitution. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they asked for a referendum.  They did 

not ask for a standing committee.  And I say this because the 

very least you can do to honour their wishes is to allow them to 

speak through their elected representatives if you are not going 

to hold a referendum. 

 

If the members opposite were to hold another vote today, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we all know this would be the case.  And I 

don't know what the members opposite mean, Mr. Speaker, but 

I certainly have a lot of confidence in the people of 

Saskatchewan in what they feel and where they 



536 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1992 

want to be in the future years. 

 

I hope the members opposite will give this the consideration 

that they deserve.  Mr. Speaker, there has been a lot of words 

said today and I'm not going to take any more of your time.  I 

want to assure you that I second the motion put forward by my 

colleague from Maple Creek.  And I thank you very much for 

the opportunity to express my point of view. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I can't 

believe that there are still people in this province left today that 

don't think that there should be referendums in this province.  

Eighty per cent of the people in this province on October 21 

voted in favour of a referendum for constitutional change.  

Eighty per cent, Mr. Premier, voted in favour of the people 

being consulted on any constitutional change. 

 

I can't for a moment imagine what the people of Saskatchewan 

would think if this committee that's being proposed to be set up 

went around the province, consulted with everybody in the 

province, and then came back to this legislature and said no, we 

won't have a vote, we won't allow a vote.  We won't allow 

people the opportunity to express their own desires on this very 

important matter, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the constitutional business is the Premier's 

favourite playground.  It's exactly where he wants to shine.  

Once again he will have the type of exposure he wants -- 

national media -- a chance to mould the country the way he 

thinks it should be moulded, the opportunity to show everyone 

in Canada again that he has the will and the desire to shape the 

country the way he believes it should be. 

 

But I think 80 per cent of the people in this province believe 

that they should also have the opportunity to make some 

comments on the constitution, Mr. Premier.  And I firmly 

believe that the people should be consulted on such an 

important issue, Mr. Speaker.  I'm not sure of the make-up of 

the committee, Mr. Speaker, but I'll say here today that if I find 

myself in a position of being on that committee, I will not be 

able to support a committee's recommendation that the people 

should not be consulted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier, I know very clearly he doesn't like 

the opportunity for people to consult on this.  He wants to be 

able to do it by himself.  And that's why, Mr. Speaker, he spoke 

against a referendum yesterday.  And it's important, I think, 

that the people of this province recognize the fact that the 

Premier does not want the people to be consulted on this.  He 

wants to deal with this issue himself. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I'll say again that I believe people in this 

province should be given the opportunity of a vote for any 

changes to the constitution.  And I will, in my position as MLA 

for Kindersley, abide by that recommendation that the people 

of Kindersley put forward to me on October 21. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

Certainly we will be very succinct and brief in my comments as 

well in the fact that I've been listening very intently to the 

debate as it has been going along for the last while and I have 

to admit that my colleagues have done a very admirable job in 

bringing forth the concerns that we have on this side of the 

House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the wish of any politician always is to find 

out what the will of the people is.  Politicians throughout the 

ages have asked themselves:  by golly, if I could find out what 

the will of the people was or is, I would do it, and then I would 

stay in power for ever. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan last 

October 21 did speak and very unequivocally stated their will, 

which was yes, they wanted to have input.  They wanted to 

have input. 

 

I believe it was 380,000 people that spoke -- 80 per cent of the 

folks in this province said yes, give us a say.  And that is what 

we as an opposition here are asking the Premier and his 

colleagues to abide by, to the wishes of the people. 

 

Now they have conceded over the last day and a half of debate 

here that there will be a committee set up and that this 

committee now will have within its mandate the right to 

determine whether something should be brought . . . whether 

that question should be brought forward to the people in the 

form of a referendum. 

 

(1645) 

 

But I object to that, Mr. Speaker, because of the composition of 

that committee that will be determining that.  It will be a 

committee made up of NDP apologists.  There's no doubt about 

it.  As a matter of fact the House Leader hasn't given me his 

commitment that the composition of that committee will be ten 

-- six government members, three official opposition members, 

and indeed the independent member will be included on that 

committee.  So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a foregone 

conclusion in terms of how that committee will render any 

decision. 

 

Now the other issue that I wanted to bring forward at this time, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the member from Cumberland, I 

believe it was, indicates to me how this was a flash in the pan 

approach by the Premier opposite -- that indeed there was no 

long-range plan, that indeed this was on a spur of the moment 

decision -- because we find out that the member from 

Cumberland got up and made a House amendment, as it were, 

to a motion made by the government itself. 

 

Now if this was a well thought out plan -- if indeed there was a 

plan, if indeed it was not only a seat of the pants, fly by night 

kind of an operation -- this thing would have been well planned 

out in advance.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I am saying is that 

it's not a well thought out plan, and because of that I sincerely 

hope that the Premier and members opposite will take very, 

very seriously the amendment that we have put forward. 



May 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 537 

We know that the one amendment has already been defeated, 

that the referendum is not going to be done automatically, that 

it will be done by that committee.  But one thing that we are 

going to be insistent on is that when that committee has made 

its resolution, that that report will indeed follow the procedure 

of this Assembly, which is that standing committee reports will 

be tabled in this Assembly when this Assembly is sitting.  And 

that is paramount as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  What it does 

do is make that committee accountable.  While not accountable 

directly to the people of this province as would be their first 

choice in a referendum, it would make that committee 

accountable to the people's representatives, which is this 

Legislative Assembly and all 66 members therein. 

 

And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is what we are proposing as an 

amendment.  And I suggest to the Premier that it's a well 

thought out amendment, it's a logical amendment, and I think 

it's an amendment that has a lot of common sense to it.  And I 

would highly recommend that they give it some serious thought 

and not just out of hand reject it because it was this side that is 

making that proposal. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thank you for your time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 4:50 p.m. until 4:55 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

Yeas 

Neudorf Britton 

Swenson Toth 

Boyd Goohsen 

Martens D'Autremont 

-- 8 

Nays 

Romanow Serby 

Wiens Sonntag 

Tchorzewski Roy 

Lingenfelter Cline 

Teichrob Scott 

Shillington McPherson 

Koskie Wormsbecker 

Anguish Crofford 

Goulet Knezacek 

MacKinnon Harper 

Bradley Keeping 

Koenker Kluz 

Lautermilch Carlson 

Calvert Langford 

Hamilton Jess 

Johnson Haverstock 

Trew  

-- 33 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I have listened with a great deal 

of interest to the speeches of the various individuals from both 

sides of the House in relation to the debate on both of these 

motions.  I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that there are three things that are seriously absent.  

And we have tried to point them out.  As 

an opposition here we have tried to point them out to the 

government.  And we're going to be very pointed in those three 

observations. 

 

And one of them is, that I honestly, firmly believe that the 

Premier of this province does not want to have a referendum.  

That's the conclusion that I came to from the remarks that he 

made in his speech.  He had every reason to believe that the 

whole process that we went through and the people and the 

province went through when they said, 80 per cent of the 

people of this province want to have a vote in deciding what 

the constitution will look like in this country. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier said over and over again 

that it was almost impossible to do.  He said, as a matter of 

fact, in an indirect way, that he wanted to be the one that would 

take the whole of the constitution and mould it and shape it the 

way he personally wanted to have it happen. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have watched the constitutional debate 

through the last 15 years of this province, and we have watched 

it consistently dealing with a whole host of things.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, the process has been flawed to a great deal because of 

the fact that the people were not given an opportunity to have a 

say in what was going on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, did the people of the province of Saskatchewan or 

anywhere in Canada have anything to contribute during the 

process of debate in 1982?  The answer is no, Mr. Speaker, 

they did not.  Mr. Speaker, the role of the attorney general at 

that time in 1982, who is the Premier today, said over and over 

again, he can do it.  He can control and massage and 

manipulate the way the constitution of this province is going to 

be.  And when the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 

through these last 15 years, have watched the development of 

the debate in 1982 and in 1986, through Meech Lake and 

through that whole process, the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan said in 1991 . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  It being 5 

o'clock, I now leave the Chair until 7 o'clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


