




















































Hansard: June 10, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1027 

 June 10, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I shall give 

notice on Friday next and ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding polling surveys used in preparing the budget: (1) 

What were the purposes of these polls? (2) Who was hired to 

conduct these polls? (3) When were these polls conducted? 

(4) What questions were asked? (5) What were the results? 

(6) At what cost were these polls conducted? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly two groups of students from W.F. Ready School.  

The first group are a group of grade 4 students, 23 in number, 

who are with their teacher Cheryl Ganong and chaperon Leslie 

Baldwin. 

 

The second group are a group of 23 as well and they're also 

grade 4 students.  And they're all in your Speaker's gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, with their teacher Miss M. Ready and chaperons Ms. 

Helgason who is the assistant for the hearing impaired and Ms. 

Baldwin the teacher for the hearing impaired. 

 

I would ask members of the Assembly to join with me in 

greeting these guests.  I'll be meeting with them after a tour in 

room 235 for refreshments and a number of questions I hope 

they'll have from the observation in the gallery today and their 

tour. 

 

I ask members to join with me in greeting them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my privilege 

today to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly 50 

students from the Hudson Bay School which, Mr. Speaker, I'm 

sure you're familiar with.  They're a grade 7 class.  They're 

seated in the west gallery.  Their teachers are Garry Hein, Blain 

Emerson, and Phyllis Low.  Chaperons are Elvina Rumak and 

Laurie Wolowski, and the bus driver is Al McDougal. 

 

The Hudson Bay School has a tradition of an excellent 

education system, Mr. Speaker, as well as an excellent sports 

education system.  And some of the graduates from the Hudson 

Bay area are people like Trent Yawney from the Chicago 

Blackhawks -- or now from the Calgary Flames -- and Bob 

Poley from the Saskatchewan Roughriders. 

 

I'd like the House to welcome these people, these guests of 

ours. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- I'd like to introduce to you and through 

you to the rest of the members of the Assembly a group of 54 

students seated in the east gallery -- grade 8 students from the 

Weyburn Junior High School.  And accompanying the students 

are their teachers, Murray Sproule and Tracy Johnston, and 

also bus drivers Gary McKenzie and  Roger Bellavance. 

 

I welcome the students to the Assembly and I look forward to 

meeting with them after they've had an opportunity of taking in 

question period.  I'll give them a few refreshments and answer 

any questions they have, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like everybody to 

join with me in welcoming the students. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure today to 

introduce to you and through you to the Assembly the 41 grade 

8 students from Brownell School in Saskatoon.  I had the 

pleasure of meeting with this group before question period and 

I trust that they will find the proceedings very interesting and 

informative. 

 

They're accompanied by their teachers Catherine McCormick 

and Larry Klopoushak.  They're seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, and I would ask the members to join me in welcoming 

the students from Brownell School to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It was a pleasure and a 

privilege for me last Saturday night to participate in the 

opening ceremonies of the provincial court judges' conference 

now going on at the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

This is a conference being held by the judges on the issue of 

racial, ethnic, and cultural equity.  It was organized by the 

Western Judicial Education Centre, the College of Law, and the 

provincial court judges of Saskatchewan.  As well, Indian and 

Metis organizations and the multicultural community were 

involved quite heavily in both the planning and in participation 

at the conference itself. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the judges are seeking to better understand 

the social context of decision making, including important 

issues of race, and they're listening to people from the 

community. 

 

Our country is comprised of aboriginal people and immigrants 

and their descendants, and we really are a mosaic of peoples, 

Mr. Speaker.  We should rejoice in that and at the same time 

remember that Canada, of all countries, should be a place 

where tolerance and mutual respect are demanded. 

 

Racism is certainly a troubling concern in our country and we 

should commend the judges, Mr. Speaker, for the measures that 

they're taking to better understand its 



1028 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1992 

dynamics and consequences. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As a part of the . . . 

or a past member of the vice-chair of the emergency measures 

committee for Regina, I rise today to offer congratulations to 

the organizations and people involved in handling the rupture 

of Saskatchewan Power transformer in downtown Regina 

yesterday.  Our member from Lake Centre also told me that as 

a representative of the area she felt this was handled so well 

she didn't receive a single call of concern. 

 

The incident involved a spill of about 400 litres of PCB 

(polychlorinated biphenyl) contaminated mineral oil.  Just 

minutes after the rupture occurred, the Regina fire department, 

city of Regina environment department and the SaskPower 

department arrived on the scene to handle the emergency.  

Thanks to the quick action of these dedicated people the area 

was sealed off and the spill was completely contained.  Their 

actions prevented any damage to the environment or danger to 

the public. 

 

The oil that leaked was later determined to contain three parts 

per billion of PCBs, below the level considered to be safe of 

five parts per billion.  However it should be noted that the 

workers involved in the containment and clean-up had no way 

of knowing this before, when they were dealing with the spill. 

 

Dedicated workers like these across our province risk their own 

safety on a daily basis so that the rest of us can feel safe and 

secure.  I invite all members of the Assembly to join with me in 

offering congratulations and thanks to those who responded to 

yesterday's emergency for a job well done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It was my 

privilege last Saturday to speak at the Saskatoon Social 

Planning Council's founding annual meeting.  This is a new 

umbrella organization of NGOs (non-governmental 

organizations) and community individuals committed to 

improving the quality of life and to enhancing the well-being of 

all residents in Saskatoon.  Their specific objectives include 

social research, policy analysis, program development, 

co-ordination and integration of services at the community 

level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are dedicated people, a broad-based, grass 

roots organization who are very much a part of their 

community.  The council wants to work with each level of 

government, and I invite all members to join in wishing them 

well and pledging our support to them.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today 

to recognize a new regional economic development council 

that's just been organized in the east-central part of 

Saskatchewan.  The name of the organization is the Woodlands 

Regional Economic Council.  It has just recently been 

incorporated and registered under The Non-Profit Corporations 

Act. 

Mr. Speaker, the boundaries of the region shall include from 

Kelvington to the north, east to the Hudson Bay, east to the 

Manitoba border, south along the Manitoba border to the 

Qu'Appelle Valley, and west to Highway No. 47, north to 

Melville, and west along Highway No. 15. 

 

This district, Mr. Speaker, includes some 23 communities that 

have been involved in the development of this particular 

council.  The objectives, Mr. Speaker, are to promote the 

quality of life in east-central Saskatchewan, to co-ordinate 

communication and activities amongst the members in that 

area, and to establish a community futures corporation within 

the next couple of months. 

 

The interim executive, Mr. Speaker, is Mr. Roger Pitstick of 

Wadena, Alfred Moore of Ituna, Lynn Krotenko of Canora, and 

Terry Ortynsky of Yorkton, Don Olson of Sturgis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the members of the Parkland region, 

I wish to commend the work of the regional delegates and 

extend our support and co-operation in assisting in the efforts 

of enhancing and promoting the economic development and 

growth of our Parkland region. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to report to the Assembly 

on events this morning before the Court of Appeal.  I went to 

the court to personally observe the NDP (New Democratic 

Party) lawyers presenting their GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) case against Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to report that the government was 

thrown out of court and told that they had nothing to appeal.  

Mr. Speaker, it is very important to note that the Minister of 

Agriculture failed to present a defence to the courts, so that 

everyone understands when the farmers made their case against 

the government the law required the government to make a 

defence.  The Minister of Agriculture failed to make that 

defence, and the Court of Appeal said since the minister did not 

follow the law, he had nothing to appeal.  The minister is now 

in the position of going back to the court to ask for some other 

way to get at Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is as important for this Assembly since the 

NDP have announced they will be bringing a new law 

tomorrow to rewrite history.  In effect this government is going 

to tell the Court of Appeal to take a hike, that this Premier and 

this Minister of Agriculture are above the law.  Mr. Speaker, it 

is strange indeed that the government will spend thousands of 

dollars trying to destroy farm families at the Court of Appeal 

while it prepares to force through this legislature, a law that 

says a contract will be deemed to have been followed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to rise 

today to announce that the residents of Redberry and 

particularly the home care board members and staff are pleased 

with the 20 per cent increase in their funding. 



June 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1029 

This 20 per cent will go a long way to help them fill their 

mandate to provide additional services for our seniors. 

 

It is with great satisfaction that I as MLA (Member of 

Legislative Assembly) for Redberry have the opportunity to be 

part of this very progressive step.  The seniors and handicapped 

in my constituency now have the privilege to remain in their 

own homes with dignity.  To remain in their own homes is a 

top priority for these special people. 

 

It is with great pride that my government accepts responsibility 

for these very worthy residents of Saskatchewan.  This is as 

well a positive move for rural Saskatchewan as it allows people 

to remain in their farm homes and small communities.  This 

action creates business and employment in these rural 

communities. 

 

Such action, along with many senior citizen centres established 

in the 1970s, do in fact enhance the quality of life for rural 

seniors.  The people of Redberry represent a large number of 

ethnic groups, and to be cared for in their own homes and 

communities -- often in their mother tongue -- is a tremendous 

public service to a very deserving segment of our society.  I am 

pleased to be part of a government, a government that believes 

in humanity first. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1345) 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Changes to GRIP 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a question 

for the Minister of Agriculture.  Today this government in all 

its mad rush to destroy everything ever done by the previous 

government has totally handled the changes they are going to 

force on farmers in the GRIP program.  First there was 

virtually no consultation, then they tried to scare farmers off by 

imposing a $750,000 bond, and then they said they would force 

the changes through by passing yet another piece of retroactive 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question is this: if the government is so sure 

of itself, so sure that it is legally and morally correct, why has it 

delayed in filing its defence in the courts?  And why don't you 

give the farmers a chance to go with '91 GRIP?  And why are 

you delaying in filing your defence in the court? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe the matters of the 

court are in the hands of the lawyers representing the Crop 

Insurance Corporation and the Government of Saskatchewan 

and will be dealt with in the manner than court matters are 

dealt with.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the matter is not before the 

court, and the minister, if he would have been there, would 

have understood that the matter was thrown out because he 

didn't file his defence.  I'm asking the minister 

when are you planning to file that defence? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, my understanding from the 

Department of Justice lawyers is that the matter of application 

relative to the appeal are still being considered and will be 

considered and these matters will be dealt with. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker and Mr. Minister, are you 

delaying the defence simply to have your legislation brought in 

to provide the information then, that that will be the defence 

that you're going to provide for the lawyers to take back to the 

Queen's Bench court?  Is that the reason why you're delaying 

the action in the court is so that you can provide that as 

evidence against the farmers of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe the member 

opposite is aware that some other legal technicalities which 

were not of our doing have been introduced into this appeal 

process and the matters will be dealt with in due time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture has 

taken upon himself to move from the Department of Justice to 

hire lawyers now who are NDP lawyers, the same lawyers who 

were asked by the government to kick out the secretaries and 

chief executive officers of the . . . the employees of the 

province. 

 

Will you now tell this Assembly that the only reason that you 

are delaying the court action and filing your defence is that 

your only defence is placing before this Assembly the 

legislation that you're proposing to present? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, just for the record, I believe 

the lawyers of whom the member opposite speaks are working 

for the Crop Insurance Corporation and they will be dealt with 

in due time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, will you tell . . . Mr. Minister, 

will you tell this legislature when you plan to introduce this 

legislation to this Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, soon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I assume that 

you should . . . or I am going to make the assumption that you 

won't be as flippant with the farmers about letting them choose 

between '91 and '92 GRIP as you are with the answers you're 

providing to this Assembly.  Will you tell me: is it going to be 

tomorrow or the next day or the day after that you're going to 

file this?  Because you're coming to a conclusion on June 23 

that you're going to have to file this or you're going to be done 

-- is that going to happen before June 24? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the matters of the courts will 

be dealt with by those who are best able to deal with those 

matters.  I have had better things to do than sit before 



1030 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1992 

the courts because there are people there with the opportunity 

to carry those matters forward. 

 

We've been out talking to the farmers and hearing their 

concerns about their situation in farming.  Maybe the member 

opposite would be well advised to go out and talk to a few 

farmers so he can -- instead of pretending to be interested -- 

show that there is a real interest in providing some assistance to 

farmers in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, will you provide to this 

Assembly what contingency plans you have in place that in the 

event the court rules that the government does not have the 

right to retroactively change the GRIP program by making 

changes to the contract after the deadline. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the detail to which the 

member opposite refers will be addressed through the 

appropriate processes, and I continue to invite the member 

opposite to work with Saskatchewan farmers to take the 

message to Ottawa that it's time the federal government took its 

responsibility, its appropriate responsibility, for agriculture in 

Saskatchewan and recognize that we do not have the capacity 

as a result of the actions of the members opposite to fund these 

kinds of programs that would be of help to farmers under these 

circumstances. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, will you give the farmers the 

choice between '91 GRIP and '92 GRIP?  Why don't you do 

that and save the whole province some money? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the choices the farmers now 

have are choices about how they survive on their farms.  What 

we intend to do is deal with the issues of income and debt and 

we invite you to work with us in getting the federal government 

-- your colleagues in Ottawa -- to work with us in assuring 

farm incomes are at a decent level in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about giving 

the farmers some breathing room on income and debt.  You're 

just taking income away from them by disqualifying them from 

'91 GRIP.  You're taking on an average of $30 a cultivated acre 

in this province, and you know that because the court heard 

evidence of that fact.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact. 

 

Will you or will you not give the farmers the choice with the 

'91 GRIP and '92 GRIP?  Let the farmers choose and let them 

tell you what they choose rather than you telling them what to 

do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

aware of the program that's in place in Saskatchewan.  He's 

aware of the reasons why it had to be implemented as a result 

of the absolute incompetence with which the Leader of the 

Opposition and the members behind him introduced the 

program; the incompetence with which they negotiated federal 

funding for Saskatchewan farm assistance; the incompetence 

demonstrated by the taking on of in excess of $200 million of 

federal funding onto the Saskatchewan taxpayers' shoulders 

while you proceeded to decimate the economy in other areas. 

 

I think the members opposite ought to be ashamed of the record 

they've had and they better join with us in trying to provide 

some improvements to Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, it isn't a reflection on this side of 

the House -- the incompetence.  The 50,000 people who have a 

contract with '91 GRIP think you are incompetent and that's the 

point. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, what happens, Mr. Speaker . . . 

And I'm going to ask the minister this question:  if you are told 

by the courts that you are wrong, what will you do?  Why don't 

you do as Gloria Baer wrote in the Leader-Post just the other 

day, and I quote: 

 

 If Wiens thinks the program is exactly what (the) farmers 

want, why not give the farmers the option of choosing 

(between) . . . '91 or . . . '92? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker and Mr. Minister, that's a question I'm asking 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

aware, as I said earlier, of the the program that's in place, aware 

of the added efficiency with which it delivered, aware of the 

wrong signals that the program corrects.  And as the members 

opposite ought to continue to be shamed for the actions they've 

taken in bankrupting this province and allowing off-loading . . . 

in fact, leading the federal government exercise to off-load, 

putting other provinces in Canada at risk to allow the federal 

government to put loads onto the provinces that otherwise were 

borne by the federal government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker and Mr. Minister, last week the 

federal Department of Agriculture release, Statistics Canada, 

showed that you're absolutely wrong.  There's 80 per cent 

funding from the federal government compared to your 20.  

And the highest it ever was, was 82 per cent. 

 

The question that you have to answer to the public of 

Saskatchewan and the farmers of Saskatchewan: are you 

prepared to provide '91 GRIP or '92, and let the farmers 

choose?  That's the question you have to answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1031 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite ought 

to review a few facts.  The farmers in the south-west that we 

visited with yesterday, when we talked about drought in 

Saskatchewan, were appalled at the fact that the government 

represented by you in 1988 took on $100 million debt load 

which we are now repaying in our very rough financial 

circumstance at the rate of $15 million per year now, as a result 

of an agreement with the federal government, at a time when 

the province did not contribute money towards those programs. 

 

And the year following you took on half of the federal 

government's contribution to crop insurance, a cost to the 

province of 40 to $60 million annually.  And a few years later 

when the western grain stabilization program was discontinued, 

which was funded by the federal government without 

provincial support, you took on the GRIP program and the 

NISA (net income stabilization account) program, costing 

between 150 and $200 million a year, the net result being the 

cost to Saskatchewan taxpayers for farm income support now 

in excess of $200 million for which we only borrowed the cost 

of crop insurance administration before 1989. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Has the minister provided to the Minister of 

Finance an observation about what the cost will be if the court 

rules that you have to pay the farmers of Saskatchewan their 

losses between the '91 GRIP and '92?  Have you asked the 

Minister of Finance how much money that really is? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should 

have thought about the costs to the province when they 

designed some of the farm support programs that were here 

before. 

 

First of all, up front costs of $200 million.  Secondly, 35 per 

cent of the cost of program deficits.  Thirdly, cuddling the 

federal government as it refuses to meet its commitment to 

Saskatchewan farmers in the face of an international price war.  

That kind of action is unforgivable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, the courts 

have said and they have said it very firmly that your actions . . . 

and in fact, Mr. Minister, your deputy minister told the court 

that you are incompetent.  You haven't provided the 

information before the March 15 deadline on the contract, and 

you haven't provided the defence, and you've lost the case. 

 

Mr. Minister, my question is back to you again on this matter: 

how much is it going to cost you to deliver '92 program when 

the court tells you that you have to pay for the losses to the 

farmers of '91?  How much money is that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I would invite the members 

opposite to recognize that there are matters 

before the court, and the speculation in which they engage is of 

no value to anyone.  But I do invite them when it comes to the 

matter of accurate information to examine for themselves the 

record of Saskatchewan's contribution to farm support when 

everyone knows that the federal government is responsible for 

international trade and that it is international trade that has 

decimated the incomes of farmers in Saskatchewan, that it is 

international trade that puts at risk our supply and management 

industry, that it is a national responsibility that we keep our 

agricultural sector healthy in order to keep a strong economy in 

Canada. 

 

Let you examine what you have done to that industry in 

allowing the federal government to off-load its responsibility as 

you continue to coddle a government less popular than the 

numbers of people that believe a certain once-upon-a-time 

popular singer was alive. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I'd like to ask the question.  You 

were down at Orkney yesterday.  Did you tell the farmers down 

there how much they were going to lose on a per-acre basis 

simply because you changed '91 and '92 GRIP?  Will you tell 

the people here how much they told you they were going to 

lose per acre choosing . . . making your choice between '91 and 

'92? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, let me inform the member 

about what we were told on our tour of Bengough and Orkney 

and Mankota and other areas in the south-west.  The people 

with whom we met were infuriated by the actions of the federal 

government in not coming to grips with the crisis that's in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The people in that area are seriously concerned about their 

grasslands.  They are seriously concerned about their water 

supplies.  They are seriously concerned about the delay by the 

federal government in the shifting of the question about 

whether or not grasslands would be made available in the park 

there for the area that's burned out; a shifting of the 

responsibility from the Minister of Agriculture to the Minister 

of the Environment, Mr. Charest. 

 

In the same way that when we talk about the responsibility for 

federal government cost sharing in Saskatchewan, they've 

shifted from the Agriculture minister who can't answer the 

questions, to the Finance minister.  They recognize that there is 

a problem in the province of Saskatchewan.  They recognize 

we have the inability to pay.  The farmers in the South know . . 

. 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Consultations with Livestock Industry 
 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My 

questions relate to the same minister.  And he has just proven 

an article that I'd like to quote from, from The Western 

Producer that says, and I quote:  One of the government's 

biggest problems is Berny Wien's ego.  He can't say he made a 

mistake.  If he can't answer he hollers 



1032 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1992 

and yells and turns red.  Mr. Minister, you have demonstrated 

that for the people of Saskatchewan this afternoon. 

 

Now you, on the advice of your Premier and . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Let the member 

proceed. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I 

appreciate that. 

 

Mr. Minister, you, on the advice of the Premier and the 

Minister of Finance, have embarked upon destroying the grain 

sector of this province.  But you are also systematically killing 

the livestock sector with the slashing of the FeedGAP (feed 

grain adjustment program) program and the livestock cash 

advance program.  You were seeking, sir, revenge on the NDP 

defeat at the hands of the farmers in '82 and '86. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: whether or not you have 

met with the livestock sector, including the hog marketing 

board recently?  And will you tell us whether or not you are 

listening to their legitimate concerns and whether or not you 

are contemplating scrapping your plan to kill the livestock 

sector by killing the FeedGAP program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't know if the member 

was present in the House when other members of the group 

opposite asked those same questions.  I have answered them 

before; I will answer them again, for his benefit, if he wants to 

take the time. 

 

The fact is I spoke to the stock growers' convention in Moose 

Jaw last week and the members of your caucus were there and 

they heard the response, and they recognized that the last 

statement that was made before I left after my speech was a 

commitment by one of the leaders of the stock growers that 

they would meet with us and examine the facts around this 

question and work with us in determining whether this was the 

best place to make investments in Saskatchewan. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, several days later I met with the pork 

industry and we discussed the plans for expansion in 

Saskatchewan.  They do not take the negative view that the 

members opposite take.  This was a committee of the pork 

producers in Saskatchewan who met with us promoting the 

idea of expansion, recognizing that certainly it's nice to have 

some assistance, but recognizing that in this province farmers 

know the facts of business and they know they can compete 

because they do it better than anywhere else. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I commend the 

minister for cooling down and calming down a little bit so that 

we can have a rational discussion here. 

 

You talk, Mr. Minister, about meeting with the pork board.  

Richard Wright who is the provincial chairman of 

Saskatchewan Pork International Marketing Board, has this to 

say about you and your plans, and I quote: The timing of these 

budget announcements has been a major psychological blow, 

and heaped further discouragement 

on producers resolve to continue.  End quote. 

 

Does the minister know how many this will force out of 

business, and in fact, Mr. Minister, will actually cost the 

government and the taxpayers of this province millions of 

dollars because farmers will not be able to honour their 

commitments to Ag Credit?  And can you, sir, tell me now 

what studies you have that show that what you are doing with 

the FeedGAP and livestock cash advance is actually going to 

be productive for the Saskatchewan taxpayer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the biggest psychological 

blow to the province of Saskatchewan was the actions of the 

members opposite in bringing forward, in bringing upon 

Saskatchewan, a $15 billion debt, a $760 million annual 

interest cost which will continue to grow until we can get the 

mess under control that the members opposite created. 

 

The facts of the matter are that the people in Saskatchewan, the 

business people in Saskatchewan, the farmers of Saskatchewan 

from the dry south-west to the other parts of the province, 

know the folly of the actions of the members opposite, 

recognize the need to deal with the crisis, and are willing to 

work with us in moving forward. 

 

The pork industry has met with us and appreciates that there is 

an opportunity for growth.  The biggest restriction to growth of 

the pork industry in Saskatchewan is access to capital for the 

building of facilities and for the ongoing maintenance of that.  

And the members opposite full well, if they know anything 

about agriculture, are aware of that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister proves he does not 

know whereof he speaks.  That's exactly what the cash advance 

is being used for.  That's exactly what the FeedGAP . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order.  Will the members 

please simmer down on both sides of the House, okay?  On 

both sides, and we can have an orderly question period. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, that's exactly the point.  I'm glad 

that you finally recognize it.  You are now depriving these 

farmers their cash flow, the money that they have used to 

expand and to keep their operation running.  You have just 

whipped out the rug from under them, sir. 

 

Now Art Crone from Moose Jaw is saying, and I quote: What 

is he the minister to gain by shutting this place down. 

 

He also said that his plans to expand production are put off.  

There's a question of whether he can even make his payments 

to ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan). In 

fact I've heard now that he's put a stop payment to ACS for 

$580,000.  That's what you are in jeopardy of losing for one 

farmer, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now I'm going to ask you . . . and he also says it would be 



June 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1033 

better to move his animals to Alberta.  That's what he says.  

That's a hog farmer.  Mr. Minister, what do you say to Mr. 

Crone or do you not care that major operators in this province 

are seriously thinking about shutting down and/or moving out 

of this province?  That's what you are creating, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the only negative 

vibes that come from Saskatchewan come from this cluster of 

members opposite who insist on looking for a grey lining in 

every circumstance.  The member opposite is aware, he speaks 

with successful hog producers, that they are willing to take up 

the challenge of producing pork here because it is a good place 

to produce.  The climate is conducive to it.  The cost base in 

terms of feed supplies is conducive to it. And farmers have a 

spirit to compete in the world that the member ought to know 

about. 

 

The member, being in the business, ought to also know the 

difference between operating money and capital expansion 

which I was talking about.  The committee of pork producers 

who met with me who are major producers and who represent 

the industry, raised the point that what is very difficult for them 

to find is capital expansion for a new facility that might be 

worth a half a million dollars or a million dollars or a million 

and a half dollars.  And they came forward with some 

constructive proposals to examine with us growth in the 

industry. 

 

The member opposite ought to know that good business will 

build for the future and not sit there and dwell in the past, 

recognizing that we do not have the capacity to put money into 

operating costs, support that the members opposite are 

suggesting that we restore under this program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the same 

minister.  Mr. Minister, you answer questions like Leona 

Helmsley pays taxes, I'm afraid. 

 

Now what I'm going to ask you now is why you are so intent 

on destroying rural Saskatchewan, citing the deficit as your 

be-all and your end-all in order to do that.  You are 

mean-spirited, Mr. Minister, to livestock producers in your 

approach. 

 

Now when I was a vice-chairman of Saskatchewan Pork 

Producers Marketing Board we had what was called SHARP 

(Saskatchewan hog assured returns program) in those days as 

support for the hog producers of this province.  Now SHARP 

was in conjunction and with consultation of the Pork Board at 

that time and the members of the pork industry brought into the 

tripartite situation.  But, Mr. Member, I say to you that during 

that time, within three to four weeks at the end and the close of 

a quarter, farmers had their cheques in the mail.  Sir, right now 

with the FeedGAP program we are still waiting for our cheques 

from the first quarter of this year -- January, February, March.  

We're in the middle of June. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the member have a  

question? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, we are right now in the middle 

of June.  In this highly computerized age you could easily have 

those cheques in the hands . . . after two weeks after the 

quarter. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, why are you maliciously and 

mischievously tightening the screws on Saskatchewan farmers 

so that you can have your own political agenda to take care of?  

Why are you doing that to the farmers of this province, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 

would go out and talk to farmers, he would recognize that the 

farmers' biggest concern, as is the biggest concern of all other 

people in our province, is getting the debt under control, 

putting the province in a manageable state, recognizing that 

there is pain in that. 

 

In the discussions we had with farmers in the south-west 

yesterday, they are fully understanding of the difficulties that a 

government faces, the difficulties which you placed us in.  

They recognize that we need to get on with the future and make 

the tough decisions, recognizing that we still have an additional 

$517 million to deal with in terms of debt you've created, in 

terms of an annual basis.  Knowing that we have a $15 billion 

debt to repay, they're willing to face that task; they're willing to 

bring positive proposals to us instead of the negative ranting 

that comes from the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite the members opposite to stop the negative 

ranting and work with us in building a positive growth industry 

in Saskatchewan in agriculture and in all other areas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 49 -- An Act to amend The Mortgage Protection 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move first reading of a Bill to 

amend The Mortgage Protection Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 50 -- An Act to amend The Financial 

Administration Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move first reading of a Bill to 

amend The Financial Administration Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 51 -- An Act to repeal The Heritage Fund 

(Saskatchewan) Act, to provide for the Winding-up of the 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund and the Farm Purchase 

Program Fund and to enact Consequential Amendments to 

Certain Acts and Regulations resulting from the repeal 



1034 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1992 

of that Act and the Winding-up of those Funds 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move first reading of a Bill to repeal 

The Heritage Fund (Saskatchewan) Act, to provide for the 

Winding-up of the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund and the Farm 

Purchase Program Fund and to enact Consequential 

Amendments to Certain Acts and Regulations resulting from 

the repeal of that Act and the Winding-up of those Funds. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 52 -- An Act to amend The Senior Citizens' 

Heritage Program Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend The Senior Citizens' Heritage Program Act be now 

introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 53 -- An Act to amend The Farm Financial 

Stability Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Farm Financial Stability Act be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

(1415) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 42 

 

Drought Conditions Facing Livestock and Grain Producers 

in South-western Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Before orders of the day I rise pursuant to 

Rule 42 of this Assembly on a matter of urgent and pressing 

necessity.  Our caucus has taken the time to contact the leaders 

of the opposition and the Liberal member of the legislature to 

seek leave.  The issue is the disastrous situation facing 

livestock and grain producers in south-western Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for those of us who have visited the area and seen 

the situation first hand, there is no doubt that these producers 

desperately need help and they need it now.  Accordingly, Mr. 

Speaker, I seek leave to move the following motion: 

 

 That this Assembly recognizes the devastating drought 

conditions facing livestock and grain producers in 

south-western Saskatchewan, and requests the federal 

Minister of Agriculture to visit the area and to take steps to 

provide financial assistance to alleviate these disastrous 

circumstances. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the circumstance in 

south-western Saskatchewan is certainly serious.  We took a 

drive -- a number of MLAs, ag caucus members and others -- 

to visit first hand the farmers and the business people across 

southern Saskatchewan, to talk to them about the circumstances 

they are facing. 

 

It is clearly distressing to watch your crops not come up; to 

watch the pastures dry up or never to green in the spring; to 

watch the water-holes evaporate and your water supply 

disappear; and to watch the feed stocks that you have, in spite 

of the fact that you had a very good stock of them last year, 

gradually to be used up in feeding your stock in the face of 

such a serious situation. 

 

The situation is, thankfully, at this point restricted to the 

south-western part of Saskatchewan and . . . however it is also 

serious in the northern United States.  And it is in fact true that 

the state of Montana has been declared a disaster area by the 

federal government of the United States.  And it is that fact that 

has caused the farming people and the ranchers in the South to 

ask us to request of the federal government the same action. 

 

From Mankota, west and south to the U.S. (United States) 

border, the situation is so critical that we ask and the farmers 

and ranchers ask that the federal Minister of Agriculture come 

to that area and see for himself the state of the drought that is 

causing farmers so much concern. 

 

In the worst affected areas some grain crops are . . . up to as 

much as 50 per cent of the fields have not emerged and in some 

fields even more serious than that.  Saskatchewan is taking 

action to help identify feed sources for farmers, pasture 

sources, and we are issuing a press release today asking 

farmers who have pastures that are not being used and who 

have feed supplies that would be available, to identify them to 

the provincial Department of Agriculture so that those who 

have the need will be able to have access and be able to find 

access as close as possible. 

 

Farmers in the south-west and ranchers have already begun to 

move significant numbers of livestock out of the area.  Farmers 

at Orkney when we met with them and the ranchers there, say 

that the four municipalities in which they live contain between 

2 and 300,000 head of cattle which with proper support with 

possibly some access to water or some facilitation of pasture, 

they may be able to keep there this year, but for whom it 

creates a great deal of concern should this drought continue in 

terms of feed supplies next year when there is no carry-over 

grass and no carry-over feed. 

 

Saskatchewan is in the critical situation of being bankrupted by 

the circumstances that the members opposite so well know.  

And at this time in our history we are beginning to pay back the 

federal government for a drought program that we committed 

ourselves to in 1988 under the previous administration. 

 

We are now, while our farmers in the south-west are in need of 

drought assistance, paying the federal government $15 million 

a year in order to pay back a debt created by the previous 

government, a debt they took on willingly, not recognizing the 

fact that this was a federal responsibility and that that kind of 

support is critical from the federal government if we want crisis 

intervention and 



June 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1035 

we want crisis support here.  Because clearly when 

Saskatchewan is in a critical situation, it is not in a situation to 

fund its own disaster relief.  Someone bleeding to death is not 

in a circumstance where they can give themselves a blood 

transfusion. 

 

I ask the members opposite to join with us in asking the federal 

government to come and examine the situation, ask the federal 

minister to come and see for himself, to meet with the farmers 

as we did yesterday, and to bring forward positive support from 

the federal government so that our farmers may have some 

security that their livestock and their grain farms will be 

protected under these disastrous circumstances.  Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think we have the 

order right here now, Mr. Speaker.  And I want to compliment 

the minister on finally recognizing the fact that there is in fact a 

drought in south-west Saskatchewan. 

 

We have taken some time in this Assembly to try to bring his 

attention to that matter over the past several weeks. And I want 

to compliment him for recognizing the problem and for 

recognizing the fact that the folks out there will need some help 

this year because we are in a devastating drought in some parts 

of the south-west corner and in some parts of my constituency. 

 

It's an amazing thing how the weather treats people.  We have, 

for example, a streak through our constituency where a few 

showers have gone.  And the cereal crops are in not too bad a 

shape there.  But the reality is that it was too late and far too 

little to assist the pastures and those kinds of things out there.  

For example, we have farms even where the cereal crops are 

not looking too bad where the drought so far is causing the 

dugouts to drop by at least 3 to 4 feet in those that had water in.  

And south of us and north of us, there's areas where there never 

was any water to begin with, so you don't have anything to 

evaporate.  So it is getting to be a serious problem. 

 

Now of course a large amount of rainfall would certainly help 

the situation, and we can all get together and pray that the good 

Lord will bring us some rainfall and that we can alleviate that 

problem in that way.  It certainly would be a lot better than 

asking for assistance. 

 

But in the meantime, we do have producers -- and I've 

mentioned this before in the Assembly -- that have already 

moved their cattle herds north.  It's a very serious problem for 

people that live in a drought area, especially when it hits you 

consistently year after year.  And like last year we had a pretty 

good year, but it's not enough to have one good year to make 

up all the bad ones and then be hit by another bad one where 

you have to spend more money shipping cattle out or bringing 

feed in.  We've had just a real run of feed being brought in.  

People are starting to try to stockpile feed supplies as fast as 

they can, seeing that they won't have very much on their own 

properties this year. 

 

Unfortunately that has in itself a devastating effect in that the 

price of feed goes up immediately.  And we've already seen the 

prices of feed go up from $45 a tonne to a hundred-and-some 

dollars being asked already in some places. 

So while that's good for the fellows that are selling the hay to 

make their income, it is devastating for those people that have 

to buy it with an already shrunken amount of dollars in their 

cash flow.  And it is especially hard on those producers that 

depend on programs like FeedGAP when they know very well 

that they won't be getting that assistance back out. 

 

And so we see some very serious consideration going on in the 

area of people already saying that this fall we won't be putting 

any calves into our feedlots.  We're probably best just to stay 

out.  And we see an awful lot of investment dollars that were 

still available to buy calves and feed them in the area saying 

that they're simply not going to be invested here. 

 

And so we have to build some confidence out there, and we do 

have to have some kind of assistance.  And I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, in all fairness, when we ask for assistance from 

governments for a disaster, we should look at how this kind of 

thing is approached throughout the rest of North America in 

other kinds of disasters. 

 

And the first step that is always taken is that the local 

authorities pitch in and do something to help out the folks that 

are in a disaster.  The local rural municipalities, for example, 

will do everything they can with their limited resources.  Then 

it moves to the provincial scene and the provincial government 

has to take a leadership role here and provide some assistance 

to those folks.  Then the federal government is called upon.  

There is a tiering effect of assistance for disaster and you have 

to pitch in at every level. 

 

You can't just go straight out and start yelling, federal 

government come in here and save our lives.  They've got to 

see leadership by example.  And leadership by example tips the 

folks off in Ottawa that there is a real problem.  If you invest 

some provincial monies into the drought area, then the federal 

government is going to take you seriously and start to look at 

what really has to be done. 

 

The minister alluded to the fact that this particular group on 

this side of the House, through his motion and his comments as 

well as earlier in the day, that this group in this House had no 

plan to help agriculture or wasn't doing anything.  And I'd just 

like to comment a little bit on the kinds of things that the 

people on this side of the House have been proposing, and to 

show you that we are in a co-operative spirit in wanting to 

assist the provincial government to make those right decisions. 

 

For example, in an agricultural strategy we have called for the 

federal government to implement and urgently review the need 

for further third line defence of assistance.  Now the Leader of 

the Opposition has been there for farm families and rural 

communities -- and I'm quoting from a farm strategy here -- 

successfully obtaining billions of dollars of support from the 

federal government.  He is Saskatchewan's single best hope for 

ensuring further assistance to protect those families and 

communities.  The Leader of the Opposition is continuing 

negotiations with the federal government and recently released 

the text of a letter of the Hon. Bill McKnight, federal Minister 

of Agriculture, which called on Ottawa for 750 to 800 



1036 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1992 

millions of dollars pay-out. 

 

Now that statement was made last fall when in fact the Leader 

of the Opposition had been going to the federal government 

and was asking for assistance for farmers.  So we haven't been 

shirking our responsibility and our duties to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And we were looking at a disaster already at that time that was 

bigger than the drought that has become very important at this 

moment in the south-west.  We were looking at a tragedy 

through the entire industry.  But with that kind of a beginning, 

there could have been a follow-up so that you could have in 

place a strategy for the drought. 

 

Now we said at that time that we must negotiate a five-year 

strategy with the federal government that addresses the third 

line of defence in a more concrete fashion, as well as other 

farm support mechanisms as Ottawa seriously takes on the 

GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) challenge. 

 

You see, we were trying to formulate at that time a strategy that 

wouldn't be just for one day or one week or one month or one 

drought.  You have to deal with farm and agricultural problems 

as though it is an industry, and we sometimes forget to use that 

word: it is an industry. 

 

It's not just a farmer over there or a group out there or 

somewhere else, and some of it are getting flooded out.  It's all 

of the people that are involved in this business of producing 

food and distributing it to the people of our province and the 

country and around the world.  And you have to have a 

long-term strategy, and that's what we were saying at that time 

and we say it still.  We have to get into some long-term 

strategy programs.  And we were calling on a five-year strategy 

approach to be used. 

 

We talked about things like how to distribute the monies that 

farmers needed, and there are several vehicles you can and 

might use in order to distribute funds to farmers.  The NISA 

accounts because they're new were handy, and they could have 

worked in order to do that. 

 

It's unfortunate that every time we get into one of these new 

programs, we also build more bureaucracy and more red tape, 

and it becomes more and more difficult to get these programs 

to work in the kind of timely, fast manner that we need.  And in 

this situation I would suggest that we wouldn't go that route 

because the drought problem that we're talking about in the 

south-west needs an immediate kind of an attention -- the kind 

of an attention, I think, that would call on the provincial 

government here to look at some the ideas of assistance to 

moving cattle, assistance to moving feed stocks into place. 

 

(1430) 

 

There's nothing new about these, Mr. Speaker.  These are all 

old ideas, but they're ideas that have been used in a time-tested 

way in the area of drought where it has happened before in the 

past.  And so I think what we have to do is look back at history 

and dig up those programs and plans that worked well before, 

and re-use them and 

revisit them to the communities that need them.  And we do 

need that assistance. 

 

And it's amazing how this spring we watched the grass out in 

the hills not really turn green.  Instead of going from a sort of a 

winter brownish colour, it went to a kind of a funny white grey.  

And of course when that happens you know that the root 

systems are in serious trouble.  And what happens with native 

grass is that they go into a kind of a dormant stage, and they 

will in fact revive when rain comes and they will relive. 

 

Tame hay and feeds are not quite so persistent in drought.  And 

when they take on that colour, often the plants die and the 

farmers have to reseed them.  So you have to revisit some of 

the old ideas of bringing in seeding programs, assistance for 

grass seed to reseed after the drought is over, and if it happens 

to start raining, to replace those plants.  And I would suggest to 

the government that they take some serious looks at that kind 

of an approach in the drought area, because certainly there 

won't be enough plants there if this drought continues for much 

longer where the tame seed grasses are. 

 

We also suggested as far back as last fall that the grain 

handling industry must be designated an essential service.  And 

I think that that would be important to do at this time too, Mr. 

Speaker, because the members opposite to us have suggested 

that we didn't have any ideas and that we're not being 

co-operative.  Well we're offering you some ideas and we're 

offering you some co-operation in helping you to bring these 

programs into effect. 

 

And there are considerable amounts of preamble in here that 

we could offer to the members opposite quite easily, if they 

would like to have it because we certainly want to share these 

ideas for the benefit of people in agriculture. 

 

We also said at that time that the provincial government will 

continue its abeyance of legal actions against cash-starved 

farmers by ACS until both interim GRIP payments were made.  

And that kind of an approach should be revisted as well, Mr. 

Speaker, because obviously those farmers and producers in 

south-west Saskatchewan are among those many in the 

province who have ACS loans to pay and those kind of debts 

that they will have to face with no production of grass or hay or 

feed this year.  And if the crops are gone, the same thing 

applies to the grain farmers.  And if they can't make their 

payments on these ACS loans, we'll have to revisit some of 

these old ideas of attempting to alleviate for those farmers the 

needs to make those payments this year because they simply 

won't be able to do it. 

 

And I don't think it's really the best for the government to use 

the non-payment of ACS loans as a vehicle to become the 

owners of farm land.  I think probably enough institutions 

already own enough land that it's probably time that we took a 

little bit easy on foreclosures and did something in that area, 

because it's going to become a serious situation especially in 

light of the announcement that the livestock cash advances will 

no longer be interest free. 



June 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1037 

And you're going to find an awful lot of ranchers and livestock 

producers out there that are simply not going to be able to pay 

the interest on these advances that they have.  And had they not 

gone though some serious years before and could simply say, 

well we'll now pay these loans back, that would be simple.  The 

truth of the matter is that we've had some difficult recessionary 

times in agriculture, and these folks just simply don't have the 

cash flow to be able to pay this money back. 

 

So in view of the fact that they can't pay it back, are going to 

have to pay interest now on top of everything else, their 

operations are in serious jeopardy of foreclosure.  And I want 

to suggest most emphatically that the government should take a 

look at its provincial program here and perhaps stay this idea 

for another year, of putting interest on the livestock cash 

advances. 

 

It is a suggestion for you to consider.  And if you are 

suggesting, as you did before, that we are non-co-operative and 

that we are not trying to assist you, then we want you to take a 

look at the proposals that we're giving you.  We're making 

suggestions to you of a way to solve some of the problems out 

there in this serious drought area, as well as in the cash short 

area of the rest of the province.  You might want to back up a 

step and cancel some of your plans to come in so hard on 

agriculture and agricultural producers and give them a year's 

breathing space or maybe even longer. 

 

We have made suggestions, Mr. Speaker, about the 

Saskatchewan land transfer agencies.  We've talked about water 

works in Saskatchewan as far back as last fall.  And I think we 

should visit that old plan for a minute again. 

 

In the past the administration of our province has worked in 

conjunction with the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 

Administration) and other groups like that to provide assistance 

to producers to get water for their farms and for their livestock. 

 

You could introduce a program such as the one that was in 

place before, where 40 millions of dollars, I think it was, was 

put into a fund to assist farmers with the digging of dugouts 

and the digging of new wells. 

 

If we're going to look at any kind of assistance where we bring 

feed in or attempt to help producers to keep their livestock 

herds up, we also have to provide water for those animals.  And 

in those areas where the dugouts are going dry and if the water 

tables are dropping, then you also have to visit this plan of 

producing some water and having water available. 

 

Now this may mean going into some deep-well digging or that 

type of thing and this gets very expensive, Mr. Speaker.  It can 

cost the farmer 20 or $30,000 to dig one well if he has to go 

down to the 300 or 600 foot level in order to find water. 

 

And so I want the members opposite to take a minute to think 

about the possibility of bringing in some programs that will 

assist producers out there with the digging of new water wells 

and the expansion of, the cleaning out of, or the digging of new 

dugouts, and those kinds of things that might help -- even 

pipelines. 

We had in the past many programs where there were water 

pumps with a whole great deal of pipe made available by the 

Department of Agriculture or the Department of Rural 

Development.  I'm not sure which department handled it, but 

they had these pumps and pipes available and they were leased 

out to the farmers. 

 

It could be done through the municipalities to keep track of the 

equipment.  I'm sure that everyone out there would co-operate 

in the handling of these programs. 

 

Dugouts were filled from rivers many miles away in some 

cases.  And it's a difficult operation, it's a lot of work, but the 

farmers and the producers out there were willing in the past to 

do that kind of thing.  And I'm quite certain that they would be 

willing to do it again if the government would make those 

things available to the producers. 

 

So there's another idea for you.  It's not real expensive, because 

I think that most likely those pumps and those pipes are still 

available out in the country, stored somewhere.  You could dig 

that program up out of the moth-balls; revisit it to the 

communities that are hit by drought and provide them with that 

opportunity to be able to pump water from the rivers or from 

wherever there is. 

 

You could assist with a bit of mileage for those people maybe 

that have to load tanks on trucks to haul water and that kind of 

approach could be of some assistance to the producers out 

there. 

 

We have suggested in the past that $13.1 billion was brought 

into this province over the past 10 years through diplomacy and 

negotiation.  It wasn't a confrontational approach that got those 

dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to suggest to the members opposite in our 

government that if they want truly to get money from the 

federal government, they won't get it by going and 

metaphorically kicking them in the knee.  If you want to get 

money from the federal government, you're going to have to 

show a spirit of co-operation. 

 

If you want to do as well, dealing with the federal government 

on behalf of farmers and agricultural producers throughout this 

province, as was done in the past, you will have to revisit your 

plans of how you're approaching this whole situation and this 

whole area of attempting to convince the government in Ottawa 

that you are worth helping, that you as a provincial government 

are worth taking a look at and assisting farmers. 

 

So the responsibility falls on the administration here to go back 

to Ottawa and eat a little crow, if that's what it takes, and 

maybe apologize for some of the actions that have been taken 

in the last few months and start over.  Because there certainly is 

an adversarial fever developing between this provincial 

government and our federal government, especially in the area 

of assistance for agricultural producers. 

 

And that fever has got to be controlled and put out somehow.  

Someone is going to have to do that proverbial 



1038 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1992 

old thing and eat some crow and back up and apologize and 

restart this whole process of negotiations. Because otherwise 

you will never see that $13 billion of assistance that this 

province is going to have to have for agricultural producers in 

the next four or five years, if you're going to have any industry 

left at all, as we are heading into the direction that we seem to 

be going, with the GATT talks not really be resolved and some 

good possibilities that they may not be resolved.  And if that 

happens, we're going to be in serious trouble and we're going to 

have to talk real nice to the fellows down in Ottawa. 

 

I hope that the GATT thing goes well for us, that the price of 

wheat goes up to $8 a bushel, and that cattle go up to $2 a 

pound.  But I don't think it's going to happen.  So you're going 

to have to face the reality that we're going to have to stick 

around maybe with our hat in hand and talk nicely to Ottawa.  

And I think you have to show leadership here at the provincial 

level in order to get that kind of assistance started. 

 

It cannot be a confrontational approach.  We must do it with 

quiet diplomacy and politeness. 

 

Sometime back we have 57,000 farmers that received $1.1 

billion through the 1986 production loan program.  A lot of 

people felt that that program was very good. There were some 

that said no, it wasn't that good because it gave us money too 

easily and we found that we spend it too easily. 

 

And I think that's a fair assessment, as I remember my days 

working with counselling and assistance for farmers and 

visiting some farmers who found themselves in some financial 

troubles.  And they said that one of the problems was that they 

hadn't learned to use the money they were borrowing in the 

right way yet.  They were so used to having easy dollars 

coming in in the '70s and the early '80s that they hadn't realized 

that a recession caused a very great difficulty in paying back 

some of those dollars.  But for most of the farmers, this money 

was used wisely and correctly and it kept them going for a 

couple of years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can show you example after example after 

example of people that took that money, paid down high 

interest loans, loans that they had got caught up in in the early 

'80s at 18 and 20 and up as high as 24 per cent interest.  They 

paid off the principal on those loans, restructured their loans, 

and got them back into a realistic range that they could afford 

to live with. 

 

One producer that I know of, and obviously I won't name his 

name, but he had $50,000 worth of increase in his cost in one 

year from the increase on his interest rates -- in one year, in the 

early 1980s.  And that's how the agricultural sector was 

devastated by high interest rates. 

 

In 1986 that production program helped people to be able to 

bail out of a lot of those bad interest rate loans and get them 

into reduced amounts.  And that's important, Mr. Speaker.  And 

it might be time for us to address a program -- I'm not saying 

exactly like that one, but something along that line -- to allow 

people to bring down their principal amounts of money owed 

to the banks so that they can restructure their loans at today's 

lower interest rates. 

There are a lot of producers paying 11, 12, even 15 per cent 

interest.  In fact I think I know of one case where it's likely 16 

yet.  And if they could revisit those bankers with some cash 

money that they could say, we're going to use this to restructure 

our loans and get down to a 6 or 7 per cent interest rate, then 

they would be in much healthier financial shape.  So there's 

another thing that you can take a look at as a point of how to 

address the serious problems that we have, not only in the 

drought area but in the entire area of agricultural production. 

 

Back in the 1980s we had farmers saving over $388 million in 

interest payments through interest reduction programs, Mr. 

Speaker.  Here again was the government's approach to the 

problems in agriculture. Instead of increasing power rates, 

instead of increasing telephone rates, instead of increasing all 

of the fixed costs that producers have to pay, the government of 

the day decided to assist farmers with interest rates, because 

when it was at 18 per cent and all those kinds of crazy high 

numbers, that's where the people needed assistance and that's 

where they got their assistance.  And I think the government 

really should take a close look at some of those ideas. 

 

(1445) 

 

In 1984 -- I mentioned to you the counselling and assistance for 

farmers program -- and at that time it had reviewed . . . last 

year up to 6,000 applications had been received and we had 

loan guarantees for 3,700 farmers for a total of 343 millions of 

dollars that were invested in the program to assist producers in 

this province.  And we haven't seen one program, Mr. Speaker, 

out of this government in its seven months of administration -- 

not one program that assists agriculture in any way. 

 

All we see before us is Bills cancelling all of the programs that 

were ever there before.  And a lot of these programs have been 

cancelled, not through legislation but through orders in cabinet 

or orders in council or whatever they call them, but they just 

swept them away and they're gone. 

 

And then they say to us that they want our co-operation in 

helping to alleviate the problem.  And we're here to say that 

we're going to suggest to you that a lot of the programs of the 

past could be redesigned to match the needs of today and 

brought back in by this government. 

 

And so we're going to suggest, Mr. Speaker, to this 

government, that they do some of these things and assist not 

only the people in the drought area but all of the producers in 

Saskatchewan.  Two hundred million dollars through the 

agriculture development fund was provided.  We had $157 

million in the spring seeding loans, just in one year, to help 

farmers. 

 

And you may have to look at those kinds of investments, not 

only in grass seed, but you may have to go out and start 

looking at investing some of that kind of money into a 

reseeding program for this year.  In the cereal crops in those 

areas where the drought is so severe, those producers probably 

don't have the wherewithal financially to be able to go out and 

put more seed in the 



June 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1039 

ground. 

 

And even though it's getting quite late in the season to get a 

cereal crop, if you do get a rain and you can find some dollars 

to put seed in the ground, you can plant some crops that will 

give you crop growth and stop the soil from blowing away 

through the rest of the summer and next winter and on into next 

spring. 

 

And that's a very serious situation that has to be addressed very 

quickly, because if those producers don't get that seeding done 

immediately after any rain that does come, you will lose the 

opportunity -- the window of opportunity -- to get some growth 

on that land to stop serious soil erosion from wind and 

whatever else comes along through the fall and the winter. 

 

So I urge the government to look strongly at providing the 

necessity that is required to bring seed to those farmers and the 

cash flow that they would need to be able to put that seed in, in 

order to keep that soil erosion problem from developing.  And 

it's got to be there, ready to be triggered on a minute's notice, as 

soon as a shower comes by. 

 

We saw programs like $140 million in loans to the livestock 

producers through ACS livestock cash advance programs.  And 

I talked to you a minute ago about that.  And you really have to 

consider the position you've taken of putting the interest rates 

on those programs, especially in light of this disaster that you 

have just yourself declared with this very motion.  You've 

declared there's an emergency and cash flow is going to be a 

part of that emergency, and piling interest rates onto those cash 

advances at this time is certainly not going to alleviate the 

problem. 

 

So rethink it, consider your thoughts here, and maybe you can 

put it off for a year or two and help those producers in those 

areas. 

 

Over a $115 million through crop and livestock drought 

programs was provided, and we have now another drought 

program.  So maybe it's time to look at things like the crop 

insurance program and extending to those producers 100 per 

cent coverage instead of 80 per cent.  Maybe we'd better take a 

look at some of those things that were done before in those 

drought areas, things that worked for the producers then and 

brought about some cash flow in those areas.  There's another 

suggestion for you. 

 

Over $100 million in the past to farmers through various ad 

hoc programs, and you know very well that there is in the 

budget $150 million that we managed to get a commitment 

from the minister the other day by questions.  There's $150 

million in contingency for emergencies into the budget, and 

we're calling on you now to take a look at that 150 million that 

we managed to get you to admit that it was there in the budget. 

It's available yet without creating any more deficit. And that is 

the money that we think that you should target now to the 

drought area.  And do it in whatever ad hoc way you have to, 

to help those producers, but think of something and do it fairly 

soon. 

Ninety-two million dollars went to our agricultural colleges 

and institutes, and these are the kinds of plans that were 

designed for that long-term strategy that we talked about a few 

minutes ago.  The kind of long-term strategy where you study 

and research what you're going to do in a strategy to help all of 

agriculture, what you're going to do to fight things like drought, 

what you would do to fight things like too much rainfall, 

perhaps.  And the University of Saskatchewan certainly used 

that money for good advantage in providing the buildings that 

were needed up there and the kind of research that is ongoing 

and necessary for our industry. 

 

We had the feeder association loan program, the guaranteed 

programs.  And here we had 72.5 millions of dollars that was 

offered in loans back in those days, and those feeder 

associations, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to you, worked 

very well in the feeding industry.  Along with putting our 

province in a competitive position with Alberta with the 

FeedGAP program, the feeder association loan program 

provided producers the opportunity to be able to get the loans 

necessary to buy the livestock to put into their own small 

feedlots and keep those cattle at home to feed. 

 

Now we have to consider, Mr. Speaker, in a situation where we 

have a declared disaster in drought, we have to consider the 

possibility of bringing not only this program into an updated 

position to help producers to get the money they'll need to keep 

those calves here this fall, but we're going to have to revisit that 

problem that the FeedGAP not being here is causing as we get 

uncompetitive with Alberta and the Americans and Manitoba 

again. 

 

We once again find ourselves in a trough in the middle of this 

country where we are not competitive with our neighbours.  I'm 

not saying that what Alberta has done is right or fair.  The fact 

that they have done it, though, makes it absolutely incumbent 

upon us to be competitive by producing the same playing-field 

for our producers. 

 

And if we don't do that, we're going to not only see a drop of 

10 cents a pound in our calves this fall -- which I'm predicting 

will happen because of the FeedGAP cancelling -- but we will 

see all of the calves leaving this province and none will be fed 

this year.  And that means that there will be a lot of producers 

without work, not only for themselves but for those people that 

they employ.  It also means a loss of the spin-off of the 

industries in packing plants and all the other things. 

 

And you've heard it all before.  But you've got to be reminded, 

I think, because somehow you seem to have forgotten the 

effects that all of this can have on the entire base of our 

taxation in our province.  You've killed one industry and it 

ripples into other industries.  And when you ship all of the 

calves out of Saskatchewan to somewhere else, then you lose 

all of the spin-offs that go with killing of beef and pork or 

whatever animals you're talking about and the whole related 

industry. 

 

And in the drought area, Mr. Speaker, you're going to have to 

take an even better look at this situation and give more 

attention to it, because now you have the added weight of 

drought with no cash flow.  The feed grain 



1040 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1992 

adjustment program put out $9.3 million of assistance to 

livestock producers up to last fall.  That was a major 

commitment to the industry that it made it survive where 

otherwise it would have been gone. 

 

We had all kinds of plans to assist rural people, and I want to 

point out, Mr. Speaker, that there are some very fundamental 

things that could help even in a drought area that don't relate 

directly to drought assistance.  For example, if you had helped 

the people that don't have natural gas on their farms and 

ranches out in the places that are far away from the urban 

centres, they could save a lot of money on their heating costs 

for their houses and shops and that sort of thing. 

 

And that program is still not finished.  I had a request just the 

other day from farmers out west of Gull Lake who had applied 

for two years now to get the natural gas line put in and they 

were just on the verge of getting that program to go ahead 

when the present government took power and it went on hold.  

Those producers, if they could get natural gas, could save half 

of their heating costs and this would greatly help them, not 

only in drought years but for years and years to come if they 

could get that program back into place.  I happen to know that 

this is a good program because I put this particular natural gas 

line project to use on my farming operation and it did in fact 

cut the costs in half to heat our farm home. 

 

We have had things like the breeder association loan guarantee 

program and a whole bunch of other ideas that we have listed 

here.  And, Mr. Speaker, we want this government to know that 

we have a lot of ideas that we're willing to share about how to 

help this drought situation and how to help the entire 

agricultural situation in our province because the problem is a 

big one. 

 

And we've got to think of ideas to do that because the minister 

just a few minutes ago got up and said that we weren't 

co-operative, that we weren't giving him ideas or assisting him.  

Well we're going to give you a whole bunch of ideas, and we're 

going to show you how we will help you to get these ideas into 

place to help the people in rural Saskatchewan, not only in the 

drought area but more specifically there than other areas right 

now because that's the immediate problem.  But we want a 

long-term strategy from you.  We want a long-term look at how 

we're going to solve this problem for a long time to come. 

 

Now we've got investment loan programs.  The past 

administration put up $6 million to establish large-scale hog 

operations.  And what have we seen from the government 

opposite to encourage hog production in the last few days here?  

We've seen the FeedGAP cancelled and almost totally 

devastate any plans of expansion in the hog industry. 

 

You've got to take a look, I think, at things like the drought 

area as being a good target area to put some money into to 

encourage that kind of diversification.  If you have farmers that 

have a hog barn and can produce some hogs and bring some 

grain in, then they can get cash flow out of that diversified 

enterprise on their farm, and they don't have to be totally 

dependent on the weather outside on each individual year. 

And so you have to rethink the idea of perhaps putting some 

money into investments to help people to diversify in those 

areas where drought and other kinds of disaster hit and 

especially in those areas where they happen to hit frequently. 

 

And so you've got to look not only at those programs, but 

we've got to also start looking at spending some time on the 

international centres and on the international scene.  We've got 

to look at science and technology and getting people with 

intelligence in the industry to go to the places like the GATT 

talks and visit people and try to straighten out some of these 

long-term problems. 

 

If these farmers all had money in the bank because things were 

going right in the last few years, you wouldn't have probably 

even heard of them this one year because farmers are a tough 

group of people who put a dollar away when they've got one.  

The trouble is that they don't have any dollars left because 

every dollar they saved in the '70s and early '80s is now gone.  

And the recession has cleaned their bank accounts out, and now 

there aren't any dollars left to fight off a bad year.  So they have 

to be here, hat in hand immediately, and what we've got to do is 

get a long-term strategy that puts some dollars back into the 

agricultural bank accounts. 

 

We've had the save our soils program, Mr. Speaker, working in 

our area for some time.  And I should imagine that an awful lot 

of the producers that are involved in this drought right now are 

really happy that they're involved with that particular program, 

because they will have their soil protected with residue as a 

result of having followed the good management practices that 

goes with a program like the save our soils program. 

 

Unfortunately not everyone will be in that situation because a 

lot of fields are open now with the cultivation having been 

required to accomplish the job of spring seeding.  And when 

you seed your crop in the spring and if it doesn't come up or if 

it comes up and dies off because of the drought, then the soil is 

opened up.  The trash is basically buried, and we're going to 

have a very serious problem. 

 

So I think we have to look at the long-term strategy of helping 

the save our soils programs and programs like that so that they 

continue to work.  The no-till seeding type of approach with 

the chem-fallow programs and those kinds of things are very 

necessary especially in our drought area.  And this government 

should look at expanding its assistance in those areas. 

 

We've had a lot of money spent in the rural areas, Mr. Speaker, 

in areas like underground power lines.  And you'll say, well 

what difference would that make?  Well let me tell you what 

happens out in a drought area with power lines if you happen to 

get a freak storm, and that's when you get these freak storms is 

in a drought situation.  The thunder and lightening storms are 

produced by heat that rises from the ground and creates the 

disturbances upstairs, and the lightning strikes that knock down 

an overhead power line can cause terrible fires throughout the 

country. 



June 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1041 

And the underground power program that the past 

administration put into this province spent several millions of 

dollars, and it helped an awful lot of farmers to get the 

underground power program.  And those lines of course are 

much safer, and I think our government should be reminded 

that here's another idea where they could expand and work to 

help rural Saskatchewan by completing that program.  If many 

more miles of that power line was underground, we wouldn't be 

facing the possibility of all these fires from lightning strikes on 

the power lines. 

 

(1500) 

 

We have in our province 72 rural development corporations, 

Mr. Speaker.  And those are important to rural people because 

here again we talk about a diversification, and we want to 

encourage this administration to pursue that line of thinking of 

providing these kinds of diversifications for our communities. 

 

There are all kinds of things that you can do.  You can get 

away from ideas like a land bank and help people to own their 

own land and to keep it by revisiting the ideas of cancelling 

some of the interest rates on ACS loans.  You could assist with 

those folks that have interest rates in other areas as well.  And 

you can provide all kinds of support for people in agriculture 

that can help them to get through a drought period of time so 

that they can feel confident to go on with another year. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I spoke at some length here about the 

situation in terms of what the government can do and some 

ideas that ran through my head that we have provided. 

 

And we want the government to know that we are willing not 

only to offer these suggestions to you but we are more than 

willing to help you to bring them into place.  We are not 

unco-operative in the area of assisting agricultural producers in 

the drought area.  We are more than happy and more than 

willing to do anything that we have to, to bring some assistance 

to this area. 

 

And all of these kinds of suggestions and every other one that 

anyone can think of should be re-examined and relooked at, 

and some attempt made to bring these things into place so that 

the producers in those drought areas can in fact survive this 

drought period.  It's an extremely difficult time for them, Mr. 

Speaker, and our hearts go out to them.  And we certainly will 

co-operate with this government to find whatever is necessary 

to help them through this difficult period of time.  Thank you 

for your time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was anxious to 

speak on this resolution and I thank the member from Maple 

Creek for being . . . sticking right to the point and not using up 

all the time here. 

 

I'm anxious to speak to this, Mr. Speaker, because the disaster 

situation that the minister spoke of, it's right in the heart of the 

Shaunavon constituency, the constituency I represent.  And I 

spent last Monday out driving through 

the constituency -- pretty well the full day in the Frontier area 

-- meeting with the RMs (rural municipalities) and many farm 

groups and groups of ranchers that would come in and discuss 

their situations with me. 

 

And in touring some of the Frontier area and south on Monday, 

what I saw was real depressing.  You know, the crops they're 

pretty much shot and the pasture situation . . . the dugouts are 

dry.  There's no water or very little water.  The pastures down 

there, there's very little grazing.  They're not going to be able to 

sustain any carrying capacity of the cattle for very long. 

 

And what I noticed, Mr. Speaker, was the concern that these 

farmers and ranchers had down in that area is genuine.  They 

are very concerned that they're perhaps going to have to sell 

cattle.  And what bothers myself, Mr. Speaker, is I don't know 

if they'll ever be able to get back in if they get out of the cattle 

industry this year. 

 

They had a great deal of feed to carry over from last year and 

many of these people had not even stopped feeding from last 

winter.  It looks like they'll have to continue to feed right on 

through the summer.  And of course their stocks, their 

feedstocks, are going to be way down. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they have . . . a large number of the farmers 

and ranchers are already shipping cattle out.  It's a situation that 

we're monitoring and we got to keep right on top of this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday we had about seven or eight of my 

colleagues and the Minister of Agriculture in the Shaunavon 

constituency for the full day.  We met in Mankota and had a 

meeting there with the two RMs from that area; had a real good 

meeting too.  The people, they brought forward their concerns, 

and we talked openly about the positive and negatives of past 

programs, whether it be hauling feed into these areas or hauling 

the cattle out or pellets.  And we talked on the pros and cons.  It 

was just a real positive meeting. 

 

And there too, their pastures all across the south, they're in the 

same situation.  Areas that were very spotty with the rains, 

they're having a serious water shortage down there.  We talked 

about whether we could have . . . or work in conjunction with 

PFRA to get back to a well-drilling program or have the RMs 

into a well-drilling program with PFRA, or assistance in 

digging of dugouts. 

 

But what we noticed there once again was the farmers and 

ranchers are . . . the meetings are so positive.  They are very 

appreciative that we're coming out to see the situation and stay 

right on top of it and see what we can make of it. 

 

From Mankota, Mr. Speaker, we travelled over to the area in 

Val Marie.  And some of my friends in the Val Marie area that 

ranch and farm down there, they were able to take us and show 

us some of these pasture areas and crops.  There too it's no 

different.  In fact I think from Mankota, the further to the west 

you go, the worse it gets. 

 

What we did have a chance to look at, Mr. Speaker, was the 

Masefield community pasture, which I spoke on in this 

legislature about ten days, two weeks ago.  That was 



1042 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1992 

the pasture that had the fire.  It's neighbouring the Grasslands 

Park.  And at that time I'd asked the members opposite to join 

in and support the need of those people in that area to perhaps 

have emergency grazing in the Grasslands Park. 

 

And we drove out and took a look at where the fire had been.  

It's black for miles, as far as you can see.  And the pastures, 

nearby pastures, are gone or near gone at this point because of 

the drought.  And here right beside we have Grasslands Park 

and areas in that park there the grass is knee-high or higher and 

not being grazed at all. 

 

And I still am going to ask the members opposite to do what 

they can to lobby their federal counterparts to perhaps allow 

emergency grazing in that Grasslands Park.  I've received word 

back from Bill McKnight, the federal Minister of Agriculture, 

that he has referred the matter to the Environment minister.  So 

if the members opposite would please get a hold of the 

Environment minister and do what they can, not for political 

reasons but for reasons that the ranchers down there need a 

place to put the 1,200 head of cattle affected and just set 

politics aside and give us a hand on this one, I know the 

ranchers in that area would really appreciate that from you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know how serious the drought is, but the 

member from Maple Creek spoke of off-loading.  What he 

didn't allude to was some of the federal off-loading that our 

federal government has been doing onto this province over the 

last nine and a half, ten years and how they were allowed to do 

it because the members opposite, some of those members, were 

in government at that time and not only allowed it to happen, 

but supported it. 

 

I look back at things like the 1981-82 Crow freight rate, the 

fixed rate.  It was members opposite that fought the New 

Democrat government of the day to do away with that fixed 

rate.  And here we are on the slippery slope now.  They're 

backing their federal counterparts in allowing the Crow benefit 

to be in danger now.  They spent the winter having meetings all 

along the south line, all throughout the province. And the 

people down there have a fear that if we allow them to go 

ahead and change the method of payment on the freight rate, 

what we're going to see is the abandonment of rail lines down 

there. 

 

And what the members opposite have to realize, these 

communities down there that's their lifeline, Mr. Speaker.  

They're 40 and 50 miles apart, some of those communities, and 

that railroad is just all too important.  And we, I think, as 

Saskatchewan producers and government, we have got to stick 

together on this one and make sure that the method of payment 

remains being paid to the railways so that we don't have a 

change in where the lines are and putting others in jeopardy, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Also I notice that the members opposite when the Free Trade 

Agreement was being forced upon us by the federal 

government, the members opposite, they supported that.  In 

fact they campaigned rather vigorously for it. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Go talk to Mike Harcourt about it. 

Mr. McPherson: -- I notice the member from Thunder Creek 

now speaking about that.  But he helped support that with his 

premier.  They toured not only the province but they toured 

Canada, Mr. Speaker.  And what we lost out of that Free Trade 

Agreement was a two-price wheat system which brought in 

another 200, $250 million to this province or to the grain 

system as a whole. 

 

And I didn't see the member from Thunder Creek at that time 

arguing for the farmers.  He was arguing more for the Free 

Trade Agreement, which the effects of the agreement are being 

felt, but the positive effects I and others around the province 

have yet to appreciate them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look down at some of my notes here at other 

federal off-loading.  And I see another one that the members on 

this side of the House had to fight and fight hard to keep was 

the interest-free cash advance.  And the federal government 

tried to pull away from the interest-free cash advance.  And the 

members on that side of the House, the members opposite, they 

weren't in support of that. 

 

But it was through a lot of lobbying from the members on this 

side and from the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool that we were 

actually able to keep that program in place, a much-needed 

program, especially at a time when the farmers are in such a 

cash flow crisis that interest-free cash advance is all too 

important.  And I hope we have put that to rest, but I can't be 

sure. 

 

And there again I'll have to ask the two members that are 

talking right now opposite that perhaps they should join with us 

for once.  And do it for the farmers, do it for the people that 

actually need that cash flow, and give us a hand to support the 

people that it means most to.  And just stop playing politics 

with that one. 

 

I also see that when there were changes to the crop insurance, 

the federal government did a great deal of off-loading for the 

costs of operating the crop insurance program.  And the federal 

government at one time funded the crop insurance by some 50 

per cent, and they reduced their level of support to 25 per cent, 

putting the onus on the province and onto the producer. 

 

Well there again the members of this government, the members 

of this party, they fought hard to make sure that wouldn't 

happen or try to stop it.  But yet the government of the past, the 

members opposite when they were in government, they didn't 

fight for that.  And it meant so much to Saskatchewan 

producers, yet they weren't there backing the producers.  They 

allowed that to happen.  They were more interested in ad 

hoc-ery instead of being out there and defending long-term 

programs which today mean so much. 

 

Another one, Mr. Speaker, I see was the western grain 

stabilization where the feds also off-loaded.  And in that 

program, Mr. Speaker, they were paying I think it was $2 for 

every dollar that the producer put into the program. 

 

And I know I spoke on this last week also, but here we now 

have the federal government sending out bills from the western 

grain stabilization, asking that farmers -- and for the most part, 

farmers in Saskatchewan -- to repay 



June 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1043 

$41 million that they say is an overpayment in the western 

grain stabilization fund.  When in fact, Mr. Speaker, it was a 

full year ago that some of the members opposite were actually 

going around in preparation in the campaign and saying that, 

oh well, there'll be a $500 million western grain stabilization 

pay-out.  And not to confuse that with the third line of defence 

argument they were using at the same time, another $500 

million third line of defence argument. 

 

(1515) 

 

Well there again the farmers in this province, that $41 million 

that we're being asked to repay . . . and I brought forward an 

emergency resolution on that Friday before last, stating that we 

will pay that 41 million but we want the $459 million that they 

are still short, because it was promised.  It was promised for 

election reasons.  Well now we want help from the members 

opposite to get that from the federal government, get that 

money.  We consider it, and the farmers consider it, to still be 

owing.  And we ask them for their support on that one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look at what's happened during the '80s, and 

what I saw were 1985 and 1988, two years in which we had 

serious drought in this province, and in both of those years 

some of the members opposite were in government.  And at 

that time, Mr. Speaker, they had no problem in having their 

premier fly down to Ottawa and ask for help, specific help just 

because of the drought, over and above any government 

programs of the day. 

 

And that is what we're going to ask once again, Mr. Speaker.  If 

they found it in their hearts and if they knew that the crisis was 

severe in '85 and '88, that they would take part in asking and 

lobbying the federal government for monies then, surely they 

weren't doing it for just political reasons or to try and get 

re-elected. 

 

But I ask them once again, take part.  Take part in this and 

share in getting some money for this drought area.  By and 

large it's not a huge area but it is so severe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we left the Val Marie area and went over to Orkney we 

had a meeting with about four RMs and a concerned group for 

a few hours.  It was another positive meeting but we had a 

good look at the crops.  The further west we went the worse it 

got.  Some of those crops, Mr. Speaker, only a third to a half of 

them ever germinated.  It just looks terrible and these guys do 

need the help down there.  There's no question they need the 

help. 

 

And that's what we're asking here today, is that we all join 

together and see if we can't get the federal Minister of 

Agriculture, Bill McKnight, out here to view the situation, to 

see if he can't find it in his heart to come up with some money 

now instead of waiting for an election. 
 

And there's no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that they have money.  I 

take a look at the GST (goods and services tax) that they're 

charging.  Well when they first wanted to bring in the GST 

they were talking of some $10 billion net revenue from the 

GST.  It wasn't too long into that argument and that figure rose 

then to some $18 billion.  And yet I noticed when the federal 

budget come down that 18 billion net revenue didn't show up in 

there. 

I, like a lot of people in the province, are very suspect that 

perhaps there's money being set aside to try and win the next 

federal election.  I hope that perhaps they could just find it in 

their hearts to perhaps reach into their pockets and help out 

now when an area such as the south-west needs this help. 

 

It's all important, the cash flow crisis, Mr. Speaker, as the 

minister stated before and I've said is severe down there.  

There's got to be something done for the feed and the cattle but 

money's so short you're looking at a thousand dollars a load to 

bring feed in and nobody has that kind of money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I noticed also . . . We were all along the south line right along 

the 49th parallel looking at some of the crops and pastures -- 

and a few miles south of where we were at one point in the 

state of Montana they had the same situation, the drought goes 

for many miles.  But I see there that the state has declared it . . . 

a state of emergency is being declared in that state.  And the 

federal government, the federal U.S. government is looking at 

providing funds to assist their farmers and ranchers and that's 

over and above any programs that they have also.  So if the 

States can find it in their hearts to have their federal 

government support their state's cause on behalf of the farmers 

and ranchers, that's all we ask of the members opposite, to join 

with us and get the Minister of Agriculture out here, take a look 

at this area, and let's get something done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this resolution is very important to some of the 

members opposite because they are representing south-western 

constituencies as I am, and I'm just going to ask them once 

more to please share with us and support all the measures 

necessary to get the job done.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I recognize that 

there are several other members who wish to speak to the 

resolution this afternoon, therefore I'll keep my comments brief 

and to the point. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of the motion that this Assembly 

recognizes the devastating drought conditions facing livestock 

and grain producers in south-western Saskatchewan and 

request the federal Minister of Agriculture to visit the area and 

take steps to provide financial assistance to alleviate these 

disastrous circumstances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, natural disasters like drought are unpredictable.  

In fact if they were predictable, they wouldn't exist.  It is 

difficult to assess these disasters unless they are observed first 

hand, such as the member indicated the delegation and the visit 

that went into this area yesterday. 

 

I speak from experience when I talk about drought, because in 

1980 and 1988 I was in that very same situation, only on a 

much smaller scale in terms of the provincial drought situation.  

And it's not an easy issue to deal with when you're affected.  

And I understand the feelings and the emotions and the stress 

that farmers in the 



1044 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1992 

affected areas are experiencing at this particular time. 

 

I also represent an area of the province where we have the 

opposite problem this spring.  In fact there are still many 

farmers in my area that have not completed seeding, and I'm 

one of those, for the simple reason that it's just simply too wet, 

and we've had an ample amount of moisture.  And I suppose if 

we could do things that we wanted to do, if it were possible to 

do, it would be great to move this moisture 3 to 400 miles to 

the west of our province and allow them to enjoy some of that 

much-needed moisture and rainfall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government role is to protect residents and 

producers in times of disaster.  Such a time has arrived for the 

producers in south-west Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, I urge the 

co-operation of all members of the House and other producers 

and employers in the industry to help wherever they can.  For 

example, I see tonnes of hay in my area spoiling, sitting in 

sloughs of water, that perhaps could be used in case of 

emergency for the cattle producers in the stricken part of the 

province. 

 

Provincially we can't handle the situation by ourselves.  We 

need everyone's support including, and especially, the federal 

government.  We need their co-operation and assistance in 

addressing this problem.  My colleague had mentioned, south 

of the border the affected states -- those states affected by 

drought -- will be receiving assistance from their federal 

government.  Our farmers are no less important than our 

neighbours to the south. 

 

I remind you it is an urgent situation.  These producers have to 

have peace of mind on the issue.  And we need to show solid, 

unified support for such an emergency disaster program.  I urge 

all members to rally together to show the federal government 

that we are serious about the situation our producers are in and 

that we do need their help to address their needs.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'm 

glad I have the opportunity to enter in this debate to try to 

convince the federal Minister of Agriculture to come and take a 

look at the situation in the south-western corner of the 

province.  Certainly these people are facing some very tough 

times ahead. 

 

And talking about tough times, I've spoken in this Assembly 

before how when my grandfather settled here, when he first 

started to farm, he had to borrow seed from his neighbours and 

he was hailed out.  He had to go back to those same neighbours 

again, only the next year to be hailed out again, so going back 

to those neighbours the third time to get seed to seed his crop -- 

definitely went through some tough times, those early settlers. 

 

And there was no government help at all at those times.  I can 

remember my parents in the late '60s and the very early '70s 

when wheat, the price of wheat wasn't worth anything and there 

was a three bushel quota.  It was very tough times.  I remember 

we used to milk seven cows at that time just to put some food 

on the table and some clothing so we could go to school. 

So what those people in the south-west are facing right now, 

I'm sure it's very emotional and some very tough times, they're 

thinking, ahead.  So they definitely need some help from the 

rest of the province and from the rest of this country. 

 

I remember that we used to have a two-price wheat system, and 

it was negotiated at that time -- probably lost because the free 

trade deal with the United States.  But at that time the federal 

government had stated that all farmers would be receiving a 

subsidy or a payment equal to one-year price of what the 

two-price wheat system would have brought.  But personally I 

have not seen that payment and none of my constituents have.  

It was just a case of another promise made and another promise 

broken. 

 

And I rose in this Assembly before, and I had stated that prior 

to last fall's election, I phoned western grain stabilization 

personally and they had told me that yes there is probably 

going to be a huge pay-out.  And the rumour was going around 

it was going to be some place around 500 million final payment 

on the western grain stabilization.  After the election was over I 

phoned them again and they had said, we miscalculated, the 

payment is going to be much, much smaller.  And by this 

spring we found out exactly how much smaller -- in fact there 

was an overpayment. 

 

It seems that there was another miscalculation, a big 

miscalculation.  Was it maybe the fact that there was an 

election happening in the province of Saskatchewan where the 

federal government wanted their allies re-elected, and they 

were just playing games with farmers again?  So now the 

farmers have $41 million to pay back to the western grain 

stabilization plan. 

 

And it's not only going to hurt the farmers, it's going to hurt all 

sectors of this society.  You've taken 41 million directly out of 

Saskatchewan's economy.  And we've repeatedly called for it to 

the feds, is to take that 41 million overpayment and deduct it 

from the 500 million they owe the farmers -- the 500 million 

they promised on third line of defence -- and immediately pay 

the balance. 

 

That would certainly help some of the producers.  It's not the 

total answer but it certainly would help in this time of need. 

 

(1530) 

 

Then when I listen to some of the members opposite I hear 

them talking about the production loan and the spring seeding 

loan.  No doubt that helped some producers out.  But I am 

receiving countless, countless calls on this about: I can't make 

my payments; I wish I wouldn't have taken that loan.  It seems 

like every time there's a band-aid solution comes up, it may 

help the problem for a little while but it isn't the overall 

solution. 

 

We do need a national policy.  And when I hear some other 

members talking in this House about the two-price wheat 

system, no doubt in my mind, it helped out eastern Canada 

more than it did the West.  It's time now for co-operation that 

the West and East can work out a national policy for all of 

Canada.  We all need food in this 



June 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1045 

great country, all of Canada -- some co-operation, you know, 

programs targeted to average-size producers instead of the big 

wealthy producers, targeted to those in need. 

 

And we're talking, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the revitalization 

of rural Saskatchewan.  Something has to be done.  We have to 

have co-operation between both levels of government to make 

some sense out of this . . . some of these bad policies we had in 

the past, and get ourselves going in the right direction. 

 

And when we talk about the drought, we talk about the drought 

in the south-west, we definitely don't want a repeat of the last 

drought program that we went through.  We're still paying now 

$15 million a year to the feds for that program. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can tell you that in north-east 

Saskatchewan where I farm, some of our crops were just as bad 

as our neighbours' who were in a different township just across 

the road.  And some of those neighbours were receiving 14 and 

$15 per acre for the same type of crop that I grew and my 

neighbours grew.  And what we received was 36 cents per acre 

for our canola crop.  And there's no doubt in my mind, the 

administration probably cost five times that amount. 

 

So all I'm saying is when we get some kind of a drought 

package in place for the south-west, let's not have a repeat 

performance of the last one.  Let's have a fair performance and 

let's not have to pay for it for the next five, six years like what 

happened last time. 

 

And I would ask all members of this Assembly to co-operate 

on this resolution and to get the federal minister to come out 

and have a look at the situation, just see how bad it is out there 

in south-western Saskatchewan. 

 

Our provincial minister was out there with some of our ag 

caucus members and some of the reports are quite horrible.  

Indeed when they talk about 20 per cent to the crop, in some 

areas has germinated only 20 per cent and some of that has 

burnt off already.  The pastures are dry.  Some of the pastures 

are burnt. 

 

And you know the Grasslands Park has potential for a lot of 

grazing in there, so again we're asking for the co-operation of 

everyone in this Assembly to agree on this motion and get the 

federal minister to come out and have a look and see how bad 

the situation really is. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It's my pleasure 

to stand in my place to speak to the House today regarding the 

motion brought forward by the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

And certainly as a number of members have already indicated 

in this Assembly and my colleague from Maple Creek has 

indicated as well, when it comes to drought in rural 

Saskatchewan it has a disastrous effect on each and 

everyone of us.  It affects everyone of us in this province. 

 

I believe it was just recently there was an article in one of the 

local papers indicating the support that agriculture plays in the 

economic activity of this province.  And the fact that I believe 

it's some 45 per cent of the jobs, directly or indirectly, in this 

province are affected by agriculture. 

 

So when farmers are facing a difficult time, when agriculture is 

facing a difficult time, it plays on each and everyone of us in 

this province to really come to grips with the situation that is 

being faced by agricultural producers. 

 

As we've heard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the problem has certainly 

been magnified this spring in the south-western part of this 

province. 

 

As the member from Saltcoats indicated, his area has been 

inundated with moisture and rain. 

 

I come from an area too where seeding has really dragged out 

in the last three weeks due to rain.  But I don't hear anyone . . . 

if they do complain for a minute, Mr. Speaker, they all of a 

sudden remember the reports of the south-west and they say, 

well I guess we'd just as soon have the moisture and have the 

green conditions and have the less growth that we're seeing, not 

only in the fact that we can put our cattle out, our livestock out 

to pasture. 

 

And as conditions stand right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

certain we're probably in the position of maybe pasturing one 

and a half times per head on the same acres if the conditions 

would remain the same compared to a normal growing season.  

Which is certainly something to be thankful for in light of the 

fact that producers in the south-western part of Saskatchewan 

are facing the difficult challenge of wondering what to do with 

their livestock herds. 

 

And as we've heard recently . . . and some of the auctions 

across this province, and indeed in the south-west . . . I believe 

Maple Creek has already indicated they are starting to see 

breeding stock being sold off because the cattlemen in those 

areas just do not have sufficient pasture to maintain their herd.  

And for those of us in the livestock industry, when you start 

digging into a breeding herd that you've worked at for a 

number of years, it takes a while to bring that breeding herd 

back up and especially when that's your main income. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are concerned about the problems that the 

drought creates in the agricultural sector and in our province.  

We're concerned about it because it also plays an important 

role in the economic activity of our province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

When I think about the drought situation . . . we all can think 

back to times when we have at certain times, at different times 

in the period of our years on the farm, faced periods where we 

have had abnormally high rainfall or abnormally low rainfall.  

And certainly the situation that we face in the south-west, 

contrary to the south-east, it's hard to believe that in a province 

only -- what is it? -- about 4 or 500 miles wide or is it 6, I'm not 

sure right now, that we can have such a contrast.  But not 



1046 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1992 

only is it the south-western part of the province of 

Saskatchewan facing a problem, I know that Alberta, the 

southern part of Alberta, is facing the same kind of problem. 

 

And so it is imperative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we indeed 

look at ways in which we can work towards stabilizing the 

agricultural sector of our economy. 

 

Now the motion presented before us talks about approaching 

the federal government to live up to their responsibility, and no 

one will disagree with the fact that the federal government does 

have a responsibility, does have a major important role in 

supporting agriculture, supporting agricultural initiatives, not 

just in Saskatchewan but across this nation and across Canada.  

In fact, in participating in the negotiations right now at GATT, 

one of the major problems we face in agriculture is the fact that 

the imbalances in trade and subsidies across our world not only 

affect us here in Saskatchewan, but it affects agriculture 

production world-wide. 

 

So agriculture producers are not just facing drought situations 

and not just facing areas in this province where they're facing 

the fact that it's too wet to put a crop in the ground, but we have 

that continual problem of the subsidy war that we're facing and 

the lack of support for the product, the lack of price that we as 

producers would need for the product we are producing. 

 

But I would also suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that agricultural 

producers are facing another problem in this province, and it's 

the fact that the government of the day continually puts the 

onus on the federal government without realizing that they 

have a responsibility as well towards agriculture and towards 

the decisions they make that affect not only agriculture but 

education and health and so many other areas of our province.  

And it would be very easy for every one of us to always look at 

the other person and blame them for their lack of support and 

commitment. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that many of the producers in the 

south-west, if they had the opportunity and if they were able to 

sign up to the 1991 GRIP program as many have indicated, that 

the drought wouldn't be as disastrous to them as it is going to 

be in light of the 1992 GRIP program. 

 

Now we realize that the decision on the GRIP program is 

something that is still being negotiated and still being 

discussed.  And as we went through question period today and 

as it was brought forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fact is the 

questions regarding the GRIP program and stabilization of the 

farm economy is based on all governments working together 

along with the farm community and the agricultural sector to 

design programs in which producers could become involved so 

that the onus is taken off the taxpayer. 

 

Certainly the taxpayer is going to have a commitment to the 

agricultural sector and they're going to give a commitment to 

that agricultural sector.  But I believe the taxpayer wants to 

realize, as everyone else, that their dollars are spent wisely and 

efficiently. 

And when you look at the GRIP program -- the 1991 GRIP 

program -- and in light of the drought issue we're facing here, 

the 1991 GRIP program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly would 

give a guarantee to the grain producers in the south-western 

part of the province that they had a minimum dollar they could 

work with, that the costs of putting their crop in the ground . . . 

. even though the land was dry and even though right now the 

fertilizer and the chemicals that they're applying and the many 

times I'm sure they're sitting there wondering today whether 

they should even be going out and applying the chemicals to 

try and protect the crop from the weeds when the crop is drying 

up right in front of them.  And no doubt many producers will 

think twice before they apply the chemicals. 

 

But the GRIP program as we had in 1991 had a lot of flaws, 

and we all agree with that, and the federal government agreed 

with that and appointed a panel.  And indeed, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, next spring I understand the federal government will 

be taking recommendations from their panel and their 

committee to address some of the flaws and be revisiting the 

GRIP program again next year. 

 

So what's happening to Saskatchewan producers is the fact that 

not only were there annoyances about the 1991 GRIP program, 

but they're also facing the fact that now they have to make 

another decision with a major change regarding '92 program 

and then next year there'll be some more changes regarding 

GRIP and stabilization programs in the grain sector. 

 

So I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that for the government to 

put all the onus on the federal government -- certainly 

provincial governments have a responsibility within their 

jurisdiction as well.  They have a responsibility to support the 

people that have elected them to govern. 

 

And across my area of the province, there are people that are 

quite satisfied with the '92 program, Mr. Speaker.  But there are 

many people as well who would prefer to have the 1991 

program.  So in light of the questions that are raised out there, 

in light of the problems that farmers are facing, I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that it is very reasonable for us to ask the government 

to give producers the choice and find out. 

 

If indeed the '92 GRIP program is the answer, then allow 

producers to choose.  The producers will let them know 

whether or not they're happy or satisfied with the '92 program 

by the way they take up and become involved and accept the 

program. 

 

If a number of producers go back and take the '91 program 

which we may even see in the next little while, Mr. Speaker . . . 

the courts may give producers that option of going back to the 

'91 program although I suspect the government will be 

introducing legislation that will force producers to accept a 

program they don't like and deem that the information that was 

supposed to have been available to them by March 15 was 

indeed there when in fact we know it wasn't. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my opinion that is taking the top hand of the 

law instead of sitting down and consulting and 



June 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1047 

working together with people to iron out the problems that they 

are facing.  And of course in light of the changes, it creates a 

major problem to western producers in the south-west and the 

grain sector. 

 

But as well, Mr. Speaker, what about the cattle industry?  We 

are all aware as well of the problems that can be created when 

pastures went dry and when dugouts went dry, when water 

supplies run dry.  And I believe the member from Shaunavon 

talked about approaching the federal government and allowing 

producers to run livestock in the -- what was it? -- there was 

some heritage, wildlife land available in the south-west there.  

And, Mr. Speaker, that's an area of concern that I've had for a 

number of years. 

 

(1545) 

 

In our area I've had, since I've been elected to this House, 

producers on numerous occasions have approached me about 

the fact that they've been in a drought situation or their pastures 

have been bare.  We have wildlife land right adjacent to them.  

And, Mr. Speaker, the Wildlife Federation has suggested that 

that land should not be grazed and not be pastured.  The 

Department of Natural Resources has tended to agree and 

accept the recommendations of the Wildlife Federation.  You 

can have grass that's knee to waist high on one side of the 

fence, and yet you're forced to feed your cattle because you're 

lacking pasture. 

 

I would suggest that the government members take the time to 

talk to wildlife members as I've done in my area, and 

encourage their wildlife members who are farmers themselves 

to approach the Wildlife Federation and allow people to graze 

some of this wildlife land; allow it open.  And if they don't 

want to allow for grazing on that wildlife land or if they . . . I 

guess the fear they have many times, Mr. Speaker, is the fact 

that it would be over-grazed. 

 

Well there are many wildlife federations around this province 

and we can give them, rather than putting the onus on the 

Department of Natural Resources, the job of policing it.  Let 

the wildlife members police this wildlife land that they have 

taken control of through the wildlife development fund.  Let 

them decide how many cattle they would allow to pasture in 

this land that is sitting vacant and idle, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are certainly ways in which we can 

address some of the needs that are being faced, the immediate 

needs of farmers in the south-west. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as we've heard indicated today, the problem 

is not just the immediate needs; the problem is coming up with 

a long-term solution that gives the farmers a choice.  And I 

would suggest that when farmers have a choice to choose 

insurance and they don't take insurance, then it . . . they have 

given away their access to funds that are available to them to 

protect themselves.  And to come running to governments, Mr. 

Speaker, demanding money from governments and from the 

taxpayer when they said no to an insurance plan, in my opinion 

isn't right, isn't fair.  No farmer should accept the fact that the 

taxpayer should be there to just bail them out 

because they didn't try to protect themselves. 

 

So it's imperative as governments that we work together with 

producers, with the federal government, with provincial 

governments, to design programs that can work, that can give 

farmers a feeling of stability, and that will give farmers the 

opportunity of protecting themselves and their farm economies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the other problems that are being created 

is not just the drought problem that we're facing, not just the 

drought in the south-west, but the fact the the provincial 

government unilaterally eliminated the FeedGAP program -- a 

program that was designed, Mr. Speaker, to put producers in 

this province on a level playing-field with feedlot operators in 

other parts of Canada, namely Alberta to the west of us, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just got off the phone this morning, talking to an 

individual who on a rainy day last week decided to get some of 

his books brought up to date, and all of a sudden realized what 

the elimination of the FeedGAP program was going to mean to 

his farming operation.  And, Mr. Speaker, as he indicated to 

me, the elimination of the FeedGAP program is going to take 

away possibly the only positive side he had on his ledger 

regarding income on his feeding program, Mr. Speaker, feeding 

his hogs and feeding his calves out. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we have before us is the fact that on one 

hand the government is condemning the federal government for 

the lack of support and asking this opposition to support them 

in their support of drought in the province and for producers 

facing drought in the province of Saskatchewan, and on the 

other hand they continually tell producers that, well we're 

sorry, we've eliminated the FeedGAP program and we're not 

going to introduce it, we're not going to support the feedlot 

industry in this province, we're not going to support the hog 

producers in this province. 

 

And the result, Mr. Speaker, is going to be the fact that jobs, 

many thousands of jobs in this province will be affected -- jobs 

in the processing industry, Mr. Speaker, jobs in  . . . possibly 

jobs in Moose Jaw or jobs in Saskatoon, because the plants will 

not have the product available to run at the capacity that they 

were geared to operate under. 

 

What about the cap on the fuel tax rebate program, Mr. 

Speaker?  Mr. Speaker, many producers and farmers as a whole 

are great consumers of fuel and energy in this province, and by 

giving them the . . . rebating the tax on fuel used for the 

production of crops within our province, Mr. Speaker, was 

another way of helping farmers put a product on the market and 

giving it to consumers at a price much below the ability of 

producers to produce it with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess one of the arguments that we will 

continue to face in this country and around the world in trying 

to argue for higher prices is what the consumer is willing and 

able to pay for food.  And for far too long we have taken for 

granted the fact that we pay a very low percentage of our 

income -- take-home dollar -- on food compared to many other 

nations in the world. 



1048 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1992 

And in some ways many producers would argue out there that 

it would be fairer to pay a fair price at the market point and 

charge the consumer rather than designing safety net or 

stabilization programs so that farmers could continue to operate 

and at least have a decent standard of living and continue to 

produce the food needed to feed a hungry, hungry world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it also bothers me when we as producers in 

Saskatchewan can be efficient and effective producers and we 

can have abundances of product to market, and I hear of the 

fact that recently a number of ships that were coming into port 

to take grain back to Russia were being turned away because 

the Russians couldn't pay for the shipping charges.  However, I 

believe recently or just the other day, Mr. Speaker, they are 

now being allowed to come in and again load and take grain, 

much-needed grain, to the Russian nations to help feed hungry 

people in Russia at this time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what bothers me about the movement of grain 

and turning away ships from moving grain out of our world 

into areas of the world where people are hungry is a fact that if 

we're going to give farmers a value for their product, Mr. 

Speaker, if we're going to pay them and pay them up front, why 

are we not willing, Mr. Speaker, to share some of our 

abundance with those who are less fortunate than we are? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it's interesting that we can be talking about 

abundance when there is an area of the province that is 

certainly suffering from drought and facing the fact . . . the 

probability of maybe empty bins next fall.  But this province 

has a unique ability to have a very productive sector of our 

province producing grain and the bins being overflowing, and 

another corner of the province can be very dry and people 

without. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are in agreement that yes, the drought 

situation in the south-west is something that we have to look at, 

something we deal with.  And I guess I would have to also 

suggest that it was in light of the fact that the government has 

been talking of a consultative process for so many weeks, 

indeed months, Mr. Speaker, it was at least pleasing to hear 

that the Minister of Rural Development and the Minister of 

Agriculture did take some time to go down and visit with 

people in the south-west regarding the drought situation and 

listen to the needs of producers out in the south-western part of 

the province. 

 

But not only should they be listening to producers in the 

south-west who are facing the problems of drought, what about 

talking to producers -- hog producers and feedlot operators and 

farmers in general right across the province who are facing the 

difficulties that have been placed on their doorstep by a 

government who didn't take the time to consult? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can go along and accept the fact that we need 

to provide support for people in the drought-stricken areas of 

Saskatchewan.  But we must all work together on this.  We 

shouldn't just blame someone else.  And again I reiterate, Mr. 

Speaker, I do not accept the fact that the provincial government 

is shirking their 

responsibility by continually blaming the federal government. 

 

On one hand they want the federal government to support them 

on a project like maybe talking to them about AECL (Atomic 

Energy of Canada Ltd.), and then they go and condemn the 

federal government for not pouring money into this province 

when they turn down money that would have been available to 

them if they would have continued on with the 1991 GRIP 

program -- some, I believe, $200 million that would have been 

coming in.  They complain about federal off-loading when they 

turn around in the next breath and say no, we don't need that 

federal money. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, yes, even though there's a lot of work that has 

to be done, even though programs that have been designed to 

date may have some flaws, Mr. Speaker, I believe by working 

together, by consulting with people, consulting with people in 

the industry, we can work out ways of helping producers and 

giving them a form of stability that would make the family 

farm again a productive place to live, to grow, and to raise a 

family. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I thank you for your time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm very pleased to be 

able to speak on this motion. And I'd just like to read it and 

then speak to it a little bit: 

 

 That the Assembly recognizes the devastating drought 

conditions facing livestock and grain producers in 

south-western Saskatchewan, and request the federal Minister 

of Agriculture to visit the area and to take steps to provide 

financial assistance to alleviate these disastrous 

circumstances. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I find it very, very interesting what the 

motion puts forward.  It seems to me in this province today we 

have an Agriculture minister, that his whole agricultural policy, 

that the entire policy of this government is to point their finger 

east to Ottawa.  No help whatsoever for agriculture, in fact hit 

after hit after hit against agriculture. And the only solution they 

have to every problem farmers in this province have today and 

ranchers have in this province today is point their finger east; 

say the federal government is responsible and should be 

looking after the people of this province. 

 

Well I say to the Minister of Agriculture, big fat help he's been 

lately, big fat help.  Ever since he was elected and appointed 

the Minister of Agriculture he's done nothing for agriculture.  

Not a single thing has been put forward in a plan that's directed 

to help agriculture.  We see hit after hit after hit against 

agriculture. 

 

We'll start with the GRIP program.  Well, Mr. Speaker, when I 

talk to the farmers out in the south-west part of Saskatchewan 

that I represent, they see this program, the '92 program as an 

example of the type of respect and help that they're going to get 

from this government. 

 

In fact farmers all over this province are rallying in rallies 

about the GRIP program, the '92 program.  They've taken them 

to court on this, Mr. Speaker.  They lost in the courts. 



June 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1049 

They lost again today.  They failed to meet deadlines for their 

statements of defence.  Every opportunity they have to present 

their case, they've failed to meet their case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the judge's decision, the judge identified the hit 

on farmers as $27.20 an acre.  That was the hit -- $27.20 an 

acre; 31 million crop acres in this province.  A hit of just under 

a billion dollars, just under a billion dollars is what they've 

taken from this government on one program alone. 

 

And the member from Shaunavon over there, he's motioning 

that this is all fine and dandy.  This is all fine and dandy.  

Twelve hundred farmers came to a rally in Shaunavon and he 

should realize what they think, what they think of the program 

that you people put forward.  He can laugh and joke all he 

wants about what's going on here today, but the fact is that 

member will never be back in this House after this term of 

office.  He'll never make it back here because the farmers in 

that area have recognized what kind of support he's willing to 

put forward on their behalf.  That's the kind of support he's 

willing to put forward for them -- a big fat no.  That's what he 

goes down there and says.  No, I can't help you guys.  No, we 

can't help you with the GRIP program.  No, we can't help you 

with the livestock cash advance.  No, we can't help you with 

FeedGAP. 

 

Twelve hundred farmers should've been able to get through to 

that member, but no, no, Mr. Speaker.  They couldn't get 

through to him because the people, the powers that be in this 

NDP administration said to him, you go down there and you be 

quiet.  And you don't tell them anything except what we in 

Regina tell you to tell them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That's what happened down there in Shaunavon earlier this 

spring; 1,200 farmers wanted to speak to that member about the 

problems that they were faced with -- the problems incidentally 

that were identified very, very early in this program, the 1992 

program, the effect that drought could have on this program. 

 

(1600) 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, we are seeing the chickens come home 

to roost.  The drought is on in the south-west part of this 

province right today.  The drought is on, and the farmers down 

there are realizing the shortcomings in this program.  Right 

from the start they realized the shortcomings.  And now, now, 

Mr. Speaker, finally the Minister of Agriculture is starting to 

realize.  He takes a trip down to see the folks down there in the 

south-west of the province, never realizing that there could be a 

drought in the south-west of the province. 

 

For eight years, Mr. Speaker, there's been a drought going on 

down in the south-west corner of this province, and these 

people didn't have any idea that it was even happening until 

yesterday when he took a trip down there to see what's going 

on.  Big fat help that he's been down there.  Going to go down 

and tour the area.  That's a big help. 

 

And the member from Kelvington-Wadena -- an obvious 

expert on drought -- he gets up and speaks, Mr. Speaker, 

about the problems in his area, obviously affected drought 

almost every year.  Lot he knows about drought.  There's 

farmers down in the south-west part of this province that face 

drought on a continual basis.  Eight years now some of them 

have faced drought.  They know about drought, and they know 

the shortcomings of this program, Mr. Speaker.  That's the type 

of thing that's happening with them down in the area down 

there. 

 

The livestock industry's been devastated.  The livestock 

industry's been devastated by this government, Mr. Speaker.  

The livestock cash advance has been cancelled.  The FeedGAP 

program's been cancelled, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They talk about they're going to help farmers.  They 

campaigned and campaigned and campaigned last fall about 

how they were going to do better; how they were going to help 

the farmers; how they were going to get them more money; 

how they were going to squeeze more dollars out of Ottawa for 

them.  Well they haven't squeezed one penny, not one penny 

from Ottawa for farmers.  Not one cent. 

 

In the past number of years there's been $13 billion put into this 

province in the form of agriculture help between the provincial 

government and the federal government.  And so far not 1 cent 

-- not 1 cent they've got from the federal government.  Not 1 

cent did they get from the federal government or anybody else, 

for that matter. 

 

And the member from Kelvington-Wadena, he's a farmer and 

he should know that.  He's had cheque after cheque after 

cheque, and so has the member from Shaunavon.  Cheque after 

cheque after cheque from a government source of one kind or 

another, and yet he doesn't recognize that he's got any help. 

 

The farmers in the south-west of this province though, they 

realize they got help from these governments -- the past 

administration and the federal government.  And that's why, 

Mr. Speaker, they're upset with these guys. 

 

That's why 1,200 farmers showed up at a meeting in 

Shaunavon to voice their concerns.  But what did they get?  

What did they get from this government?  Did they get any 

help?  No.  A couple of . . . about a month or two later they 

come out with the most devastating budget for agriculture that's 

ever been witnessed in this province.  Never before have we 

seen the kind of havoc wreaked on one industry in the short 

period of time that this administration's been in power.  Never 

before. 

 

Not only that, Mr. Speaker, now we see them introducing 

things like marked fuel.  Marked fuel.  We're going back to the 

1950s.  We're going to be driving around on ripped-up 

highways -- ripped-up highways, gravel roads -- with marked 

fuel in the tank.  That's the kind of thing that these people talk 

about help for agriculture. 
 

It's a shame that these people don't know something about 

agriculture.  They don't know the first thing about agriculture 

when it comes to trying to diversify the economy of 

agriculture. 
 

One of the first steps they made was to cancel the FeedGAP 

program, cancel the livestock cash advance. 



1050 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1992 

Big help for diversifying agriculture.  Big help.  They should 

be ashamed of themselves.  We're going to be driving on gravel 

roads.  Can anyone in this province imagine that?  Can anyone 

imagine that?  Gravel roads. 

 

It'll be interesting to see how this is put together, Mr. Speaker.  

First of all, I can envision how this is going to be done.  

They're going to go down into the south-west of the province 

where the guys are facing the worst drought they've ever faced 

in probably the history of the province, at least going back to 

the '30s at the very least.  They're going to go in there with 

huge rototillers and rip up the road, rip up the pavement.  And 

then they're going to . . . probably in all cases the beds over the 

years become a little bit deteriorated so they'll have to build up 

the road, and then they're going to gravel it.  At a cost -- as my 

colleague from Maple Creek who knows something about the 

costs of maintaining and gravelling roads in this province 

because he's a reeve in this province -- at a cost of about 

$25,000 a kilometre.  That's what it costs to build up and gravel 

a road in this province today -- $25,000 a kilometre.  And that's 

what they're going to do.  They're going to come in and rip up 

the road and then gravel it 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who's the Minister of Highways? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And yes, incidentally, who is the Minister of 

Highways?  The same guy, the same guy who is telling the 

farmers that they have to get by with a little bit less.  A little 

less, a little less -- a billion bucks alone in the GRIP program, a 

billion dollars alone that he put at risk for the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And the member again from Shaunavon wants to speak up 

again about the help he's putting forward for farmers.  I say to 

him, and I say again, Mr. Speaker, 1,200 farmers should have 

been able to get through to him, but they couldn't.  They 

couldn't get through to him.  He didn't have the guts to stand up 

in his caucus and tell them what's wrong with this program.  He 

didn't have the intestinal fortitude to do that, Mr. Speaker.  

That's what's wrong with the member from Shaunavon. 

 

As a result of the actions taken by this government, particularly 

with respect to the livestock and grain industry, we will see 

things like the packing plants put at jeopardy in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, the packing plant in Moose Jaw, the packing plant 

in Saskatoon.  Those will be put in jeopardy because of the 

short-sightedness of this government, a government that is 

uncaring about what's happening in agriculture. 

 

They talk about the farmers . . . it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, 

the only way the farmers of this province can get the attention 

of this government is to drag them kicking and screaming into 

court.  That's the only way they can get the attention of this 

government, try and drag them into court.  Well they did, Mr. 

Speaker, they dragged them into court.  They challenged them 

in court.  They were successful in court.  And yet we've seen 

evidence today presented . . . in fact no evidence today 

presented, in a statement of defence.  They have no defence, 

Mr. Speaker.  They have no defence for their actions so far, 

absolutely no defence for what they have done. 

 

They've been kicked out of court, unceremoniously 

escorted out of the court in Regina here today, because they 

had no defence.  They were deemed, they were deemed . . . 

they say that they're going to bring in legislation to take care of 

the problem.  They're going to deem that the farmers of this 

province received notice.  Well I'm a farmer in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, and I didn't receive notice. 

 

On March 15 I didn't get a registered letter in the mail 

suggesting that they were going to make changes.  The member 

from Kelvington-Wadena didn't get a letter.  The member from 

Shaunavon didn't get a letter  The member from Rosthern didn't 

get a letter.  The member from Morse didn't get a letter.  I'm 

not surprised that them two didn't get a letter either, Mr. 

Speaker, as they don't farm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farmers of this province didn't get a letter.  

The fact is they didn't get a letter.  And now they're going to 

bring in legislation that says we did get one.  Legitimize the 

kinds of things that they want to do in agriculture.  Well I say 

to them, Mr. Speaker, no sir, no sir.  The people of this 

province won't put up with that kind of thing. 

 

They continually and continually harp at the federal 

government about coming forward with a third line of defence.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I recall the third line of defence, there 

was a number of things put forward in the third line of defence.  

First of all, it was the reduction in the revenue insurance 

premiums of farmers of 25 per cent.  That was the first step in 

it. 

 

The second step in it was a two-stage acreage payment -- 

FSAM1 and FSAM2, farm support adjustment measures, for 

the members that don't know what that means.  Farm support 

adjustment measures; that's what it was. 

 

The first program came out in the late fall and the second 

program came out in the spring.  An acreage payment in both 

circumstances that were specifically designed to help out the 

livestock and grain producers in this province, and specifically 

designed not only for all of the producers but particularly 

producers in the south-west that are faced with drought. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only was there things with respect to FSAM1 

and FSAM2 for the third line of defence, there was adjustments 

in the NISA triggering mechanism that allowed farmers to put 

money into the program and immediately access that money. 

That was another component of the third line of defence. 

 

What did they do though?  What has this government done?  

They have done absolutely nothing for agriculture.  They have 

cut back in every respect -- cut the CAFF program, counselling 

and assistance for farmers.  They cut out the rural natural gas 

distribution system -- lots of areas in this province. 

 

And I'd venture to say that cattle producers and grain producers 

in the south-west of this province are clear examples of people 

that aren't going to be getting access to the Saskatchewan 

natural gas.  They've increased costs, Mr. Speaker, at every 

turn and cut back on programs at every other turn.  They've 

increased the costs of farmers in this province for the utility 

rates -- SaskPower, 



June 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1051 

SaskEnergy.  They've jacked up the prices of insurance 

premiums for SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance). 

 

Mr. Speaker, this type of action in this province today is the 

kind of thing that is making the farmers of this province 

extremely upset with this government.  They're to the point 

where they're ready to give up and move out of this province, 

ready to give up and move out of this province because of the 

short-sightedness of this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my remarks now I would like 

to move an amendment to this motion.  And the amendment is 

the following: 

 

 All of the words after the word "Saskatchewan" be deleted 

and the following be substituted therefor: 

 

 and request the federal government and provincial ministers 

of Agriculture to visit the area to take steps in concert with 

their shared responsibility for agriculture to provide financial 

assistance and protection to alleviate these disastrous 

circumstances, including (a) as a priority, the restoration of 

full drought protection offered under the 1991 GRIP 

program; (b) a cessation of all legal actions against farmers 

trying to recover their right to drought protection; and (c) 

withdrawal of any legislation at the federal and provincial 

levels that would remove or reduce drought protection for 

farmers in this area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm just going to 

make a few brief comments in support of the amendment as 

proposed by the member from Kindersley.  I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that when we view the actions of the Minister of 

Agriculture, particularly in the last little while, it gives one 

wonder at the minister appearing briefly in the House today 

and proposing this particular emergency motion. 

 

In the light of everything that has happened in this province in 

the last couple of months, it really makes people out there, 

particularly in rural Saskatchewan . . . and you have to feel for 

the folks in the south-west who once again have Mother Nature 

conspiring against their ability to support themselves, their 

families, and their communities. 

 

When you have a natural catastrophe such as drought 

happening to these people, and then on top of that, add what 

this Minister of Agriculture has perpetrated on these people in 

the meantime, one can only feel for the folks down there. 

 

When you look, I guess, at the latest numbers of out-migration 

for Saskatchewan -- and this was an area that the members of 

the former opposition constantly harped upon.  I can remember 

many of them standing up time after time in condemnation -- 

and I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that there's been over 2,300 

people leave this 

province in a short few months of 1992.  If you annualize that 

over a whole year, you're going to look at nearly 6,000 folks.  

A lot of those are going to be people in rural Saskatchewan 

who are simply giving up in despair. 

 

(1615) 

 

I've got a good friend of mine, Mr. Speaker, city of Moose Jaw, 

involved in a business that was almost totally dependent on 

agriculture -- he's moving to Red Deer simply saying, I don't 

see any future here because of the actions of the government 

present. 

 

A minister who has on many occasions told farmers one thing 

and gone and done another.  And this latest action in the Court 

of Queen's Bench today only drives home the point that this 

minister doesn't understand his job, he doesn't understand what 

he's doing.  He does not consult.  He simply has a bull-headed 

view of the world -- it's my way or the doorway. 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, when we have jurisdictions 

nearby that allow people some opportunity, some future, I'm 

afraid they're going to take those opportunities and they're 

going to leave our province.  And when you think of people 

that have had three and four generations of blood and sweat 

poured into a particular farming operation or a business that is 

dependent on agriculture, to lose people like that, Mr. Speaker, 

is a crime. 

 

Members of the government stand in their place on an 

emergency debate which is supposedly asking the opposition 

co-operation in allowing farmers in the south-west of the 

province to access some grazing, to access some opportunities 

to maintain their livelihood, particularly in the livestock 

industry.  And at the same time, those same members stand in 

their place and criticize every program that the former 

government provided. 

 

One has to wonder, Mr. Speaker, as we study the present court 

action going on over GRIP, if this wasn't simply a spiteful 

action by the members of the new government because it was 

simply a program brought in by the former government, not 

because it was going to help out people in a drought-stricken 

area, which obviously '91 GRIP would. 

 

There isn't a producer in that drought area of the province that 

wouldn't benefit from the '91 program -- not one single one, no 

matter what his politics are, that wouldn't benefit, wouldn't be 

able to maintain his farming operation in a better state than 

what he's got right now. 

 

And one really has to wonder at some of the motivation that is 

behind these people and the moves that they are making in 

regards to agriculture. 

 

I heard members stand here today and say, well they were the 

great defenders of the cash advance system.  Well it was the 

former government that brought in cash advances for the 

livestock sector.  I mean when you look at the whole southern 

part of this province below No. 1 Highway, livestock is 

absolutely crucial -- absolutely crucial to the survival of our 

communities.  That cash 



1052 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1992 

advance, no-interest cash advance, was a goodly part of the 

reason that people were able to maintain themselves in the face 

of some very, very difficult international commodity situations 

and some horrendous effects of Mother Nature over the last 

half dozen years. 

 

Now if it's good enough for the grains industry, why isn't it 

good enough for the red meat industry?  That question just begs 

to be answered every time one of these people gets on their 

feet.  If it's good enough for one, if you're saying that we went 

to the wall, we went to the wall against the federal government 

on cash advances, what would be wrong with going to the wall 

for people in the red meat industry? 

 

Well I'll tell you, the only thing I can find, Mr. Speaker, that's 

wrong with it is that most of the people in the red meat industry 

areas didn't vote for the New Democratic Party on a regular 

basis.  That seems to be the only thing that I can find that says, 

if I'm going to support agriculture, if I'm going to go to the wall 

on cash advances for grain, that I'd feel the same way about the 

red meat industry.  But it's not the case. 

 

They say no, we simply can't do that.  We would rather allow 

the red meat industry to vacate this province.  We would rather 

allow $200 million in economic impact leave this province.  

We would rather allow meat packing plants in Moose Jaw and 

Saskatoon to shut down and put their people out on the street.  

That's what we would rather allow. 

 

And instead of maintaining a system that helped our producers 

compete with Alberta and with United States and with other 

jurisdictions in the FeedGAP, they use the same reasoning, Mr. 

Speaker -- we would rather allow people to pack up and leave 

this province; we would rather allow people in the red meat 

industry at all sectors to simply leave. 

 

And this, Mr. Speaker, really flies in the face of the shallow 

attempt by the Minister of Agriculture to come into this 

Assembly today on a rule 42 and say, boys, it's time we 

co-operated. 

 

Well as the member from Kindersley so aptly pointed out to the 

Assembly a short time ago, there was a time when co-operation 

delivered tens of millions of dollars into this province for rural 

Saskatchewan.  There was a time when that co-operation was 

very evident, and it was always, always roundly criticized on 

the floor of this Assembly, on the streets of Saskatchewan.  At 

the farm kitchen table it was roundly criticized as not being 

enough.  It simply wasn't enough that the provincial 

government was abrogating its responsibilities to rural 

Saskatchewan.  And there had to be more. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as the opposition has pointed out time and 

time again, whether it's on motions for return, whether it's on 

health care, every sector of our society a short seven months 

ago had their votes solicited, had their votes bought by the New 

Democratic Party, that there would be more; that they would do 

things better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's a word for that in our society, and it's 

called fraud.  And what you are seeing today, Mr. Speaker, 

what you are seeing today is a continuation of that fraud 

because those promises were totally hollow -- totally hollow.  

There was no substance to them.  In fact the evidence, Mr. 

Speaker, mounts daily, the evidence mounts daily that in fact 

what people are seeing is exactly the opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is why today we are saying to the minister 

yes, we believe in co-operation.  Yes, we believe that you and 

your federal counterpart should go down there and sit in the 

kitchens of south-west Saskatchewan, that you should be 

prepared to put your shoulder to the wheel, and at the same 

time you should not be prepared to come into this legislature 

and use your massive majority -- use your massive majority -- 

to try and break the law: the contract signed by 50,000 

producers, a good many of them who today face massive 

drought in part of our province. 

 

You can't have it both ways, Mr. Speaker.  You can't deem that 

you did things you didn't do, and then say I'm going to go down 

there and I'm going to be the be-all and end-all to a bunch of 

people that are hurting.  It just doesn't work that way. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture could stand in this Assembly and 

say, well I guess because of exceptional circumstances I'm 

going to draw a line somewhere across Saskatchewan and I'm 

going to have the rules of '91 GRIP apply in that particular area 

because I know that it means at least $30 an acre more.  And 

that would mean more to those producers than anything else 

that minister could do. 

 

If he is so utterly confident in what he has proposed, then give 

the producers on that side of the line a choice: '91 or '92 GRIP.  

Give them the opportunity to express themselves.  He doesn't 

have to get into any ad hoc program at all. 

 

And in my view, Mr. Speaker, the producers down there will 

make the right decision for their particular operation and they 

will make their choice accordingly.  And the minister doesn't 

have to get into any ad hoc-ery whatsoever.  He simply has to 

say, you people have a choice and when you make that choice, 

your government is going to stand behind you. 

 

He isn't going to come into the legislature of Saskatchewan and 

coerce the members of this Assembly into helping him break 

the law.  He doesn't have to do that.  He simply has to give 

those people a choice.  And they will make it appropriately. 

 

And I think each and every one of them as taxpayers in this 

province as they make that choice will think of the bigger 

picture, the bigger picture that is our province.  I don't think 

any one of those farmers down there who is seeing his crop 

burn up and his cows moved off to greener pastures is going to 

make a choice that is going to harm the rest of the people of 

this province.  He will do it in honesty and he will do it with 

integrity, as his forebearers did when they came and settled this 

land. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think the amendment as proposed by my 

colleague from Kindersley is immanently reasonable. 



June 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1053 

It talks to the co-operation as proposed by the minister.  I think 

farmers in south-western Saskatchewan would enjoy seeing the 

member from Rosetown and the federal member from 

Kindersley going hand in hand through the drought area 

assessing the various options. 

 

And I think it would be very proper that the national minister 

with Parks tag along with them. I've been in the Grasslands 

Park a few short months ago and I agree with the member from 

Shaunavon -- there's knee-high grass in there and I don't think 

there's enough antelope and deer to eat it all.  And it would be 

right and proper that the two levels of government in this 

province co-operate in seeing that grass put to a better use. 

 

Our amendment speaks to that.  And it also speaks to the 

fundamental issue of whether this legislature should be using 

its members in a way that the courts of Saskatchewan have said 

is unreasonable; that this minister should not be bringing in 

legislation at this time to override the wishes of Saskatchewan's 

farming public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is why I support the amendment of the 

member from Kindersley. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of the amendment 

and to make a few comments with respect to the proposal that 

was put forward by the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

I want to set the record straight, Mr. Speaker, with respect to 

the willingness of NDP administrations to help farmers.  The 

NDP minister stands here today and he said several times, 

saying, well because there's a debt in the province of 

Saskatchewan, we just can't help the farmers.  And we've heard 

that over and over again. 

 

And we know, Mr. Speaker -- we're going to get into it in terms 

of Estimates -- that they ballooned the debt up.  And it's kind of 

backfired on them because their credit rating is falling through 

the floor.  And the Premier and the Minister of Finance are 

both in New York telling them a different story, that it's really 

okay in Saskatchewan.  But this kind of got away on them.  

They ballooned it.  They used the accrual method of 

accounting, brought forward some debt.  And then they can 

say, well we can't do anything because of debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make this point.  The point is when the 

NDP said they had money in the '70s and the '80s, did they act 

any differently than they act today?  Not at all. 

 

And for the new members in the legislature, I want you to 

listen to this and remind yourself of why the NDP lost so 

miserably in 1982 and lost most of the rural ridings in 1986 and 

would not win a rural riding today if there was an election 

called in the province of Saskatchewan.  Not a one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Not just the Minister of Agriculture wouldn't be 

here, but all the rest of those rural members wouldn't be, Mr. 

Speaker,  And they know that's the case, 

because what I'm about to say is absolutely historical and is a 

fact. 
 

Now when the NDP were walking around the province of 

Saskatchewan in the '70s and early '80s saying, oh we've got 

money in Saskatchewan, there's a Heritage Fund, and we've 

nationalized the potash and we've taken over land bank and 

there's money, people came to them and said, what about 

people?  What about the farmers?  What about pensioners?  

What about rural communities? 
 

Interest rates were running at 21 or 22 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 

and you were in the legislature at that time.  And what did the 

NDP do to help farmers during a financial crisis, when money 

doubles in four years under 20-some per cent interest rates?  

What did the NDP do to help?  Not a red cent. Nothing. Not a 

thing. 
 

(1630) 
 

And they stood up and said, oh but it's the federal government.  

It's the federal government.  It's those feds.  It's all their turn.  

And yet at the same time, they were bragging about all the 

money they had.  And people said, well where's their heart and 

soul? 
 

The member from Riversdale, who was deputy premier at the 

time, stood up and said, well we can't help.  I guess the farmers 

are just going to have to do their best.  Well do you know what 

happened, Mr. Speaker?  Farmers, they didn't forget that 

comment, and in the coming election of 1982 the member from 

Riversdale lost his own riding and they lost ridings all across 

Saskatchewan.  I think they only held one rural riding, and 

maybe there was seven or eight left, because they didn't stick 

up for people. 
 

They didn't provide them with rural gas.  They didn't provide 

them with pension legislation.  They didn't provide them with 

drought protection.  They didn't help them to build at all.  And 

yet they bragged about the money they have. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what do we see?  The same line coming out 

of these people saying oh well, there's not the money we'd like; 

therefore we can't help you. 
 

Well I want to remind you, Mr. Speaker, and you know full 

well, whether they have money or whether they don't have 

money, these people don't care about the people.  The NDP 

don't care about farmers.  They don't care about rural people.  

They don't care about pensioners.  They don't care about 

women.  They don't care about the aboriginal people.  They just 

care about themselves.  Anything to get elected -- that's the 

motto. 
 

And if you took that campaign out that we now see before the 

people, the one that was thrown out of court this morning . . . 

Imagine, saying that you're illegal.  You can't even show up in 

court on time.  You didn't allow farmers to know on time.  You 

don't show up on time.  You don't tell them the truth on time.  

Hopefully they'll vote for you just in time to get you elected.  

And then when you're elected, what are you going to say?  

Whoops, I don't have any heart and I don't have any money to 

help the people. 

 

Well this morning the judge said it all.  The judgement of 



1054 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1992 

the judge this morning is the same as the judgement of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan: you're out of here.  

You don't count.  You don't listen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- You don't respond.  You have no conscience. 

 

And the hypocrisy of people running around saying, well this is 

the way Tommy Douglas would do it.  Imagine, Tommy 

Douglas would be like this.  There's a drought in southern 

Saskatchewan, you've got people leaving the province, you've 

got farmers going broke, and the Minister of Agriculture stands 

in here and says, well we'll have to call on the federal 

government, just like the member from Riversdale did.  He 

says, well it must be the feds. 

 

You know, every other province across the country co-operates 

in crop insurance and GRIP.  Why not Saskatchewan?  What is 

so absolutely unique about the NDP in Saskatchewan?  Well 

it's just that they're NDP. 

 

It's the same thing that we heard in the 1970s and the 1980s. 

And people said, you know what? -- now I remember why the 

NDP lost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was in the Minister of Agriculture's riding in the 

community of Rosetown on Friday, and I met with a couple of 

hundred people that are from his constituency.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, he has got about as much chance of getting re-elected 

in this province in the rest of his life as . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Ice cream parlours in purgatory. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Ice cream parlours in purgatory.  Mr. Speaker, 

they are so ashamed of their member of the legislature not 

telling the truth. And on top of that, then going right in the face 

of the things that he said he was going to do, he pulls the rug 

right out from under them. 

 

And it's not just because of roads, which is bad enough.  And 

the people there are saying, well here's the new sign in rural 

Saskatchewan: this new gravel road is brought to you thanks to 

the NDP. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Ripped up by the NDP. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Ripped up by the NDP.  Like, you know, you 

only have highway signs: this new highway is brought to you 

by the people of Saskatchewan.  Well they're going to have a 

new sign out in the Rosetown constituency: this road is brought 

to you by the new Minister of Agriculture; the NDP member 

brings you this new gravel road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they look at GRIP and they can't believe that a 

minister would not tell them the truth at election time that he 

would break that contract.  And they look at the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan for rural people and 44,000 women and said, why 

won't he tell the truth?  Why didn't he tell us that he was going 

to take it away? 

 

And they look at all of these people that depended on 

natural gas, and they look at all the people who campaigned 

and have voted for tax cuts -- not increases, cuts.  And they 

voted . . . Remember all of the campaign stuff saying, we'll get 

you the cost of production; we'll get more money from Ottawa; 

we'll reduce your taxes; we'll give you more in rural areas.  

And they added this all up. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if you were there on Friday night at the 

barbecue in Mr. Minister of Agriculture's riding in Rosetown, 

you would have been absolutely . . . well it would have 

shocked even you, Mr. Speaker.  With all your political 

experience, you would have said, my goodness, he's been 

invited to go to places that . . . they didn't even want to talk to 

him, but now they do because people are losing their highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what they remember about the NDP is simply 

this.  When they had money they didn't do anything.  They 

campaigned that they promised they would do absolutely 

everything and now that they're back in again on all these fake, 

hollow promises, it's even worse.  And what's more is 

everybody out there knows that if they'd have told the truth, 

they wouldn't have got elected. And if they now go to the 

people in rural Saskatchewan, they won't win a single, solitary 

riding.  Not a single, solitary riding.  And anybody feels real 

brave, they can just throw their hat in the ring right now 

anywhere in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And in urban Saskatchewan they're looking at tax increases, 

they're looking at cancellation of AECL, they're looking at job 

cuts, they are looking at the public service -- 4 or 500 people.  

And we're just beginning to get into it in Estimates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just make the point to these members opposite 

and particularly the new members that were elected: the same 

lines, the same verbiage come out of the front benches of the 

NDP when they said they had money compared to even when 

they don't have money.  They don't help. 

 

Now they say, but we're doing this like Tommy did it.  Tommy 

Douglas tried and Tommy Douglas helped bring rural 

electrification.  We introduce natural gas and they cancel it.  

We introduce rural programs for jobs in rural communities; 

they cancel that.  We help people build and diversify in rural 

Saskatchewan, and they cut them off and they stopped that kind 

of construction.  And when they really need help, they design a 

program that will not deliver. 

 

I'm going to take the members here back to the point that they 

said the new GRIP was designed by a special committee.  Well 

we talked with the chairman of that committee, Mr. Speaker.  

And some of the members of the committee like Professor 

Hartley Furtan told the public and he's told members of the 

legislature and he's certainly told our caucus that if there is a 

drought, the NDP plan on GRIP is a disaster. 

 

Now this is a professor of agriculture who is touted from time 

to time if it suits your purposes, the NDP purposes, he says if 

there's a drought, the 1991 NDP GRIP program . . . and only in 

Saskatchewan -- and we just happen to have half the farm land 

in Canada -- and only in Saskatchewan 



June 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1055 

if there's a drought it's a disaster. 

 

And you're standing up in your places and saying, well that's 

just the way it's going to be because we really don't care about 

farmers, and we really don't care about rural people.  And he 

says, well maybe you're going to have to open up parks, 

national parks. 

 

I didn't hear the minister stand up and offer provincial parks.  

You've got provincial parks with grass growing right up to your 

knees.  Has he offered to co-operate and say, we can do this; 

we can help here; we'll work with you like Manitoba works 

with the federal government, like Alberta does, or other 

provinces.  No. Only in Saskatchewan you get this real 

hard-nosed partisanship where nobody is an ally. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm making the point because, Mr. Speaker, 

even the NDP's own members, Member of Parliament, are now 

starting to criticize the provincial NDP.  Saskatchewan's NDP 

MPs (Member of Parliament) feel the heat from the provincial 

counterparts, says the Moose Jaw Times-Herald Mr. Rod 

Laporte . . . is feeling the heat because provincial NDP are 

making so many mistakes. 

 

On the front page of the paper in Moose Jaw he's kicking the 

tar out of the provincial NDP, his local MLAs, the cabinet 

decisions, and all the silly things, unforgivable things that the 

provincial NDP are doing.  And the federal MPs are going to 

an election within the next 12 months.  And he's saying such 

things:  I have no part of them, I don't talk to the NDP, and 

NDPs are not of NDP.  They're not really like me.  I'm a 

different kind of an NDP, he says.  And he hopes to get 

re-elected on agricultural policy. 

 

Well Mr. Rod Laporte, MP for Moose Jaw, is not happy with 

the agriculture policy, Mr. Speaker.  He thinks the NDP 

provincial agriculture policy is a sham.  It's pathetic.  It doesn't 

help.  It's broken promises.  You get kicked out of court.  You 

get kicked out of meetings.  You're going to get kicked out of 

ridings.  You have lost the respect of rural people.  And you 

can sit there and say, well I guess we would get elected again, 

wouldn't you, if you just went and told them what you were 

going to do. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we've just begun to get into Estimates.  And 

the kinds of sham that you're building and the kinds of 

evidence of the things that you're going on -- and the more the 

caucus meets I'm sure they're realizing this -- that the front 

bench, two or three people there, have snookered the whole 

caucus and half the NDP Party. 

 

But they haven't snookered the public.  They are not going to 

believe what you're doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- And they're not going to support it.  They see 

other provinces co-operating.  They see other provinces dealing 

with it. 
 

Mr. Speaker, as we sit here in a crisis in agriculture that the 

NDP campaigned -- the NDPs that were going to be open and 

were going to share -- what do I see in the newspaper and just 

watch on television?  More secret, 

tight-lipped meetings between the NDP Premier and premiers 

down East.  The very thing that he campaigned against -- 

agriculture, constitutional, economic development.  He's down 

there in so-called -- and it looks like he's kind of proud of it, 

Mr. Speaker -- secret meetings behind closed doors on 

constitution and economic things with eastern premiers, 

Quebec and Ontario. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it doesn't matter what they say during a campaign.  

They are not open.  They hide information.  They break their 

promises.  They're no more open than . . .  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

every single one of them, every single one of them knows 

exactly the point that I'm making with respect to the kinds of 

promises they made . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, I know the Leader of the 

Opposition is having a good time, but there is a point of 

relevancy here to the debate on the motion.  I was wondering if 

you could remind the Leader of the Opposition that this motion 

really is one on devastating drought conditions facing the 

livestock and grain producers in south-western Saskatchewan 

and that what we're really after here is their co-operation, 

asking them to vote for the motion that would request the 

federal Minister of Agriculture to visit that area and take the 

steps provided to provide financial assistance to alleviate these 

disastrous circumstances.  I wonder if the member would stick 

to the motion and forget about trying to re-run on the election. 

 

The Speaker: -- The debate this afternoon has been rather 

wide in its scope although I do want to . . . I was tempted 

several times to draw the member's attention that we are on a 

motion and an amendment, but he did draw it back to his . . . 

although in a very cursory manner.  I ask the member to maybe 

more directly get to the amendment and the motion before it. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

obviously, Mr. Speaker, I've struck a chord of some 

embarrassment of the members opposite. 

 

But my point is simply this, that your agricultural policy is not 

only being doubted by the people and not only doubted by 

many members of your caucus who are now openly supporting 

the '92 GRIP and not only doubted by the NDP members of 

parliament that I've quoted, but it's now going right to the top 

where the flip-flops -- not only in agriculture policy but other 

policies -- are building this image about the NDP that you 

cannot be trusted.  You're not believable. 

 

If you say you're going to do something, you do the opposite.  

If you say you're going to cut taxes, you increase them.  If you 

say you're going to help farmers, you put burden on them.  

There's a revenge, a rural revenge just oozing out of those front 

benches.  Rural people have beaten the NDP time and time and 

time again.  Now we have this Riversdale rural revenge that 

picks on rural people. 

 

You promised the cost of production, more money for farmers, 

and you would build a better life in rural 



1056 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1992 

Saskatchewan.  You broke that promise.  You didn't make the 

changes in time for GRIP; you didn't get in court in time to 

change it.  And now you're trying to say, well I'll deem it all 

appropriate.  I'll rewrite history. 

 

And people are saying: uh, uh, not in my community; not in my 

farm.  And the judge said that today.  And that's the most 

damning thing that can happen to an administration, is when a 

judge says in a prima facie case, you're wrong.  You have not 

done the proper thing for people.  You have broken the law.  

And if you come in this legislature and say, well we'll change 

history and we'll get it all right because we'll change the law, 

people are not going to accept that.  You can't rewrite history. 

 

You're going to find that people are going to say to you, I don't 

want any part of your stories; I don't believe you when you say 

you're going to stick up for women or rural people or farmers; I 

don't believe you when you say you're sincere about drought.  I 

know you have not a shred of evidence of co-operation with 

any administration -- Alberta, Manitoba, the feds. 

 

I talked to the federal minister, Mr. Speaker, who just recently 

dealt with the Associate Minister of Finance.  He says, I can't 

believe this.  They not only broke the GRIP agreement, but 

now they won't fund their honest share of a Bi-Provincial 

upgrader in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

(1645) 

 

This is jobs in the rural.  Our heavy oil is processed in the rural; 

it's good for rural people.  And the NDP administration said no, 

it's an Alberta agreement, a federal government agreement, a 

private sector agreement.  We can break that just like we broke 

GRIP. 

 

And the same applies, Mr. Speaker, when they look at other 

national programs.  Not only that they wouldn't harmonize to 

generate money to pay for some of this stuff -- and that tax is 

suggested by farmers and supported by business people across 

the province that gives you the kind of money necessary to help 

farmers and co-operate like other provinces are -- but time after 

time after time, Mr. Speaker, they break their word. 

 

They break their agreements with Alberta politicians, they 

break their word with Manitoba politicians, they break their 

word with American politicians, and they break their word with 

the federal government -- contract after contract after contract.  

And finally this morning, again they got caught. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are going to ask these people -- the 

new-elected NDP -- to come clean with their constituents and 

do what you said you were going to do.  Do what you said you 

were going to do . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, 

the rural members are a little edgy and you can hear them 

chirping from their seat because they're worried because their 

constituents are saying, well you didn't tell me that and I 

wouldn't have voted for you if you had told me that. 

 

Well over and over again, it won't just be the people, it will be 

the courts, it will be other people who will say that you've 

made serious mistakes. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment to talk about the pain 

already inflicted in rural Saskatchewan, not only in the grain 

sector but the livestock sector, because what these people have 

done to the livestock sector is unforgivable.  It helps diversify 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I remember when I was a professor at the university, the former 

minister of Agriculture, Gordon MacMurchy, used to go across 

the province and say: wheat's okay; that's all we need; we don't 

need diversification.  And I campaigned against that.  And a lot 

of people said, you know, we need diversification in rural 

Saskatchewan.  It would be a good idea. 

 

Well now we've got the same mentality going back.  The NDP 

says, wheat only.  GRIP is all based on wheat only -- no 

recognition of specialty crops; no recognition of the livestock 

sector; no recognition of feed grain and processing.  And now 

they said on top of that GRIP change they will specifically 

apply their rural revenge to the livestock industry. 

 

And whether you're in northern Saskatchewan -- east, west, or 

north, south, wherever -- you have felt pain.  And you're going 

to feel pain because the NDP have targeted the livestock 

industry and said, you've never really voted for us, so you're 

going to get yours. 

 

And now it's backed up by Professor Furtan and others at the 

university who say this is awful.  This is unconscionable.  This 

is unfair.  It doesn't make any sense.  Just because some people 

who have livestock vote Conservative doesn't mean that the 

NDP have to pick on everybody that has livestock.  But that's 

what you're doing.  Every rural person, every livestock 

member, you're going out there and saying, I'll get you. 

 

And I want to read to you what Mr. Furtan -- Professor Furtan 

who does research for you, who you say that your listening to 

-- has said about what you've done to the livestock industry: we 

anticipate as a result of the budget that was just brought down 

-- particularly the FeedGAP removal and the cash advance -- 

we anticipate a loss of 100,000 head in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now why is that part of a plan to help rural people?  The oil 

patch is moving out.  The natural gas industry is moving out.  

You all but closed the uranium industry in rural Saskatchewan.  

The northern people don't know . . . I mean, what are you going 

to give them if it isn't mining and economic activity right now?  

I mean, all of those things in rural Saskatchewan are hurt bad 

enough.  And now you're saying if you are an 

honest-to-goodness farmer, you're not only going to get crop 

insurance taken away, but now I'm really going to take a run at 

you and your livestock business. 

 

So Professor Furtan says: we anticipate a loss of 100,000 head 

in the province of Saskatchewan as a result of the brand-new 

NDP administration who said they'd go the other way.  This 

matter was also studied by other people at the university, in the 

Department of Agricultural Economics.  Mr. Furtan determined 

that the loss would be more equivalent to $117 a head. 



June 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1057 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if you're looking at running a cow-calf 

operation and you're running into expenses that are running to 

$117 a head, whether it's on the cow, whether it's on the 

replacement animals, whether it's on the heifers, or whether it's 

just out of the calves you're going to sell in the fall, any 

average at all will tell you that these people, the NDP, have 

stuck a stake through the heart of the livestock industry. 

 

Furtan believes that over a three-year period Saskatchewan 

would lose up to 50 per cent of its current feeding sector.  Mr. 

Speaker, one stroke of the pen by the NDP and the professor of 

Agricultural Economics at the University of Saskatchewan says 

Saskatchewan people will lose 50 per cent of its livestock 

sector. 

 

And they're standing on their feet, holier than thou, saying, well 

we can't help you if there's a drought or if there's problems or 

international things.  It's just beyond our means.  I said at the 

outset of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, that's the same line we 

heard when they said they had money.  They haven't changed 

at all because 22 per cent interest rates is just like a drought.  

And you know it.  And people said, where was the heart. 

 

Mr. Furtan goes on and says: this would be equivalent to an 

extra 117,000 feeder calves being exported out of the province 

of Saskatchewan.  Now we talked about feeding the livestock 

industry, putting people to work.  They're lending money to 

packing plants and processing plants to stimulate economic 

activity in Moose Jaw, places like Saskatoon.  And clearly 

they're going to shut them down because they won't have the 

feedstock to run through them. 

 

Where's the plan, Mr. Speaker?  They want our support 

because they've got a plan?  If they'd even come forward with a 

plan in agriculture and viability for rural Saskatchewan maybe 

people would listen.  Like what is it you're going to do?  

You've cut off gas.  You've increased utilities.  You've raised 

the taxes.  No rural gas program.  You've closed hospitals.  No 

more nursing homes.  Now you cancel GRIP.  And you've 

ripped up the roads. 

 

And now you're putting a stake through the heart of the 

livestock industry supported and evidenced not only by judges 

now but by the university and academics and researchers and 

others.  The plan is a destruction.  Now how can you sit there 

and smile and be so cocky about watching rural Saskatchewan 

go down the tubes?  How can you even go back to your 

constituents?  What do you tell your families?  Boy I'd like to 

walk with you through your ridings -- riding after riding after 

riding -- and get you to explain this. 

 

What is it?  What is it that keeps you motivated about helping 

rural people when the university, the judge, the people, the 

public, the farmers, the ranchers, politicians on every side of 

you, international people say: what in the world is happening in 

good old socialist Saskatchewan?  Back to socialism, back to 

1950s, back to the '40s. 

 

And then to put salt in the wounds, we find even the 

Communist parties of Ukraine and Russia signed agreements 

on international economic activity and research that the Reds 

right here won't sign.  I mean, 

you're isolated.  You're in a world of your own. 

 

And agricultural policy is the epitome of that, because rural 

people are the salt of the earth, and the very basis of life here in 

the province of Saskatchewan -- cultural, social, religious. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know they laugh over there.  And they say, 

well look at the numbers there.  I'll tell you, young fellow, you 

wouldn't get elected if you'd have told the truth -- you wouldn't 

have been elected.  And that's a fact.  So you can chirp all you 

like.  You change your policies out there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- You go out with these policies and you hold a 

rally.  I dare any one of you, any NDP member, to go out and 

hold a rural rally on your budget.  You see if they're going to 

vote for you.  Because they're going to remember, and if you 

would've told the truth, you know you're gone. 

 

That's why you're gone now -- because you can go back and 

say, well I'll try to fix it, I'll try to fix it, and I'll try to fix it.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, they'll remember. 

 

Furtan adds that meat packing industries in Saskatchewan 

would lose some of its economics to reduce volume.  One plant 

was shut down immediately.  Mr. Speaker, they may not want 

to hear about this agriculture stuff, but the professor says . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . And the member from Moose Jaw 

is chirping up, Mr. Speaker.  The professor says one plant's got 

to go for sure. 

 

Now is that the Moose Jaw packing plant?  How will you feel 

about that?  Your budget -- NDP budget that cuts off the 

livestock industry -- is going to cut off the feedstock for the 

packing plant in Moose Jaw. 

 

The blame isn't going to be somewhere in Ottawa, my friend.  

The blame is going to be you and your policies.  And you 

sitting there clapping for this Minister of Finance as he rips the 

heart and soul out of rural people around Moose Jaw and in 

Moose Jaw, who depend on agriculture.  And you know that.  

So how can you think that it's a good idea? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the long-run result is that Saskatchewan feedlots 

will have to ship animals to slaughtering plants in Alberta and 

the United States, says Professor Furtan.   This further erodes 

the farm income situation in Saskatchewan, which means the 

crisis has a new crisis. 

 

We had a crisis that we all campaigned in during last fall's 

election.  And the NDP made all the promises.  And now we're 

in and we've got a new NDP budget, and not only is there a 

crisis, there's a double crisis.  It's called the pathetic response to 

the truth that the NDP are now pushing on the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The missing brochure. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- The missing brochure.  It's the second crisis.  If 

you'd told them that you were going to rip out their crop 

insurance, devastate their livestock industry, 



1058 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1992 

cancel the energy industry, cancel all the mining activities, 

raise taxes and raise utilities, and cancel their nursing homes, 

close hospitals, raise health care fees in rural Saskatchewan, do 

you know what?  You wouldn't be here.  That's the fact.  That's 

the fact.  And you can discount it all you like, but that's the 

truth because you wouldn't dare campaign on this.  And the 

people know and they're not going to forget. 

 

Furtan concludes by stating that this would have a negative 

impact on rural Saskatchewan because many of the jobs lost 

would be in rural Saskatchewan.  So we have a crisis.  Then 

your budget comes, there's another crisis in terms of income, 

then there's a crisis in terms of debt, and now there's a crisis in 

terms of rural jobs because the jobs associated with the 

livestock industry have several multipliers.  In fact some of the 

best multipliers you can see are in the livestock industry.  And 

why the depth in some jurisdictions in Canada, in the United 

States, are stronger than Saskatchewan is because they have 

diversified, and it's more intensive. 

 

And all economic studies show that even socialists that go to 

school learn that.  You learn the fact that if you spend money in 

diversification in the livestock industry in rural Saskatchewan 

you will make them stronger.  And as a result, Mr. Speaker, 

they will then invest in infrastructure that helps them.  They'll 

invest in water supplies.  They'll invest in wells.  They'll invest 

in irrigation equipment.  They will drought-proof themselves.  

They will put the right kinds of rotations in.  They know they 

will be able to save some money.  They have a combination of 

things that allow them to be stronger through all kinds of 

economic conditions. 

 

Mr. Furtan goes on and says, one could argue that the 

FeedGAP program makes money for the province of 

Saskatchewan rather than costing the province.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, Professor Furtan says the FeedGAP program makes 

money for the province of Saskatchewan, doesn't cost the 

province money. 

 

Now imagine if you're investing in people in rural 

Saskatchewan and you're giving them roads, giving them good 

education, you're giving them a protective mechanism to allow 

them to build up their livestock industry like we have in 

neighbouring provinces and states throughout North America.  

Imagine you're doing that and they're just getting on a roll and 

they are competing with Alberta -- very competitively -- and 

the United States and American producers.  And they just get 

doing that and they go into a campaign, Mr. Speaker, and they 

vote for an NDP administration that says, we'll keep that up, 

we'll even do better, we'll give you the cost of production, 

better protection, all that kind of help for less money and less 

taxes -- that's right -- all of that for less taxes. 

 

In fact when we said in the budget, Mr. Speaker, that the deficit 

would be 265 and with harmonization that would allow us to 

do it.  The leader of the opposition at that time, the now 

Premier said, oh well I think that's fair enough. With a little bit 

of management we can fix that.  We'll have an even lower 

deficit. And he's anticipating that it might even be $500 million 

deficit there. And then we can even take 200 million out, and 

we can cut your taxes in rural 

Saskatchewan and give you the cost of production and give you 

all of these things. 

 

It's very nice to see the House Leader back, Mr. Speaker, 

because he was the guy that finally got defeated by rural . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I think the leader has 

been here a long time, knowing that we do not refer to 

members absent or present in this House.  I think the member 

knows that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Being near 5 o'clock, I move the 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I know that the member realizes 

that that is unacceptable, when a member is still on his feet to 

interject and move that the House do now adjourn. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm happy you gave me that 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- It now being 5 o'clock this House stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 

 

 


