




















































Hansard: August 18, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2627 

 August 18, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 9 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave we would 

like to go to government business, adjourned debates, Bill 88, 

The Power Corporation amendment Act. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 88 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 88 -- An Act 

to amend The Power Corporation Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we 

have a few questions we'd like to ask on this Bill, but I believe 

those questions could be adequately handled in committee.  So 

at this time we would allow this to go to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 

the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 

day. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 88 -- An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a couple of 

questions which I'd like to direct to the minister.  Mr. Minister, 

could you give us a general outline of the purpose of this 

amendment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'd appreciate doing that.  And I ask 

the member for the patience, and I appreciate his patience.  I 

have officials coming.  They're not here just yet, but most of 

these questions I'm sure I'll be able to answer, because this Bill 

is very, very straightforward. 

 

And what the Bill does is give authority to SaskPower to bury 

communication cable that they need in terms of communication 

links between their power plants or between their offices. 

 

The Power Corporation, as you will know, sir, already has the 

power and authority to bury power lines, and they have buried 

many, many kilometres under the rural underground 

development program that your government started and was in 

the process of doing across Saskatchewan.  But the legislation 

does not cover the burying of underground communication 

cable. 

And so to clarify in the Act that while you're burying the 

underground electrical cable, that if the Power Corporation 

wants to do communication cable, all this Bill does as a way of 

change is allow for them to bury the communication cable and 

give them the same rights and privileges that they have as it 

would relate to electrical cable to their communication cable. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, is SaskTel 

then involved in this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The option that we looked at, to the 

member from Wilkie, was allowing SaskTel to do the program.  

And there's some logic and a great deal of discussion went on 

between my officials at SaskPower and the officials at SaskTel. 

 

Finally it came to a resolve that what would happen here, 

because the Power Corporation's needs are very single needs 

that no one else would be using their system -- it's not a matter 

of Power selling the service to anyone else; it's just used for 

Power; they're often burying other cable at the same time -- that 

it just became easier for SaskPower to do the program as 

opposed to contracting with SaskTel, letting SaskTel bury the 

cable, making payments from SaskPower to SaskTel on a 

regular basis, that it just seemed easier because of the need for 

security and all of that to bury the cable directly through the 

Power Corporation. 

 

And the discussions that went on between SaskTel and 

SaskPower, as I mentioned, were lengthy and the result was 

that SaskPower should do the project -- therefore the 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Chairman, is 

this . . . the SaskTel, is that internal to SaskTel or is that 

global?  The SaskTel portion of this, is that for all over 

Saskatchewan or just internal for SaskTel? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'm not understanding -- maybe it's 

the earliness of the morning -- but the problem here is that 

SaskTel . . . It's not a problem but . . . Let me rephrase that.  

The issue here is that SaskTel will not be the company burying 

the cable.  SaskPower will bury their own communication 

cable. 

 

And the discussion had been, contracting with SaskTel to bury 

the cable and then paying them an annual lease for it.  And the 

conclusion came that it was less complicated and easier for 

SaskPower to do the projects on their own.  Had we allowed 

SaskTel to do it -- had that been the route we had gone -- we 

would have needed no legislation because SaskTel already has 

the authority under their legislation to bury this kind of 

communication cable. 

 

So in essence, if you want to look at it in another way, the 

government -- if you want to look at it in a global way -- 

already had the power to put the cable down through SaskTel.  

And what we're doing is giving a little bit of that power to the 

Sask Power Corporation to allow them to bury their own 

communication cable. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I  



2628 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

think . . . I don't think I phrased my question properly and I 

think you've answered it. 

 

What I was asking is: SaskPower are putting their own 

communication lines in.  And it's got nothing to do with . . . 

Okay, that's kind of what I wanted to know.  Can I ask you, Mr. 

Minister, what are your plans to finish the underground 

gasification project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'm not sure that comes under this 

Act, but I don't know . . . I'll take my lead from the Chair.  I 

guess you can cut me off if we get too far outside the bounds of 

the debate on the SaskPower Act.  As the member will know, 

the rural gasification program is in SaskEnergy. 

 

But just a brief outline.  We have clearly indicated that the 

10-year plan that was in place was not renewed at the end of 

the 10-year period.  And in large part it was as a result of the 

very high cost of putting the program in place.  Some of the 

subsidies per connection were as much as 10 and $12,000.  

And in terms of where that money could be best spent in terms 

of developing farm program and rural program, it was decided 

that at this point in time we would not renew the program but 

review it, look at it. 

 

If and when the budget of the province came in line and we had 

the books balanced, obviously we want to do whatever we can 

to allow gas to be distributed in rural areas.  And of course 

there is a plan already in place to distribute gas which is 

subsidized by other taxpayers, but it's not at the same level as 

the 10-year plan that came to conclusion last fall. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, can 

you tell me if you're having any problems with the buried 

cable? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Here again I'm not sure whether 

you're referring to the communication cable that we're referring 

to in this Bill or whether you're referring to electrical cable. 

That question, I'll wait until my officials come and I'll get a 

response for you.  I'm not aware of any, but that doesn't mean 

that there aren't some. 

 

I know one thing, that the rural underground program has been 

very helpful, especially in some of the oilfield areas, where we 

. . . I know on our farm and I'm sure in your area as well, many 

farmers who had power lines all over the place have had that 

reduced considerably as a result of the underground program.  

And it has been a good change for the farming community in 

terms of the ability of large farm equipment to move around in 

the fields, as well as the safety aspect. 

 

Now whether there are problems, I imagine there are because 

for every action there's a reaction.  But I just don't know quite 

what they are, and I'll get that for you. 

 

(0915) 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, could you explain 

in section 59, it's paragraph (2) and it's talking about the cost, 

and it says the corporation can request any reasonable fee that 

it may prescribe. 

Can you tell us just what percentage of the cost you intend to 

charge to the customer.  Do you have that figured out?  And 

what assurance does the customer have that he won't have to 

assume full cost when he makes that request? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- As the member will know, that the 

communication lines that will be buried between -- let's say use 

an example, and I'm not sure that this is realistic or not -- but 

between Boundary and Coronach, if you were to bury a 

communication line, over time, obviously, that whole line 

would have to be paid for by the consumer, because there's no 

other place that the corporation gets its revenue.  So it would 

basically be amortized over a 20, 30, 40-year period, much as a 

power line or a power station.  But I think the users of power 

are the only people who can pay for this project, unless the 

Power Corporation were running a deficit and got a direct 

transfer from the Consolidated Fund. 

 

But the Power Corporation historically has run relatively 

effectively, made a small- or medium-sized net income each 

year, and is, at least in most cases . . . although some years the 

full amount was asked for by the government, but has been 

allowed to keep -- the Minister of Finance would know -- but 

roughly 50 per cent of the net profits as retained earnings.  And 

that is where they get their capital for such projects as this.  But 

it would be paid for by the consumer, but amortized over a 

longish period of time. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I don't have any 

more questions for the minister except the answer to the one.  

So I guess, with your assurance that that'll come over, I'm 

going to let this proceed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, I will get that for the member.  

And I thank him for his questions.  And I think as the 

committee will see, this Bill is not earth-shattering, but . . . to 

us, as politicians.  But for the corporation, it's an important 

piece of legislation in that it allows them to remove some of the 

overhead communication lines and put them underground.  

That will make better service and probably a safer service in 

the long run. 

 

So I just thank the member for his questions.  And I'll get that 

piece of information that he asked for. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I thank you too.  I 

guess there's no use me thanking your officials.  However I'm 

sure they done their job in getting you . . . the Minister of 

Finance will take the plaudits.  Thank you. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 60 -- An Act to amend The Community Bonds Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like 

to introduce to the member opposite and I guess all 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2629 

members of the House, particularly the critic for the 

community bond area, Jim Zatulsky who is the director of 

community bonds. 

 

And I'll try to, as quickly and as efficiently as we can, answer 

questions.  But here again this is a program that has been in 

place for some time and I would expect the questions will be 

routine and I'll be able to handle them without holding this up 

very long. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I think we can 

be agreeable to that.  The questions we have are basically 

general in nature. 

 

Mr. Minister, as I understand this, this is simply an opportunity 

for co-operatives to participate in the community bond 

program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, the member is correct.  The 

main difference, or the main change in the Bill, although there 

are a couple, is the issue of allowing co-operatives to be 

involved in the community bond program. 

 

This had been looked at by the previous government, as I 

understand it, but at the time the legislation was established 

co-ops were not included.  And I don't know whether that was 

an intent that co-ops would be excluded for the longish period 

or whether this was initial program and co-ops were being 

negotiated with. 

 

But at any rate, the co-ops approached us in the early stages of 

our government and said that they would appreciate the 

opportunity to be included.  And when we looked at it, we 

thought it would be a good idea because much of the economic 

development that happens in the province, especially in rural 

Saskatchewan, there's a very direct input from credit unions 

and co-ops and the Wheat Pool, and some local co-ops that are 

not associated with the big three as well.  So this change will 

allow for them to be able to invest in community bonds. 

 

The other area is the due diligence on the projects.  We believe 

that there was an inherent weakness in the legislation and in the 

program that not enough emphasis and work was being done in 

terms of trying to determine whether or not the project in the 

end would be successful.  And so we've established here a layer 

of independent due diligence that will be done in the projects 

that I think will make more of them successful and therefore 

will strengthen the program in the long run. 

 

The other thing that the auditor's opinion was, that we should 

set a maximum amount overall that the program could be 

involved in.  You'll know that in SEDCO (Saskatchewan 

Economic Development Corporation) there's a cap of $300 

million and we'll be dealing with that later this morning. 

 

But in the community bonds there was no cap.  There was an 

annual limit of 20 million, but the auditor indicated to us that 

there should be more than that.  There should be an overall cap 

on the program and if you go over that, you should come back 

to the legislature to change it.  So we're establishing here a cap 

of $100 million. 

 

Now if the annual cap that you put in place last year of 20 

million is followed for the next five years, then we will have to 

come back here to the legislature to amend the Bill to allow for 

that to be changed upward. 

 

But it's a check and a mechanism whereby a government some 

day in the future, if they got totally out of control and were 

spending hundreds of millions of dollars on this program, 

would actually have to come back and debate it before the 

legislature. 

 

Those are the three main changes.  And I think what you'll find 

is that we've done it in consultation with a lot of people in the 

province and that these are basically requests from investors 

and communities, and I think will help strengthen the program 

that your government introduced. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I'm 

wondering whether there is the possibility or potential for a 

co-operative to gain an unfair advantage as a result of this 

legislation.  There's a concern that we have, being brought to 

our attention, that perhaps a large co-operative -- Federated 

Co-op, Sask Wheat Pool, or someone of that nature -- would be 

able to use this to their advantage, the community bond 

program, to their advantage over a small community, for 

example, or whatever. 

 

I'm wondering whether there's been any consideration of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- We, I guess, are more interested in 

the positive side of the formula, in that the co-ops that had been 

excluded will now be able to come in.  They will add another 

level of security to many of the projects.  Quite honestly, we 

haven't had that raised with us by any of the communities, that 

they were worried about co-ops dominating. 

 

The other limiting factor there is here, in terms of the size of 

the community bonds, as you know, is that the previous regs 

and legislation indicated that any project over 2 million has to 

come to cabinet to be reviewed and approved. 

 

Now I'll take that under advisement and maybe be more 

cognizant that there could be that concern, although I haven't 

heard it.  And we'll watch closely.  And if this becomes an 

issue . . . Obviously we too would be not interested in anyone 

dominating the community bond.  But I just haven't seen that as 

a concern and it certainly isn't a concern at this time.  But we'll 

make a note of that and follow it closely. 

 

Obviously, as well, if you're getting concerns and you have 

somebody who's raising that as an issue, we'd be interested in 

talking to them. 

 

(0930) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well I'll just maybe 

cite as an example, we'll use the Saska Pasta project in Swift 

Current as an example.  The project is expected . . . or 

hopefully going to be going ahead. 

 

Now supposing the city of Swift Current decided a community 

bond offering was a way to attract additional 



2630 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

capital into the project.  We could potentially see the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool asking for a community bond for a 

pasta production facility as well, directly being in conflict . . . 

directly being in competition -- not necessarily conflict -- but 

directly in competition with a community bond corporation that 

is initiated by a smaller community. 

 

And that is, you know, one of the areas of concern that has 

been brought to our attention.  And we just wondered . . . and I 

seek the minister's assurance that that will be given a due 

consideration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well at the present time the policy 

is that any project that is approved is, the maximum community 

bond portion, is 50 per cent.  This is, as I understand it, not in 

the legislation, but this is the policy of the community bond 

program at the present time.  This too is a change, although it's 

not in the legislation. 

 

But the fact is, is that the local project has to have a 25 per cent 

local component to it.  And what we're trying to do here is 

make sure, as I indicated to the member from Estevan 

yesterday, is that in terms of economic development and 

including in community bonds, that there is risk being taken by 

everyone, that the taxpayers aren't being exposed to a hundred 

per cent risk on these projects, and that there has to be a fair bit 

of risk capital by the proponents of a project. 

 

And whether that's Saska Pasta or whether it would be the 

Wheat Pool coming to us, that it is very, very important in 

terms of economic development and in terms of developing the 

market system on that side of the formula, that those who are 

the proponents of projects, to make them work properly, there 

has to be that element of risk and exposure by the people who 

are putting forward the idea and the concept. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Just one other small, 

little question, I guess, and that was with respect to the 

directors.  I notice that they have . . . I'm not sure . . . I think it's 

a new provision that one director be of age between 16 and 25 

years.  I'm wondering, what was the reason for that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- As I understand it, the provision 16 

to 25 was established by the previous government for bond 

corporations in their incorporation.  That is, that when a new 

bond corporation was incorporated, you had to have someone 

between the age of 16 and 25.  What this does is extend that out 

that as long as the corporation exists, not only for the 

incorporation stage but for the longer period of time, you 

would keep someone between the age of 16 and 25. 

 

I don't know what the original thought was when that was set 

up but in looking at it and reviewing that, we thought it was a 

good idea in the sense of in many of our rural communities 

where the economic development programs and the community 

bond programs will take place, that getting young 

entrepreneurs into the system early -- and I think this is 

something that the credit union movement and the Wheat Pool 

are trying to do to a large extent, is not only have their 

members at sort of a medium 

age of 55 or 60, but try to include young entrepreneurs at board 

levels and to get their input -- and I guess, vitality and 

excitement onto these boards seem to be important. 

 

I think that would have been the argument made by the original 

people who formulated this program.  And it seemed to be 

something we wanted to follow.  So we've extended it, not only 

from the incorporation stage, but throughout the bond 

corporation's life. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I'm wondering if you or your 

officials are aware of any of the current community bond 

corporations that have had any problem with that, meeting that 

requirement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I think all of the corporations have 

been able to meet that requirement.  It is a little bit more 

difficult . . . I think it's fair to say that in trying to ensure that 

we have young people on the boards of the bond corporation, it 

makes it a little bit more difficult but hasn't created a big 

problem. 

 

So I guess at the end of the day when we weighed it out as to 

whether to leave that clause in or eliminate it altogether, it was 

thought that the advantages that are gained by continuing to 

keep young people, training them . . . using this also as a 

training ground for future bond corporation so that they have 

years of experience and can be helpful in the community in that 

area. 

 

The bit of difficulty that it created for the bond corporation was 

actually outweighed by the positive end result. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well I would certainly agree with that, Mr. 

Minister.  We think it's important that younger members of a 

community are afforded the opportunity to participate in 

something like this, and in fact encouraged.  And we would see 

no problem with it. 

 

Of course, we're all aware in rural Saskatchewan it may be 

difficult to find people of between 16 and 25 years old that 

have a interest in a project.  And that's perhaps the reason for 

not extending it to the entire length of the bond offering. 

 

I'm just wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could tell us whether 

this legislation will also extend the opportunity for credit 

unions to participate in community bonds. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The differentiation is that they 

could be involved in buying bonds from a bond co. in a 

community; that is, they would be treated the same as anyone 

else to buy bonds in a local bond corporation. 

 

However, they would not be allowed to use a community bond 

to set up a credit union.  So if you see the differentiation:  they 

couldn't use it to go into a community where there is no credit 

union and do a community bond program and set up a credit 

union.  But they could go into a community and buy into, oh, 

an alfalfa plant if they wanted to buy some shares.  But the 

same restrictions would apply to them as applied to everyone 

else. 

 

So they would be allowed to be a stakeholder in their 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2631 

community through the community bond program, the same as 

anyone else.  But they could not use it to extend their credit 

union system into other parts of the province. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Would they be allowed to initiate a community 

bond, though, is what I was wondering? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Here again there's differentiation 

and it's important to sort of think this through.  But let's use a 

credit union board in Kindersley that needed a new office 

building and they say well an interesting way of doing this 

would be to set up a bond corporation and build a building and 

then we would lease it from them.  That would be deemed to be 

not an eligible project.  It would be ineligible; they couldn't do 

that. 

 

But let's say the credit union system in Kindersley wanted to 

get a tractor plant built in Kindersley.  No one else was doing 

it, but the credit union board believed that this was a good 

economic development project, and they could go out and 

initiate a bond co. that would build a tractor plant.  But all of 

the restricting factors that would apply to you or I or anyone 

else setting up the bond corporation would imply, and they 

would have to follow all of the regulations. 

 

So it would have to be something that would be very much at 

arm's length.  It couldn't come back to be part of the credit 

union system. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, where is that set out in the Act?  Or 

is it set out in regulations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- This would be set in the regulations, 

and I'll make sure that you get a copy of those, and we'll give 

you a briefing note on that.  It would be in the regulations as it 

would apply to business in general.  And not only credit unions 

would have this kind of restriction, but let's use oil companies, 

or North Canadian Oils, I suppose would be a good example.  

If they wanted to do a project to drill some oil wells in your 

area, they would be ineligible for doing it within their own 

company. 

 

So this is not exclusive to credit unions but it applies to all 

companies and corporations in the province and there wouldn't 

be a differentiation, I don't believe, in the regulations, although 

I'll get those for you and give you a briefing note on it. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I think that's basically 

all of the questions and concerns that we had about it.  We very 

much would appreciate the information on the regulations as 

they concern the credit unions. 

 

We essentially have no problems with this at all.  We think that 

the community bond program was an excellent program and 

we're pleased to see that the administration is carrying on with 

it. 

 

As far as the question of the total bond amount being 

guaranteed by the government of $100 million, I don't see why 

there would be any concerns with that.  Tightening up the 

regulations as they concern the viability of the businesses and 

all of that type of thing, I 

don't see there's any reasons for concern there either, Mr. 

Minister.  Obviously with a program that is relatively new, like 

the community bond program, there's always going to be, oh, I 

would say, a certain amount of start-up problems or concerns.  

And if this adequately -- and I think it does -- deals with those 

concerns, we certainly wouldn't have any problem with it at all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I want to thank the member 

because, as you know, a new program will have lots of growing 

pains, and this one certainly isn't without growing pains. 

 

And I want to say as well that I think it's important that when 

these programs come in place, that we understand that there 

will be large success stories and there'll also be some failures.  

And that's one of the reasons we didn't dwell very long on the 

one failure that we know of in the community bond program, 

although there was lots of things that could have been said 

about the failure of the Melville project. 

 

But I think it's fair to say that the department and the 

government are very, very interested in making this program a 

success.  And personally I don't much care who initiated it or 

thought of it.  Many of these things come from local people, 

come to government, and then are implemented -- whether it's 

health care or SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) or 

SaskPower or Crown Investments Corporation.  In many ways 

the end result is what's important, and I think this is a good 

example of something that can be very successful. 

 

So I appreciate the member's support of the amendments that 

we're making here.  We are trying to strengthen the program.  

And we will send him a complete set of the regulations with 

briefing notes on that particular area. 

 

I'd just like to say thanks to my officials . . . oh, sorry.  Okay. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

have a couple of questions that concern our community.  The 

town of Gull Lake apparently has received permission to get 

into a community bond project, and it has been . . . They 

themselves have been okayed, I guess. 

 

The project that they were to sponsor though, apparently has 

run into some problems in terms of definition.  And I'm 

wondering if you could clear up for them and for me what the 

definitions of projects would entail.  And I guess if your 

official is perhaps acquainted with this particular project, he 

might advise you as to some detail as to why this particular 

project was not allowed at this time.  Because there seems to be 

some conflict in the community as to whether or not their 

project should have been denied, because there seems to be 

some ideas there that . . . It's a technicality, I guess.  So I 

wonder if you could elaborate on that a bit. 

 

(0945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The program that you're talking 

about is the 35 Mile Community Bond Corp., and is dealing 

with a service industry.  And under the definitions of the 

program that are in place . . . and here it 



2632 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

goes back to the member from Kindersley's comments about 

having to renew and review these regulations and legislation.  

Especially in the first five years, I expect that Mr. Zatulsky will 

have us reviewing these and probably have changes to 

regulations and legislation each year for the next couple of 

years, if in fact we're doing our job properly. 

 

But this is a definition that under the present legislation and 

regulations doesn't allow for this corporation.  I really don't 

want to go into a lot of detail here because . . . it's not 

confidential, but I just don't know how much you or I want to 

debate the pros and cons of that definition here in the public.  

But there is no real definition of environmental projects in the 

program.  There wasn't when you people were running it and 

there isn't now. 

 

We're looking at the potential of making some minor changes 

that would allow for environmental projects that then would 

include the Gull Lake or the 35 Mile project.  But I guess the 

commitment I'll make to the member from Maple Creek is that 

we will look and work closely with you in trying to do what we 

can to make this program fit within the regulations and 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I appreciate that 

and I'm sure the folks in the community will appreciate that as 

well.  I guess your comments lead me to another question 

though.  Is there a process now of appeal that they should be 

following in order to keep their project sort of on the burner, 

alive, and not have it go dead? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- There is in fact a review committee 

that would . . . that they would have potential of appealing to.  I 

don't think the Gull Lake project is at that stage yet, and 

obviously we want to explore all the opportunities so it doesn't 

have to go that route, and that's a last resort.  But there is an 

appeal mechanism to the review committee. 

 

But in most of these cases I would be surprised if any of the 

bond corporations that were set up didn't have some problems.  

And the vast majority of them are sorted out before they get to 

that point, although there are some that are turned down. 

 

It's fair to say that not every project that comes forward gets 

approval.  And it's fair to say that this is not unlike other 

applications for money.  We have taxpayers' money being 

exposed here -- 100 per cent of the money that the bond 

corporation has in terms of the money put in by individuals is 

guaranteed by other taxpayers. 

 

So it's a balancing act and we want to make sure that we do two 

things, that we get the economic development spin-off for Gull 

Lake, but at the same time -- to friends and neighbours who are 

willing and good enough to put their money in at no interest 

and the taxpayers who guarantee that bond -- that they are 

protected. 

 

So I think there is good potential we can work this out but 

there's a . . . failing that if it's not done directly, there's the 

review panel.  And I guess inevitably some of them don't go, 

but this is one we think can be sorted out. 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I will be very 

happy to deliver that message to the folks back in my 

constituency.  I guess what it says is that they shouldn't rush 

out and start looking for another project right away because 

that was sort of one of the implications that was made to me -- 

that if we could determine that this project were never going to 

be allowed, then they would start to look for another project.  

And their feeling as they expressed it to me was that it was 

simply a matter, not so much of the ability of this project to 

work, but it was more a matter of interpretation of what 

category it should fall under within the terms of being 

acceptable or not. 

 

Now if that is true, and if in fact all of the potential for this 

project to succeed is good, then I think we have to work on that 

interpretation.  And I appreciate your comments and I'm sure 

that some of the folks from back in my constituency will be 

approaching your office to try to sort this matter out.  But if 

you have any further comments, fine, if not I'm probably 

finished with that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well as the member knows, 

south-west Saskatchewan, I've got not a bad knowledge of that 

area and also have a few relatives that live in Gull Lake, so I've 

got to make sure that one doesn't cause you and I a great deal 

of difficulty. 

 

I don't know if the members have other questions.  If not I'd 

like to thank my officials and thank the members opposite for 

their questions. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I think 

that concludes the questions that we had on this one and we 

thank your official for coming in and helping this morning. 

 

The Chair: -- Because of the number of clauses relative to 

pages, is there agreement that we proceed through this on a 

page-by-page basis until clause 18? 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Pages 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 18 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 66 -- An Act to amend The Industrial Development 

Act 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister please introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, I'm pleased to introduce to the 

committee the vice-president of finance and admin from 

SEDCO, Mr. Gary Benson. 

 

Clause 1 
 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, as I see 

it, the Bill basically is pretty much of a housekeeping nature 

and I wonder if the minister would be so good as to take the 

time to give us his impressions of the intent of the Bill and the 

implications. 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2633 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member, if he looks at section 

26 of the Act and section 37 . . . actually section 37 I guess is a 

more relevant section.  But it deals with the ability of SEDCO 

to borrow from the CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) . . . Department of Finance, through the 

Consolidated Fund, that it raises the limit from 300 million to 

400 million. And this is as a result, as I mentioned under the 

community bond program, of having in the legislation some 

mechanism so that on a regular basis as these corporations 

continue to lend money and expand, that it's not done without 

fairly stringent legislative control. 

 

When we came to office, I think it's fair to say we were 

bumping up against the $300 million limit and it was at that 

point that we either came to the legislature to extend that 

beyond the 300 million, or quit lending until we got enough 

loans repaid. 

 

But as you know, SEDCO in recent years has fallen on some 

tough times and there's not a lot of revenue being generated 

that then could be loaned out.  So the main reason of the Bill, 

as we talked about yesterday, and I say this to the member from 

Kindersley, is to raise that lending limit, so to speak, from 300 

million to 400 million. 

 

There's a few other changes in here -- section 11 that deals with 

the boards and holding office and those kinds of things that 

standardize the system of board members, and standardizes it 

with some of the other Crowns.  There's no big change there, 

but that's one other area of change. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank 

my official, Mr. Benson, who as the members opposite will 

know, doing a great job over at SEDCO, and thank the member 

opposite for his questions. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  And 

thank you to the officials for coming in this morning. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member for Saskatoon Wildwood on 

her feet? 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- By leave, Mr. Deputy Chair, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Mr. Deputy Chair, I would like to introduce to 

you and through you to the Assembly a Saskatoon artist of 

some considerable prominence who is over in the west gallery.  

He is a member of the Humanum Art Gallery of Saskatoon.  

His name is Hugo Alvarado.  And he has come to Regina to 

observe the proceedings here.  And I would ask members to 

welcome him to Regina and to the legislature. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview-Haultain on his feet? 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Chair, I would ask leave of the Assembly 

to introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Or to acknowledge the guest.  I'd like to also 

welcome our guest.  Mr. Alvarado is a constituent of mine and 

a personal friend too.  So I would just like to say welcome, and 

join my colleague from Saskatoon Wildwood.  And we'll see 

you a little later.  I would ask all members to again join with 

me, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1000) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 78 -- An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored 

Venture Capital Corporations Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister please introduce his official. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, my pleasure to 

introduce Denise Gustavson, the manager of program 

administration.  As you mentioned, the Bill we're dealing with, 

the labour-sponsored venture capital, here again the changes 

are minor by comparison with some of the Bills, but I'll be 

pleased to answer any questions. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, it 

appears that the nature of this Bill is simply to offer the 

opportunity for labour groups to take part in the venture capital 

corporations Act.  I'm wondering if the minister would be so 

good as to take the time to give his impressions of the Bill and 

implications. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Could the member just rephrase the 

question?  I was just talking to my official. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What's the Bill about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Okay.  There's two main points to 

the Bill.  There is a . . . I guess the main point, let's put it this 

way, is an increase in contribution by individuals from 3,500 to 

5,000.  And this is done for the obvious reasons, to allow 

individuals to put more money into the venture capital, with all 

the accruing benefits that will come from that. 

 

The other change is looking at a registration fee, and that will 

come in the regulations, as I understand it.  Here again, that 

hasn't been quite defined.  And I raise that only to indicate to 

the member in advance that it's something that's being 

considered, although it's not part of the legislation.  And here 

again, as these regulations are formulated I will get for him the 

detail of that. 
 

But the change in the legislation that is before us basically 



2634 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

only changes the upper limit from 3,500 to 5,000.  And that is 

done after a fair bit of consultation with the various groups who 

are involved and have been involved. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Yes.  Mr. Minister, you mentioned the possibility 

of a registration fee, and I just wanted to briefly touch on that 

as well.  What kind of . . . or, pardon me, what is the purpose of 

the registration fee as you see it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The registration fee is to try to 

offset some of the actual costs of the program.  I think it's fair 

to say that the benefit will be, as a result of going from 3,500 to 

5,000, will be relatively considerable for individuals.  And the 

registration fee would not be unlike many other plans where 

there are fees to cover the administration costs. 

 

Now the legislation allows for a registration fee.  We haven't 

decided where that will come down at, but it will be something 

that will be justifiable in covering some administration costs.  I 

don't think it'll cover the full cost, but some of the costs of the 

administration of their plan. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I'm wondering if you could perhaps 

give us an example of the type of fee structure that you see and 

how it would apply. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- This is a fee that will be, I guess, 

minor by comparison.  I don't know, I suppose it could start at 

$100, somewhere around $100, and it would be used in order to 

offset the cost of the program. 

 

The other way of doing it obviously is to take the money 

somehow from other taxpayers to pay for the administration or 

to take it from other places.  But it's a cost of the program, and 

we're just trying to determine what would be a reasonable 

amount in other plans and other programs so that we would try 

to achieve some fairness in the program; whether taxpayers 

who don't get the benefit are being called on to pay for the 

registration fee for these individuals. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well we would certainly agree with that concept, 

Mr. Minister.  We have no problem whatsoever with it.  I was 

just wanting perhaps some kind of an indication of what kind 

of fee structure you foresaw, and examples of where . . . 

 

So it's simply an opportunity to recover the cost that's 

associated with putting the program in place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes.  I think the amount we're 

looking at . . . like if it were to be between 100 and $200, it 

wouldn't come close to covering the administration costs, but it 

would be something to show some faith and recover some of 

the cost of administering the program. 

 

But we're working on that.  In the legislation we'll have the 

power to charge a registration fee, and what is left to 

regulations is setting the amount.  But we're looking, I think it's 

fair to say, in an area somewhere between 100 and $200. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And what percentage of the total overall cost 

would that . . . of administration would that represent? 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The thought is that it would be a 

small percentage of the . . . and because we haven't arrived at 

an exact number, it's difficult to say, but $100 would not be a 

big percentage of the cost of the administration.  And what 

we're trying to do is to initiate a fee that would try to recover 

some of the cost of administration.  But it's not likely that the 

initial fee that we charge will come anywhere close to 

recovering the cost of administration. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I would like to 

extend our thanks to the officials for coming in this morning to 

deal with this Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you very much.  I too would 

like to thank my official and the member of the opposition 

from Kindersley.  And I'll also send to him, when we get this in 

place on the regulations and the registration fee, we'll make a 

commitment to get that to him. 

 

(1015) 

 

Bill No. 21 -- An Act to continue SaskEnergy Incorporated, 

to make certain consequential amendments to certain Acts 

resulting from that continuance and to validate certain 

transactions involving SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to please introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, I would like to introduce to the 

committee and to you, Mr. Chairman, the members of our staff 

who are with us here today. Bill Baker, president of the 

corporation, who is seated to my right, and directly behind him 

are general counsel Robert Haynes -- Robert is also secretary, 

part of his title -- and Greg Mrazek, the corporate controller of 

SaskEnergy. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I first 

of all would like to welcome your officials here to help us with 

a few questions.  I appreciate the document on these proposed 

House amendments that probably will help me understand what 

you're doing here. 

 

It looks to me, the way Bill 21 stands, that SaskEnergy will 

become a separate Crown without any chance of gaining 

equity.  Is that so? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The purpose of this Bill, as you'll 

remember the debate -- and the member from Estevan may 

want to get into this at some point -- is a culmination of the 

very big provincial debate that went on at that time as to 

whether or not SaskEnergy should be privatized or not.  And 

the commitment that we made during the election campaign, 

and I guess the sessions 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2635 

going up to the election, that we would if we were elected, 

bring in legislation that would ensure SaskEnergy would be 

part of a Crown corporation. 

 

And at that time it was unclear as to whether it would be part of 

SaskPower or whether it would be a free-standing Crown 

corporation, but the commitment was very clear that we would 

establish legislation that would give it the authority of a Crown 

corporation. 

 

And the member from Wilkie is right.  This is now the 

legislation, the format that confirms that commitment that we, 

in fact, made to the people of the province. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, what would seem 

to me a perfect opportunity to give the public a chance to 

invest, seems like by doing this you now allow that to go by the 

wayside. 

 

Bonds, community bonds, are successful.  Your last bond issue 

was successful.  It would appear to me that the people are ready 

to invest in their own Crowns and their own business.  Why 

wouldn't you have taken this opportunity . . . I notice your debt 

is 1.3 million.  Why wouldn't you exchange equity for debt? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The members opposite will know 

that when it comes to Crown corporations and utilities in the 

province, I think it's fair to say that whether it's SaskPower or 

now SaskEnergy or SaskTel -- SGI in a different category but 

especially the AAIA (Automobile Accident Insurance Act) 

portion of Sask Government Insurance -- that the public 

seemed to want, and I think it's fair to say that all the 

indications are, that they want these Crown corporations 

utilities to remain as Crown corporations. 

 

I don't take away the member's argument, because I agree with 

him that the public should be able to invest in natural gas 

companies in Saskatchewan that do business here and that are 

involved in the gas business in Saskatchewan.  And it's fair to 

say that they have that opportunity.  I mean they can invest in 

North Canadian Oil or Bow Valley or some of the big pipeline 

companies that do business in Saskatchewan, that there's no 

end of investing in projects and companies that do business in 

the natural gas or oil sector in the province.  And these are 

major oil companies where they're . . . or gas companies or 

pipeline companies that people can invest in and be part 

stakeholders in the oil and gas industry. 

 

Or if they're very adventuresome people, they can go out and 

set up their own oil and gas company and come to the 

Department of Energy and Mines and apply for and bid on gas 

and oil leases and drill their own gas and oil wells. 

 

There's no end to the opportunities that people have to invest 

directly in the resource industry in Saskatchewan.  And we not 

only, as the member opposite knows, provide and allow for 

that, but we encourage it.  And we very much like to see local 

business people or farmers from your area of the province or 

from my area of the province getting together and investing 

either directly in share offerings from these companies or doing 

their own thing.  And many, quite honestly, have. 

In the Swift Current area, the member from Morse will know 

that many people in that area . . . in fact, the mayor of Swift 

Current, Len Stein, has been relatively successful in becoming 

involved in oil projects.  So there's no end to opportunities for 

people to invest in their resource sector. 

 

But here we're looking at a Crown corporation that is a utility 

that provides gas services to the homes and communities in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  For better or for worse, right or 

wrong, the public of Saskatchewan very much support the 

concept of keeping this as a Crown corporation, and I think 

clearly voted for that in the election in 1991. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, you 

know, that approach I think is unfortunate because everyone 

knows a lot of revenue could be raised for the government 

through a share offering.  You could, if you wanted to maintain 

control, keep 51 per cent of the shares -- you could have done 

that -- and also allow people to invest in the government 

projects. 

 

Also I think your logic breaks down a little bit when you tell 

me that everybody has the opportunity to go and invest.  But 

you want to keep control of the major part of the investments 

here without allowing people to do that. 

 

You talk about starting up your own oil company.  Well 

someone with 10 or 12,000, $15,000 to invest certainly can't go 

and start up an oil company.  That wouldn't even open the 

office. 

 

So I'm wondering why with the . . . when you are aware that 

the people of Saskatchewan, who incidentally are one of the 

greatest savers we have . . . We have billions of dollars in 

savings, and they're willing to put their money in government 

operated or controlled, if you wish, projects, rather than maybe 

take a chance on the private industry.  I wonder why you 

wouldn't allow the people to do that, at least offer that.  If it 

don't work you could come back and say to me, you know, 

look it don't work, always remembering you could keep your 

51, 55 per cent, whatever you thought was fair.  It works, and 

I'm sure you know that, because Saskatchewan itself has 

proved that. 

 

And I was wondering.  It's worked all over the world, and 

companies and businesses vary from one end of the spectrum 

to the other.  It's a proven fact that people have I think more 

confidence in investing their money when it's backed by 

government. 

 

And you're talking . . . I am at least, talking about the small 

investor, the person who is not knowledgeable about shares and 

stock markets and things like that, but he has some confidence 

in Saskatchewan and in Saskatchewan's place in the world 

where they may have small amounts of money.  And I think 

that they would be proud to invest in something that they feel 

they own anyway, and your philosophy has always been, it's 

owned by the people.  Well then let them have a share of it.  I 

believe you're missing a chance here and philosophies aside, I 

think the people out there would go for it. 

 

In section 42 it allows you to borrow up to $1.3 billion.  That's 

a lot of money.  When it comes to generating 



2636 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

income, that could be done I think, through the investors.  And 

then you would then not have to borrow money; you would 

have the people of Saskatchewan owning a part of their own 

business.  You wouldn't have to go on to the money market and 

you would be trading debt for equity.  I'm sure that any farmer 

today understands the difference between debt and equity, and 

I'm surprised you wouldn't at least give it a shot.  Mr. 

Chairman, Mr. Minister, I think you're passing up another 

opportunity to help alleviate the debt in this province. 

 

Bill 21 establishes SaskEnergy as a Crown corporation and that 

assumes no debt.  Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, what is the 

debt of the new corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member opposite raises several 

interesting points about investors and investment in 

Saskatchewan, and a lot of it I agree with.  I am one who 

believe that the individual should have the right to invest in oil 

and gas and in corporations.  And from time to time I've been 

able to invest in oil companies, and it's fair to say that many 

people in our party and other parties in Saskatchewan do that.  

And there are literally hundreds of companies in which we can 

do that, that play a role in the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

But I say again, there's one utility when it comes to gas and oil 

in the province -- one only -- that is a utility.  That the public, I 

believe, want to remain as a utility.  Not 10 utilities that they 

can't invest in, or 50 or 100.  One. 

 

There are hundreds of companies that if you want to go out and 

invest in and take a risk and take some chances, which is 

perfectly . . . up to that point, I totally agree with you, that there 

should be within the system, in a mixed economy, that 

opportunity. 

 

But the people of Saskatchewan, I say again, for right or 

wrong, the vast majority would like to see their utility that 

owns the pipelines that come to their home not as a risk 

venture.  They want that secure.  They want to know that the 

government guarantees that if they're hooked on to that gas line 

that their supply is assured and as stable as the government.  

That there isn't this adventuresome risk and the excitement of 

going to the stock market and the company has the opportunity 

to go up and down and to go broke. 

 

They like to know, they feel comfortable, that the gas company 

that provides their gas to them is owned by the people of the 

province.  It gives a sense of security.  And I think it's there, 

that's how the province is.  They like to know that their power 

lines, that this isn't a high-risk venture, that it is owned by the 

people of the province.  They built it, they own it, they'd like to 

keep it that way. 

 

You don't think that's right?  I tend to agree with them.  And 

these are matters of opinion.  But I think it's fair to say that the 

debate in 1989 clearly indicated that the people of the province 

wanted to keep SaskEnergy as a utility and didn't want the 

opportunity to take big chances in that one corporation in the 

province. 

 

And so I think the people of Saskatchewan have wisely chosen 

an economy that tries to derive the best of both worlds.  It's not 

dogmatic, it's not flashy, but it works very, 

very well for those folks in Saskatchewan who have designed 

the plan.  That is, they have the ability to invest in the private 

sector, to take chances to invest, lose money, or make money in 

the private sector corporations, many of them which the 

member from Wilkie will know.  But in the one area of 

providing gas to their homes and hospitals and schools, they 

want to be able to have the opportunity to have that security. 

 

Now we can argue all day about whether that's right or wrong, 

that that's what the people want.  But I think in fact that's where 

we're at.  When it comes to the debt in the corporation, at the 

present time there is a debt of $600 million.  The equity in the 

company would be 8 or $900 million.  The debt/equity ratio is 

about 80:20.  We think that is obviously higher than we would 

like it to be and we are setting in place some systems to see 

what we can do to bring that down.  It's not a disaster scenario, 

but we would like to see the debt/equity ratio lower than that, 

and hopefully over the coming years that will come down. 

 

(1030) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, if I 

could get your understanding, what we're after here is some 

sense of imagination so that in fact the company can operate 

successfully with as little debt as possible, as much equity as 

possible, and regulated, because it is, as you might agree, a 

natural monopoly. 

 

I see here on section 42 that you can borrow up to $1.3 billion, 

and you can do it through bonds and other securities.  Now if 

you borrow that much money, you have to honour the bonds, 

you have to pay them.  Now just say, hypothetically, if you 

went out into the market and you issued these bonds, you'd 

have to pay the interest on that. 

 

Two points I'd like to make:  number one, the way you'd do 

this, all of that interest would leave the province because you 

haven't had an energy bond.  And I wondered if you might 

consider energy bonds to replace the interest from going 

outside the province to having them inside the province, which 

. . . and you've talked about bonds this morning, co-ops being 

involved in bonds, and you've done equity bonds now.  That's 

the first. 

 

Number two, even with 1.3 billion in bonds, you have control 

because you regulate that company.  So you could have all of 

those outside Canadians, Japanese, Americans, investing in this 

bond and you guarantee it and you regulate the company.  Now 

if that's the case, Mr. Minister, let me make the point that it's 

not fair to say to the public that you can't issue bonds and you 

can't have people invest in this instrument because you would 

lose control.  You do have control.  You have significant 

control. 

 

The third point that I'd like you to comment on:  if in fact you 

could do it with Saskatchewan bonds and Saskatchewan people 

could invest in it and the interest would stay in Saskatchewan, 

not only would you have control, but if Saskatchewan people 

could actually invest in it, then in fact you would have less 

interest to pay.  And, Mr. Minister, you could have lower rates, 

lower gas rates. 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2637 

And I say that because you regulate the rates.  And if you 

regulate the rates, what we've seen in power and tel and gas and 

SGI, as under your regulation, the rates have gone higher and 

higher and higher. 

 

So the public has lost on two accounts.  They can't get lower 

rates.  They can't get the interest on their investment.  And as a 

matter of fact, they see that the cost of production and the cost 

of doing business and the cost of living in the province of 

Saskatchewan is exceedingly high, given your situation. 

 

So if you're going to go into the market anyway, have you ruled 

out the concept of utility bonds in Saskatchewan?  Like power 

bonds, we did several hundreds of millions of dollars.  Would 

you look at energy bonds, so that the interest would stay here? 

 

Number two, would you admit, even if you do bonds locally or 

internationally, you regulate it? 

 

And number three, isn't it true if you had local equity you'd 

have less debt and therefore you could have lower rates to 

people?  And obviously if you've raised the power rates and 

other rates, the equity part of it is extremely important. 

 

Could you comment on those three things, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The issues the member raised -- and 

I'll try to answer all of them, and if I miss, I'd ask the member 

from Estevan to point that out to me.  But on the issue of bonds 

and the position of our government, we're very much interested 

in people in Saskatchewan having an opportunity to participate 

in the economy through bonds, as indicated by the Minister of 

Finance who had a very successful provincial bond offering, I 

think $565 million. 

 

And the theory here of internalizing debt, I think, has been 

done by other provinces -- Quebec probably as ably as 

anywhere else -- where the idea of trying to keep the . . . if 

there is a benefit from debt internal, doing that.  Obviously the 

former premier will know that's not a perfect science because 

there's a premium you have to pay, and also a bit of a risk that 

you have to take that's inherent with doing that internally. 

 

But we have obviously decided that that is worthwhile, and that 

internalizing debt as much as possible is a good idea without 

causing problems on the other side of where that money might 

have been doing work before it was taken out of accounts, or 

taken out of other projects and put into the Saskatchewan 

savings bonds.  I mean there's obviously a balance. 

 

You can't just take the $14 billion debt and suck it out of all the 

accounts and investments in credit unions where it now goes 

out and is invested in farms for seeding and that.  I mean 

because we know how that works.  That you've got to do this in 

a very balanced way.  Because for the action of taking money 

and putting into Saskatchewan savings bonds, you're obviously 

taking it out of something else.  We hope that we're taking 

money that the credit unions have up to this point been moving 

out of the province because there haven't been the kind of 

investment totally 

that they would like to do in the province.  So it's fair to say 

that we're looking at doing that. 

 

Having made that decision though, it becomes then I think a 

legitimate question.  And I guess I would ask the member 

opposite maybe to comment as well on this, as whether you do 

a number of small bonds in SaskTel and SaskEnergy and 

SaskPower, or you try to do one major thrust through the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And we are thinking and studying and analysing now, a great 

deal, whether or not SaskEnergy should be doing their own, 

and SaskPower and SaskTel, or whether or not you do it in a 

central agency and do it that way, which gives you the most 

efficient system. 

 

The other thing that's a limiting factor as you will know, or at 

least I'll remind you, in SaskEnergy, is that there really isn't the 

opportunity to go out and replace the $600 million quickly and 

easily, because much of the debt that's signed up there, some of 

it signed by your government, some of it by our government 

when it was part of SaskPower, is long-term debt. 

 

And I just wanted to indicate that this year the total amount of 

debt that is maturing is $30 million.  So if you wanted to 

internalize that debt, the maximum you could do would be 30 

million.  In 1993 it's 7 million.  In 1994 it's 35 million.  In 1995 

it's 2 million.  And so you see the numbers that you're working 

with are not quickly changing the 600 million from long-term 

debt to some sort of a bond issue. 

 

Nor would it be a good idea -- I think the officials in the Crown 

would tell you -- to change all of your long-term debt to all 

Saskatchewan bond debt that's renewable at any time that it 

wants to be renewed.  That that would not be a . . . that that 

might not be a great idea, to change all of your long-term debt 

and security to debt that could go from 6 per cent today to 20 

per cent a year from now.  That in terms of securing the cost of 

gas to the consumer, that having a balance in your investment 

portfolio is very, very important. 

 

So I totally agree, to the member opposite, that the 

internalizing debt is a good idea.  It's not simplistic -- and he 

obviously knows that because he had a big part in running the 

government -- that you will want to do this as a regular, annual 

kind of investment. 

 

Now whether or not the Minister of Finance will be 

recommending that we do a lot more than 5 or $600 million a 

year for the government is a good question.  And I guess I 

would like the member opposite, if he cared to, to comment on 

what kind of a number he would see as being legitimate in 

internalizing on an annual basis.  We think 5, 600 million is a 

good starting point.  It may be that you want to do, or try to do 

a billion dollars.  But there are some, I think, pretty severe 

restrictions on how far you can go in that direction in any one 

year. 

 

But in the initial comment as to what we think about it, 

obviously we're involved in it.  And we think it's a good idea. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well I'm happy to hear that, Mr. Minister. 



2638 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

Obviously the participation of Saskatchewan people in 

resources is very important.  And the fact that you now endorse 

community development bonds . . . which are interesting 

because you said you have to have a premium to have people 

invest in bonds.  You don't always have to, because in 

community development bonds there's no premium at all.  In 

fact you don't guarantee that they're going to get anything other 

than their equity.  Which is an interesting phenomenon about 

Saskatchewan people that we have not seen across Canada.  

People will invest in their community. 

 

Well I'm very happy to hear that at least you're considering 

bonds for public utilities, and acknowledge the fact that you 

regulate them.  And whether it's a bond that you issue in New 

York or a bond you issue in Saskatchewan, you still run the 

company and you regulate the rates. 

 

I also want to make the argument that people feel quite 

comfortable investing in utilities because they are regulated.  

You can ask other people who manage utilities, whether they're 

in Alberta or other places, and they'll tell you it's a very safe 

investment.  So you don't need a premium on utilities. 

 

In fact I would venture to say that if you wanted to offer equity, 

even converted . . . or bonds converted to equity, you don't 

need it because you regulate the rates and you have complete 

control.  So people know that of all the investments you could 

make in Saskatchewan in a public utility would be as safe as 

there could be.  And they know it's run and managed.  So if it's 

a natural monopoly like gas, like electricity and the line going 

into your homes, people feel very safe with that.  There's no 

hesitation.  So if you would consider the equity, I'm happy to 

hear that. 

 

Number two, I would hope that you would actively solicit the 

support of the public in looking at investing in Crown 

corporations because they are safe. 

 

I wonder if you would comment on whether you'd consider 

equity . . . bonds or equity in some of your expansion plans, 

like the gas pipelines that we were looking at.  Because that's 

going to cost $100 or $200 million to expand that, and you'd 

obviously have to go into the market.  You're going to have to 

go to New York market or some other market to get the bonds, 

to get the money.  Would you look at Saskatchewan investors 

or Canadian investors, either in bonds or equity?  You regulate 

it, and you need good market regulations.  In fact the whole 

industry has asked for regulations. 

 

So two questions.  One, would you encourage the public to be 

there to replace your debt with equity or at least local bonds 

with international bonds?  And number two, have you seriously 

looked at the regulation necessary in the industry?  Because the 

industry wants to have good, solid access to the kind of 

regulation that they would like to see here in Saskatchewan so 

it would fit with other jurisdictions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to make a 

point here and I'm sure the former premier is aware of this.  

And I don't want to make a big issue of pointing this out, but 

when he says or infers that bonds are equity, the 

committee should know that that is . . . I'm sure the former 

premier didn't mean to say that.  Bonds are debt.  Bonds are not 

equity.  If a corporation sells bonds, that's not an equity.  That 

is in fact very directly a debt for the corporations.  I just want 

to make sure the committee . . . I'm sure that you didn't mean 

that. 

 

The other point that I want to make is that in terms of new 

development . . . and this will circle off that part you talked 

about before, and that is transferring existing debt to bonds.  

And I've agreed that that is something we're carefully looking 

at, although it's limited: this year 30 million; next year 7 

million; then some other number; and in year four it's only 2 

million.  So in renewing debt we're very limited as to how 

much we can actually deal with in the public. 

 

Now you come to the new point of new development and the 

same thing applies, that we are interested in using bonds, 

although you have to . . . and that's why I made my earlier point 

that there's no magic about bonds being something that's going 

to cost the utility less money.  I think it's good to use the bonds, 

but obviously if you're doing a major project and these bonds 

are renewable on a few days notice, you don't want to build a 

major pipeline company on debt that can be taken away by 

financiers in New York or the people in Shaunavon or Sturgis 

on a days notice. 

 

(1045) 

 

Now if you're asking, if you're doing a $200 million project 

could there be some bonds involved in that -- absolutely yes; 

it's a great idea.  Now we may argue whether that's 10 per cent 

or 20 per cent or 30 per cent.  That's very short term.  Not even 

short term; you're talking about instantaneously turning around 

and having to go on the market to replace that.  And there are 

also ways of maintaining that money in there as well as 

changing the infrastructures. 

 

But yes, the member says, are bonds eligible to be invest in 

future projects or Crown corporations without consulting a 

great deal with our Minister of Finance.  I think the easy 

response is, yes.  As to how much and the format they would 

take, obviously we would look at that very carefully. 

 

The member also raised one other issue, and that is the 

borrowing limit in SaskEnergy being set at 1.3 billion.  That is 

in fact a lot of money, but he will know that their own 

legislation, I believe a couple of years ago in SaskTel, which 

borrows and does investment now right around the world, also 

has a borrowing limit of 1.3 billion.  So this number's not 

unique or new.  In fact it standardizes it with their legislation as 

it applied to Crown corporations in past years. 

 

And so the 1.3 billion is not a new number.  In fact we looked 

at your legislation as it applied to SaskTel.  You had jacked 

that up to 1.3 billion.  The companies are of similar size, 

although unique in their own way, and that seemed like a 

number that would be legitimate and acceptable to the industry 

and, I thought, obviously to yourself, seeing it was a number 

that you had used in SaskTel. 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2639 

Mr. Devine: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  Again I'm glad 

that you're looking at the public participating in bonds, and 

bonds are an instrument of debt provincially as well as 

internationally.  The interest stays in Saskatchewan if they're 

issued in Saskatchewan, and that's extremely important. 

 

Let me move though in a theoretical sense, because of your 

concern about stability . . . You said you don't want short-term 

debt in terms of instruments like bonds because it might affect 

your project of expansion because of the short 

_term demand.  Clearly equity is more stable than debt.  That's 

the first point. 

 

So if in fact a company, a public company or a private 

company or a co-operative, wants expansion and they want to 

do it with equity rather than debt, then they look at those kinds 

of instruments. 

 

In that consideration, and I'm going to give you one of a large 

co-op here that operates in Saskatchewan, that has decided . . . 

and I know that the Wheat Pool has looked at it although they 

haven't done it yet, but certainly a large co-op has here in 

Saskatchewan gone to an equity offering.  And the equity 

offering allows them to reduce their debt.  They certainly 

maintain control in the co-op, they have absolute membership 

control, but they've replaced debt with a lot of equity.  And 

they have stability and they can expand. 

 

Now if a local co-op -- and you just finished the adjustments in 

the community development bond to include co-ops -- if a 

co-operative can look at expanding in Saskatchewan, 

maintaining control, and replacing its debt with shareholders' 

equity, conceptually you'd have to say, well that's fair enough, 

they're doing it.  They're certainly doing it with your 

legislation.  The United Grain Growers as a co-op is doing it 

now across western Canada; the Wheat Pool is looking at it, 

and it's run by the co-op. 

 

If you have legislation that lets you run the company and you 

can have local equity, which is much more stable than either 

local or international debt, and knowing the political 

considerations that you have, say, well I'd only allow 15 or 20 

or 30 per cent or whatever it is, so you've got control, have you 

entirely ruled out that stability and that strength on say a billion 

dollar company, of having people participate so that you could 

have local equity that is strong, that is guaranteed, that is part 

of monopoly, regulated by the government, which results in, 

one, much more stability, and number two, as you know, lower 

rates in the long haul for industry, for home owners, and for 

others? 

 

I'm sure you understand the concept.  And I say that 

understanding the political games that people get into.  But if a 

local co-op can do it and is comfortable with controlling it, and 

they've managed it well and they have well over 50 per cent, 

isn't it something that your administration might consider, 

given the dynamic nature of how gas affects other industries? 

Whether we're dealing with IPSCO, whether we're dealing with 

fertilizer companies, we're dealing with power projects, 

co-generation, all of that stuff, we want competitive gas 

rates, well regulated.  And that balance, the public and the 

private . . . want to see where it's encouraging people to invest 

here. 

 

And I'm sure that the minister . . . And I don't want to get into 

the politics of it, but it's just the concept that some equity in a 

monopoly that you control and your regulate, it might have two 

or three advantages that we see the co 

_op movement moving into. And your own legislation has 

encouraged co-ops to go equity in the bonds that we talked 

about here this morning. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well the member raises a very 

interesting point, and one that you'll know we have debated for 

a long, long time in the province of Saskatchewan, and that is 

allowing for private offerings in our utility corporations.  And 

it's fair to say that we're not considering share offering in 

SaskEnergy or SaskPower or SaskTel or SGI. 

 

We feel that we are able to meet our needs in terms of 

financing and meet the needs of our residents of Saskatchewan 

with the Crown corporations as they are now structured, and 

there's a lot of security.  The companies are secure.  And the 

work that we have done in analysing where the corporations 

are going to would indicate that there is simply no need to go in 

that direction, that is to privatize any portion of the utilities. 

 

So I think it's fair to say that there is a number of things that I 

agree with the member on in terms of bonds and having people 

being able to buy bonds in the various corporations, but when it 

comes to selling shares in the corporations, i.e., privatizing 

them, we think it's not necessary, and we think that we're 

reflecting the view of the public in that issue. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well philosophically we can certainly agree, 

but when it comes to the economics of rates, that's where we 

run into some serious practical and empirical problems.  That's 

probably the strongest argument that the public has anywhere 

in the world, of having replacing debt with equity. 

 

We had serious rate increases in power, serious rate increases 

in telephones, and serious rate increases in SGI.  We're going to 

look at rates in gas.  And you're saying, well not a bad concept 

for the co-ops; they'll have legislation here for other things.  

But the public's going to have to pay higher and higher rates 

because you're borrowing money and won't allow equity. 

 

That's the part that is pretty serious, and it goes beyond the 

philosophical game that you're saying, well we won't let the 

public invest in a utility.  The public can invest in a utility and 

they can win in two ways -- total security regulated by the 

public monopoly, and lower rates for themselves, lower rates 

for industry. 

 

So you just . . . just as long we know, just as long as we know 

that the public has to pay higher and higher rates if you deny 

the fact that the company can have equity.  Because you're 

either going to have to wring this thing out of total cash, which 

is probably why you're raising the rates, or you're going to have 

to borrow money.  And you're now asking to borrow $1.3 

billion and you're 



2640 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

saying, no equity because . . . well we're not quite sure because 

you campaigned on no equity. 

 

But just so we all know, the rate increases in the last eight 

months in the utilities are at historic levels -- very high -- in the 

public, if you look at your telephone rates, your power rates, 

your SGI rates.  Can you give us any indication what the utility 

rate increases are going to be like, given the fact that they have 

increased rapidly in the last few weeks or last few months -- 

very large increases?  And you obviously know if you didn't 

have all that debt to pay, you could have less and less. 

 

And secondly, we would know that the stability of the 

corporations are obviously going to be good.  The public wants 

these monopolies run not for monopoly profit, but for service.  

Isn't that the point of a monopoly?  It's regulated so the people 

don't get ripped off.  And you have now increased the rates so 

you have monopoly profits.  You have large monopoly profits 

in the utilities, and people are saying those monopoly profits 

are going to do whatever else people want them to.  And on top 

of that, they're paying a great deal of interest because you will 

not allow equity. 

 

So the philosophical difference can be there but the practical 

thing and the practical point is, you're raising rates very quickly 

on the utilities, and you're making monopoly profits when in 

fact when you regulate something . . . why bother regulating it 

if that's what it's for?  We're into some serious concerns with 

farmers, businesses, consumers, and others who would like to 

see competitive rates.  And obviously you've raised them very 

high because you won't allow the public to participate to reduce 

the debt and therefore reduce the rates. 

 

I mean you can agree not to do it.  I'm glad you're interested in 

bonds.  I still can't understand why you wouldn't look at modest 

equity to help stabilize the company and help reduce rates.  

And maybe you'd like to comment on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member opposite obviously is 

not willing to give up on the attempt to privatize this utility.  

And he has an argument, and it's a valid argument and it goes 

on all the time, whether or not you water down your position in 

a company by selling shares in it or whether you try to 

maintain control of the company using debt as a tool, whether 

through bond or through lending. 

 

But what the member shouldn't confuse is the fact that selling 

shares is cheap or without expense, I mean because that's 

simply nonsense.  Obviously if someone's going to invest in 

your corporation, you're going to have to pay them dividends 

so they can make a profit; otherwise they wouldn't invest in the 

corporation. 

 

So it's not as if you can get rid of the debt, keep everything the 

same in the company -- same amount of profit, same rates -- 

and then not pay these people who buy shares anything.  I 

mean the . . . obviously you have to pay them dividends on 

their investment or they go the other way. 

 

Now the simple fact is, is that the utilities in Saskatchewan 

over the years -- and the member will 

know this -- have been very, very successful in keeping rates 

low by comparison with other jurisdictions.  It's not to say we 

haven't had rate increases in automobile insurance, in electrical 

rates and in gas rates and telephone rates, but when you look at 

our comparables . . . 

 

And I'll provide those for the member -- I can't do them all 

today but I will put them on a chart because I've been meaning 

to do this for the last while and I just haven't got around to it -- 

but I will put on a chart the utility rates, some where you have 

all shareholders, all shareholders, and you'll find that the rates 

aren't cheaper. 

 

Why aren't they cheaper?  Because they have debt in the 

corporation, they have to pay out dividends to the shareholders, 

which is costly, and rates aren't lower.  Of course I understand.  

I've been involved in many companies and I've been involved 

in many Crown corporations.  The problem here is, is that there 

is always this simplistic approach to the economy.  It's not 

simplistic; it's very, very complicated. 

 

You can't say that if you simply get rid of your debt in the 

Crown corporation and replace it with equity, that that's going 

to save you a lot of money and rates are going to go down.  

That is too simplistic. 

 

The simple fact is that that is not a true statement, i.e., the 

utility rates in California and New York where they have all 

private sector utilities, or Quebec or other areas where you will 

have comparable utilities and insurance, or in . . . well 

insurance isn't a good example, but in telephones or in other 

areas where you have all private sector investment. 

 

And they have debt.  Somehow you assume that if you had a 

private corporation there isn't going to be debt.  Well you know 

as well as I do that is not true.  Many of the private sector 

companies that have shares have huge debts.  In fact some of 

them have so much debt they go bankrupt.  In the United States 

they go into chapter 11 -- huge companies that have many, 

many billions of dollars in shares also have billions and billions 

of dollars in debt. 

 

So this simplistic approach you take to our Crowns, that if you 

got rid of the debt and had shares, you'd have a company with 

no debt, that simply isn't the reality of the economy anywhere 

in the world. 

 

So I'd like to keep this debate in the other area that's much 

more reasonable and rational; that we have in Saskatchewan a 

system of utilities that have been built over many, many years.  

That it is built on the principle of the government on behalf of 

their investors, taxpayers, borrowing money at the cheapest 

rate possible to build utilities.  And they have chosen to keep 

that as a utility, totally operated and owned by the government. 

 

(1100) 

 

Now that's not the only way the utilities could run.  Obviously 

they could run in the way that you would like to see them run.  

That is, privatized or some portion of them privatized.  And 

that's fair and legitimate argument and it's a legitimate 

economic approach, and I admit that 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2641 

to you.  But for you to say simply, if you did it this way you'd 

get rid of all your problems, it doesn't work that way and I 

think you know that. 

 

What we're saying is that the system that you put forward to the 

public was rejected.  And the system that we have put forward 

may not be the right one in the end.  You may be right.  I don't 

think you are.  But you may be right in the end that we should 

have privatized the Crown corporations, and that they will go 

bankrupt and they won't provide service for the people in the 

province.  But the history of the province is that they have 

worked very, very effectively in their present form. 

 

And it's like my combine when I'm out in the field, if it's 

running and there's no large noises coming from the straw 

walkers, I don't go out and change the straw-walker bearings to 

put in something else.  The corporations are working.  They're 

working well, not perfectly, but better than many of the options 

that we see across Canada and North America.  So therefore 

the public have decided they want to keep them the same. 

 

Now in the end you may be right and the public may be wrong.  

There is the chance of that happening.  But my opinion is that 

we agree with the public, after much analysis, that keeping the 

Crown corporations, the utilities as owned by the people of the 

province through their government, is the best way to go.  And 

the concept of using some bond money from Saskatchewan to 

enhance their borrowing -- I want to make it clear, that's not 

equity, that's more borrowing -- is legitimate.  But we don't 

agree that privatizing some portion of these utilities is the right 

way to go at the present time. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well I think we're having a productive 

discussion, Mr. Minister.  I'm going to read to you arguments 

that I'm sure that you could make, and would have made just a 

few minutes ago on your community development bonds 

strategy that include co-ops.  Because the whole strategy said 

that in fact it will reduce the debt, increase equities controlled 

by the co-ops, and is publicly traded. 

 

I have for you, Mr. Minister, investing in the west, a United 

Grain Growers strategy.  And it is a 12-point plan by a large 

co-operative, and point one is: 

 

 1) The management team agreed that becoming a publicly 

traded company is the most sound and effective way of 

moving the company to respond to the needs of farmers and 

business and industry. 

 

 It will provide more capital to upgrade the grain-handling 

system which will make UGG a stronger, more competitive 

company. 

 

 2) By allowing more people to invest in the company, we're 

providing an opportunity for others to invest in agriculture 

and western Canadian economy. 

 

 3) The money raised as a result of this proposal will be used 

to continue the investment we already have begun across 

Canada.  We have undertaken a $25 million program to 

refurbish facilities. 

 With an infusion of additional capital, UGG can continue to 

refurbish existing facilities and construct new elevators at a 

much faster pace (and what they mean is a much faster pace 

than debt).  It's likely that UGG's credit rating will ultimately 

rise if this plan is endorsed at the annual meeting. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, your credit rating has been going down and 

down and down and down.  United Grain Growers says their 

credit rating is going to go up and up and up based on equity, 

replacing the debt.  And certainly the shareholders in that co-op 

control the company. 

 

So they didn't privatize UGG (United Grain Growers Limited); 

they've just opened it up to equity considerations. 

 

 A higher credit rating should give UGG better access to 

short-term money markets which can provide operating funds 

at lower interest rates.  Lower interest rate costs for the 

company mean lower overall expenses and ultimately lower 

costs for our consumers and our customers. 

 

So they're saying, by replacing their debt for expansion with 

equity, they have a better reputation, they lower their debt cost.  

That means that they have less interest expenses, their profits 

go up, their dividends go up, and their value and service to the 

customer is improved. 

 

 In the long run the competitive position of the company will 

improve and so will profits. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, they go on to say: 

 

 The current market conditions indicate change is coming.  

Policy changes outside Canada, pressures inside our own 

country, and changes within the grain industry will influence 

the way UGG operates. 

 

We say the same thing, Mr. Minister.  The Chinese government 

is allowing equity in public utilities.  The Communist Party of 

China has just allowed equity in transportation and 

communications.  Now if China can do this, well maybe 

Saskatchewan can consider it. 

 

All the countries and the republics in the former Soviet Union 

are letting people invest equity -- equity -- not just run by the 

central government. 

 

So if the Soviets allow equity and the Chinese allow equity, 

we're asking the NDP (New Democratic Party) in the province 

of Saskatchewan . . . and the UGG in your province . . . and the 

Bill you just encouraged in this province, encourages co-ops to 

have equity rather than debt. 

 

So the arguments are valid internationally, they're valid locally, 

they're valid with co-ops, they're valid with your own 

legislation.  Certainly you know that local people have 

confidence if you stood in your place, the Premier stood in his 

place, and said, the people of Saskatchewan can now invest in 

TransGas or SaskEnergy and we'll guarantee it, do you know 

what?  You could sell it.  You 



2642 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

could sell it. 

 

And it would be a good thing to do. And you replace some debt 

with equity.  You'd don't privatize the company.  You let some 

of the company replace its debt with equity and you run it and 

you have a better rate structure. 

 

They go on to say, the UGG: 

 

 It's likely that the UGG's credit rating will ultimately rise if 

the plan is endorsed because (they say) financial resources 

are thin at the federal, provincial and municipal levels.  These 

resources are already hard pressed to keep up with the current 

commitments under GRIP, NISA and the Western 

Transportation Act.  They'll be pressed even further as people 

resist tax increases. 

 

People don't like utility rate increases.  And you're telling, and 

everybody is telling us, taxes are high, taxes are high enough.  

You've raised taxes.  You've raised rates.  If you want lower 

taxes and lower rates, one of the ways is equity. 

 

They go on to say: 

 

 Under current ownership structure, UGG has only two means 

available to finance its operations:  debt and earnings.  The 

directors and management of the company believe it would 

be unwise to increase our debt level substantially at this time.  

Our credit ratings could be adversely affected. 

 

 While the company has improved its earnings lately, they 

aren't sufficient to finance capital requirements in time to 

respond to our rapidly changing industry.  The time for 

change is sooner rather than later. 

 

And they go on to talk about a renewed commitment to farmers 

and access to equity markets. 

 

 Equity markets will provide the necessary financial resources 

required.  Equity markets enable the people making the 

investment to take an equity or ownership stake in the 

company.  Equity stakeholders succeed when the company 

succeeds. 

 

 Most of the money available for investing in equity markets 

comes from pension funds and insurance companies. 

 

People who are in Saskatchewan and people who are across 

Canada. 

 

Well I'll copy this for the minister and I'll leave it . . . I plan to 

leave it with the Minister of Finance and with the Premier as 

well because we endorse your community development bonds, 

we endorse the fact that you're encouraging equity. We 

certainly want you to reduce your debt in Crown corporations.  

The public wants lower taxes and lower rates.  If it's good 

enough for the legislature, it's good enough for communities, 

it's good enough for the co-ops, it's good enough for a prairie 

co-op, for credit ratings, and all of those reasons, then I 

would think -- well I'm just . . . I throw it out to you for your 

consideration -- that at least not rule out the fact that modest 

equity in a very large company with Saskatchewan 

participating could help you all the way around:  Stability, 

lower rates, lower interest expense, which means higher profits, 

or in the case of monopoly, lower rates; and it's absolutely 

guaranteed by the public. 

 

So I'm going to leave this brochure.  I'll get it copied and leave 

it with you because it has all the interesting arguments that you 

could probably use at a cabinet meeting or a caucus meeting or 

as you travel across the province, or indeed across the country . 

. . to allow people to participate in a utility like SaskEnergy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I appreciate the member 

sending that across to me, because I'm obviously interested in 

all forms of investment and arrangements that can be made in 

terms of finance. 

 

And because obviously he's correct when he says that boards of 

directors . . . and I guess you could compare the cabinet -- the 

member opposite, I don't know whether he thinks this way 

about government or not -- but it's comparable to a board of 

directors in outlining the strategy for the shareholders, those 

being the voters of the province. 

 

What I want to go back to is the idea that in 1989 we laid out 

these options for people.  You laid out your option.  You used 

your best guns and millions of dollars of advertising, and we 

could go through it and I could get the list for you.  But the 

member will know that we gave it . . . your best shot to put 

forward your proposal. 

 

And we, with much less money, 26 in opposition and very little 

money to sell our vision as a board of directors or a potential 

board of directors at that time, running for the position of board 

of directors, laid out our option, that is, community-built 

utilities based on the shareholders, being all the taxpayers, 

through their board of directors, controlling utilities. 

 

And the shareholders voted on which of those views they 

wanted.  And they wanted the utility that was controlled 

through their government and through the board of directors 

and not watered down by shareholders. 

 

Now I say again, that may be right or it may be wrong, but the 

simple fact is is that's the best we can do in our democratic 

process.  That is, lay out your vision of the future.  You laid out 

yours.  We laid out ours.  We now in many ways have a 

responsibility to bring forward the Bill 21 that we're now 

bringing forward because we told the public, the shareholders, 

that  

 that's what we were going to do. 

 

Now in the next election obviously we'll come around to this 

again.  And I'm not going to take that platform that you ran on 

and run on it and say, look we're going to privatize the utilities.  

But you certainly have the opportunity to do that.  And that's 

fair ball and we'll wait for that to happen.  But right now we 

believe we're acting in the best interest of our shareholders who 

. . . And not only that we are going to do it, but I think we have 

an ultimate responsibility to do it because we promised them 

that 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2643 

that's what we were going to do. 

 

If we didn't bring in this Bill, I think we would have deceived 

the public on the issue of SaskEnergy, and we don't intend to 

do that.  We promised them to make it a full-fledged Crown 

corporation and that's why the Bill is here. 

 

Now we could go back and forth on this issue all day, but the 

simple fact is that I think the public want the Bill, we're going 

to bring it forward, and the members opposite obviously will 

vote against it because they have a different vision.  And that's 

fair enough. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, it's always interesting to listen to New Democrats 

recant history.  It's unfortunate that there doesn't have to be 

some truth in advertising rules that place in politics in this 

province. 

 

But the very simple fact, Mr. Minister, is that I remember that 

debate very well and I won't go back through the whole thing, 

but the public of Saskatchewan quite frankly were sold a bill of 

goods by the New Democratic Party.  I never heard so many 

exaggerations in my whole life as I did during the SaskEnergy 

debate.  And there's no doubt about it . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Chairman, everybody else in here 

gets their say and I'm going to have mine for a few minutes this 

morning on this topic, whether the members like to hear it or 

not. 

 

The simple fact is I think that the public by and large want that 

gas line, as the minister said, going to their home, to their farm, 

to the guy on Main Street, Saskatchewan, to be part of a Crown 

corporation, the same as they do with their power bill and 

everything else.  And they spoke very clearly on that. 

 

But the other gobbledygook that I've heard coming from the 

minister today that Saskatchewan, this little population of a 

million people here, because they are governed by New 

Democrats today, are smarter than the rest of the world when 

we come to pipelines . . . to the pipeline infrastructure that 

delivers gas in a deregulated gas market that now goes from the 

Gulf of Mexico to the Arctic Circle, and a deregulated gas 

market that I say this minister and this government isn't going 

to mess with, that they aren't going to change, that deregulation 

is a fact of life, and deregulation means certain things 

differently than the last time that the New Democrats were in 

power. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, what I see by this Bill here, without any 

regulatory mechanisms attached to it, is the right to rip off, and 

nothing else.  Because everywhere else in North America, I 

will say to you, there are very strong 

regulatory mechanisms in place. 

 

There are mechanisms that allow the public to be absolutely 

assured that the rates that are passed down through them 

because of tolling and tariff, that those rates . . . And you can 

go to most of the utilities that are owned by shareholders and 

you will find very strong, either national, state, or provincial 

organizations in place that don't allow that utility to pass on 

rate increases to the public that are unjustifiable.  You will find 

power plants in the United States that are shut down half-way 

through their construction because the proposed rate increases 

to the public are not accepted. 

 

(1115) 

 

And, Mr. Minister, when you bring forward a Bill . . . And this 

entire section 60, part III, all of it gives you the power to do 

that.  And, Mr. Minister, some people in this province 

remember the last time the New Democrats were in power here 

and what happened with our natural gas rates.  We weren't 

allowed to drill in Saskatchewan.  We used Alberta gas at three 

sixty-five a thousand I believe it got as high as.  Today the 

rates are half of that. 

 

And that was all passed on through.  You had a 180 per cent 

rate increase between 1971 and 1982 in natural gas.  And quite 

frankly, Mr. Minister, I don't think anyone in Saskatchewan 

wants to see a 180 per cent rate increase passed on to them in 

the natural gas area when you're not seeing that in the rest of 

the world. 

 

I mean it says here, Mr. Minister, section 61(4): 

 

 Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act or The 

Power Corporation Act, TransGas may modify, alter or vary 

the terms and conditions of any consent given or deemed 

(there's that deemed word again) to be given  under this 

section and may impose new terms and conditions at any 

time on the consent. 

 

I mean this Bill, Mr. Minister, is very wide-ranging on the 

whole transportation area.  And quite frankly there are a lot of 

large industrial users out there.  There are hospitals, schools, 

lots of people that have been phoning me as a former Energy 

minister and saying, well I don't find this Bill so terrible when 

it comes to home owners and that type of thing, but quite 

frankly the powers that the minister has here without any 

regulatory body attached mean that he basically has me at his 

mercy in the future. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, if you were going to live up to your election 

campaign about the shareholders, the stakeholders being the 

voters of this province, why you would bring forward a Bill 

that said to the stakeholders, not only are we creating a Crown 

corporation to run your natural gas business, we are going to 

bring in a regulatory body that makes sure that a cash-hungry 

government in the future does not rip you off. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I'd like some comment on why you would 

bring forward this Bill without some assurance to the taxpayer, 

to the home owner, to the farmer, to the small-business man in 

this province that he is not going to be ripped off by increasing 

rate increases when they're 



2644 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

not justifiable, when in any other jurisdiction in Canada or 

North America that individual can go apply and have those 

rates looked at and be assured that that tolling and tariff of 

structure isn't going to rip him off. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member will know that the 

section he refers to is a rewrite from the SaskPower Act that 

has been in place for many, many years and was in place under 

his government.  There's nothing new. 

 

As the public and the members of the committee will know is 

that SaskEnergy up until now has been regulated under the 

SaskPower Act.  This is the same section as that minister had in 

the SaskPower Act when he was in government.  There's no 

change. 

 

And I don't know why he's doing this -- why he's making this 

sound like this is a new section and it's arbitrary and it's not 

going to work.  It's the same section he had in place for 10 

years while he was in government and never made any attempt 

to change it. 

 

And so we're using basically an Act that his government had in 

place.  And he will know that.  This is not a section that comes 

from anywhere except the Act that you were using when this 

legislation was included in the SaskPower Act. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, the minister didn't answer the 

question.  He side-stepped it.  The question is, why you would 

bring forward this type of a Bill without some kind of 

regulatory mechanism? 

 

And the reason I think the minister doesn't want to answer that 

is because he knows that it is on the public's mind and that the 

potential . . . And he's right.  These regulations have been in 

place for a long time. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, the application of the regulations, the 

philosophy behind the people applying the regulations does 

make a lot of difference.  You can have two separate 

individuals, two separate ministers, or two separate 

governments using the same set of regulations, and I assure 

you, Mr. Chairman, under this Bill if one wants to apply these 

regulations differently, they can mean a whole lot of different 

things to people. 

 

And I think it's incumbent upon the minister . . . And I would 

say to the minister -- he challenged me as to why change didn't 

occur -- I would say to the minister this morning that given a 

little bit more time, Mr. Minister, that you would have seen this 

structure change fairly dramatically.  And if I'd have had my 

way, you would have had a regulatory mechanism that would 

have been fairly broad ranging.  And I think your head official 

there could probably assure you that that was being studied 

quite diligently. 

 

And I'm just wondering, if we've gone to all this trouble to put 

together this Bill and form this Crown corporation, why we 

didn't go the next step and put the regulatory mechanism in 

place to assure the consumers and the taxpayers in this 

province that they aren't going to get ripped off. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I don't know how many 

times we'll go back and forth here.  And I'm trying to put 

forward as many options as I can to get the member opposite to 

agree. But I think in some ways, Mr. Chairman, we really are at 

odds.  On many things today we've been able to agree, but on 

the area of privatization we're not going to agree. 

 

I know if the member opposite had been re-elected . . . they put 

forward the vision of privatization, and we put forward the 

vision not to privatize.  And the shareholders voted.  And they 

voted for our vision of non-privatization. 

 

And I agree with what the member says, that had he been 

re-elected there would have been big changes in the gas 

company.  I know that.  But the simple fact is, you weren't 

elected for that very reason. 

 

The other fact is, is that when you talk about regulation, in 

1982 your government promised to regulate utilities.  You 

remember that.  The member from Estevan ran in a campaign 

in 1982 that they were going to regulate utilities.  And they did.  

They brought in what was known as PURC (Public Utilities 

Review Commission) at that time.  And then very quickly after 

that they did away with it, saying to themselves, we don't want 

to regulate any more. 

 

Now you're back to the position of wanting to regulate again.  I 

say to the member opposite that it's very, very confusing to the 

public when you come forward and stand in your place today 

and say, we put in regulations back in '82 -- PURC; then we 

fired them; now we want to put it back in again.  And I know 

what you're saying. I hear it. 

 

But for the public, they are very, very leery about ever 

believing you again on the issue of regulation because you 

deceived them last time.  You put it in in 1982, then you fired 

them and did away with it.  Now you're promising again to put 

it back in.  And you might put it back in if you were elected, 

but the public doesn't know where you stand on any issue.  And 

this I believe is part of the problem. 

 

I don't want to get . . . I mean discussing and debating 

privatization over and over again, six months after the 

shareholders have voted that they don't want it seems to be not 

a very productive use of our time.  But obviously I'm going to 

be here defending what we're doing because we made a 

commitment to the public.  We're going to bring in Bill 21 and 

establish SaskEnergy as a Crown corporation, and that's what 

we're doing.  That's what the public wanted. 

 

Now obviously you will continue to try to sell your idea of 

privatization to the public.  And you may be successful and you 

may be right.  I don't think so.  But I'm not sure the two of us 

standing here all day saying the same thing over and over again 

about privatization is going to get us very far. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the only one standing 

here this morning talking about privatization is the minister.  

And the reason he's talking about privatization is he doesn't 

want to talk about the questions I'm asking. 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2645 

Specifically, in several sections of the Bill it talks about the 

transportation of natural gas.  Mr. Minister, you've won.  I hand 

it to you -- you've won; you've carried the day.  You now have 

a large Crown corporation that you're going to run as a Crown 

corporation.  You've won.  I don't want to argue about that any 

more.  We have a Crown corporation. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, what I want to talk about is, in your Crown 

corporation which is yours to run as you see fit, I want to talk 

about the transportation of natural gas.  I don't want to talk 

about privatization any more, any of those things.  I want to 

talk about transportation of gas and rates and rate increases and 

how those are going to be handled with the public. 

 

And you're absolutely right, there was a thing called PURC in 

the 1980s, in the early '80s, that in my view didn't work out.  

And it didn't work out for a number of reasons.  One, it was 

extremely expensive, and I know the Minister of Finance 

doesn't like expensive public entities these days.  Most of the 

people in the private sector that used PURC said they had to 

have far too many lawyers to interpret that particular piece of 

legislation, that there was too much litigation. 

 

And that's why the people that brought forward alternative 

proposals on regulatory mechanisms were trying to do away 

with that expense.  And they presented a number of them.  

They presented a number of them to the people at SaskEnergy.  

They presented a number of them to the Energy minister. 

 

And what I want to talk about is the transportation of gas, the 

rates that will be charged on that transportation and how people 

are going to feel assured that they aren't going to be ripped off.  

Nothing about privatization at all any more, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now I want you to tell me how you see this working under this 

legislation you have here and what you see for rate increases 

and how you see the public being assured that that gas that's 

coming into their home this winter or next winter or the winter 

afterwards is going to be regulated or they're going to have 

some assurance that they aren't being charged rates that are 

unreasonable.  That's what I want to talk about, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The obvious way that the member 

for 10 years set rates, which is being continued.  But obviously 

there's always ways of making systems better.  One might be 

surprised that all these bright ideas come up now after 10 years 

and nothing was set in place for those 10 years.  In fact there 

was. PURC was put in place, then it was turfed out, and now 

after a few months we've got all the solutions again. 

 

But obviously we do have a great interest and have met with 

SIGUA (Saskatchewan Industrial Gas Users Association) a 

number of times.  The Minister of Energy and Mines has met 

with them, and we intend to set rates after much consultation.  

Because obviously there is a balance, and there is need for 

having rates that reflect the competitiveness of the market 

between Manitoba and Alberta and Saskatchewan, in terms of 

economic 

development, whether it's at, as you would say, at factories or 

manufacturing plants in Saskatchewan, co-generation, those 

kind of projects that we're looking at at the present time in 

SaskPower.  So it will be done in the same way as you were 

doing. 

 

I'm trying to be agreeable here, but I'm not quite sure what 

you're suggesting.  Are you suggesting that we go back to the 

PURC that you introduced and then threw out?  Are you 

recommending that we continue your strategy that you had 

when you were minister, of ongoing consultation, which I think 

it's fair to say we do almost on a weekly basis with the users, or 

. . . 

 

I'm having a hard time to become clear, because I know that 

you didn't obviously like PURC, because you put it in and then 

threw it out.  You then consulted for eight years with the 

industry to set the rates.  You're now saying that what you did 

for those eight years was no good either. 

 

And what I'm having a difficult time knowing is what you're 

recommending to us, and I say this in all honesty to you.  I'm 

very interested in knowing what you're putting forward here.  

Because I watched with a great deal of interest as the natural 

gas industry was put to and fro on this issue for the last 10 

years, never quite sure whether you wanted to regulate or didn't 

want to regulate.  And I'm not quite sure now whether you're 

saying PURC was good or bad, or whether the ongoing 

consultation was good or bad.  Supposedly you're saying both 

of them were bad, that everything you did in that area for 10 

years was bad. 

 

But what I'm not hearing you say is what you would put in 

place.  And in all honesty, I would very much like to hear that 

-- not saying that we would do that, but having been minister 

for a while, I would expect your experience could be helpful. 

 

(1130) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I was hoping the minister 

would just give some answers rather than dodging and darting.  

I am not the minister of SaskPower; never have been.  This is 

the minister that's in charge.  And the Minister of Energy told 

us clearly the other night in his Estimates that it wasn't his 

responsibility.  He was doing lots of consulting with people, 

but the buck stopped at the minister responsible, that on this 

question of a regulatory mechanism -- which I say that every 

other jurisdiction in North America has -- this minister is the 

one responsible to make sure that the home owner, the senior 

citizen, the person living in the high-rise aren't ripped off by 

rate increases.  This is the minister responsible right here. 

 

And he can cast all sorts of ideas out about what the former 

government did or didn't do, and what I did or didn't do in my 

responsibilities, but this is the minister.  It's his responsibility to 

bring forward those things now in legislation as he so proudly 

has done.  And it is the opposition's job to peruse them, look at 

them, and see if the taxpayer and the consumer is being looked 

after by that legislation. 

 

So what I'm asking the minister is:  what kind of time schedule, 

what sort of proposals is he, according to his 



2646 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

colleague, the Minister of Energy, as he told us the other night . 

. . what are his proposals as the person in charge for regulatory 

bodies and mechanisms to make sure that the industrial user, 

the large public user like our hospitals, our universities, our 

schools, and our private home owners, business men, and 

farmers . . . what assurance are they going to have through a 

mechanism that the rates charged them are going to be the 

proper ones?  This is to the minister who is in charge and the 

one that will have to bring that forward. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I just say to the member opposite 

that what we're doing at the present time is following exactly 

what your administration was doing; that is, we are taking 

those sections out of the SaskPower Act and moving them from 

the SaskPower Act to a free-standing Bill that will give the 

very same authority as you were using out of the SaskPower 

Act. 

 

So there's no change.  I mean if you look at the clauses that 

you're referring to, they're exactly the same clauses as you were 

using when you were the minister.  True, you weren't the 

minister of SaskPower, but the Act that you worked under was 

the SaskPower Act.  You understand that.  So what this 

legislation is is the exact same legislation as you used when 

you were minister.  That's why I'm surprised that you're 

shocked and astounded at the legislation.  It's the same 

legislation.  And I just expected when we used exactly the 

same legislation as you had used, that you would have been 

supportive of it.  I'm surprised at that. 

 

Having said that, we are looking at always inequities in the 

system, whether it's SaskPower, SaskEnergy, SGI, and looking 

at ways and means of making the rates responsive to the needs 

of the public and to try to make them as fair as possible. 

 

Having completed the review, if we find that the system you 

had in place wasn't working and has led to many inequities, if 

that's what you're saying, that your system wasn't working and 

there are huge inequities -- I'm not sure at this point whether 

that's true or not -- but if you're telling us that your system led 

to all these problems, then we're going to look at that.  And I 

guess what I'm . . . I'm not sure what I'm supposed to do here, 

Mr. Chairman, is amend the Act, put in a system of PURC?  

I'm looking for positive alternatives to what I'm proposing here 

but I'm not hearing them. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I don't want to belabour 

this either, but you are the one that likes to use the political 

innuendo about our regime.  I mean a lot of this SaskPower 

crap's been around for 40 years and you and I both know it.  

Okay?  And not everything that the former government did was 

perfect, as your former government wasn't perfect either. 

 

There are changes.  This is the '90s.  People are expecting 

different.  We have a de-regulated North American gas market 

that may, with the inclusion of Mexico, be a way bigger than 

anything we've dealt with before. 

 

Now what I'm shocked at, Mr. Minister, is that after these 

promises which you say you are fulfilling with the SaskEnergy 

agreement, with this Act, where you accuse 

the former government of all sorts of things with privatization 

that would allow the consumer to be ripped off . . . and I 

remember that statement clearly in the SaskEnergy debate that 

what we were doing was providing a mechanism for the 

consumer to be ripped off to pay dividends to private people.  

What I'm saying to you, Mr. Minister, with just the cabinet, just 

the cabinet, setting these rates on a sort of a yearly . . . or 

whenever cabinet decides to set these rates, isn't good enough 

to the folks out there.  The folks are saying that cabinet doesn't 

necessarily have all of the criteria to set gas rates.  And they are 

looking to mechanism. 

 

Otherwise I guess everyone else in North America is wrong.  

What the minister is saying to me today is that everyone else in 

North America is wrong, but we're right here in Saskatchewan.  

And I don't quite subscribe to that view, Mr. Minister.  You 

can't have the rest of the continent wrong and you right all the 

time.  That there has to be some mechanism.  Now obviously 

you're thinking about it.  I just want to have some time lines. 

 

You're the minister in charge.  You're the guy that's going to 

have to take it through cabinet.  You've obviously done your 

consultation, you tell me.  One of these regulatory methods 

must of sort of struck you as being the proper one for your new 

company.  What is that? 

 

And what time line do you see taking that to your cabinet 

colleagues and bringing it in so that the consumer in this 

province has the assurance that those rates are going to be set 

fairly and justly, and that they are going to be very transparent 

to all who use natural gas.  They're transparent to IPSCO.  

They're transparent to the guy on north Albert in a business.  

And they're transparent to the home owner.  That's what I want 

from you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I want to indicate to the 

member opposite that as I mentioned earlier, we're very 

interested in making a system that's fair and equitable and that 

works for everyone.  Because as these systems go, whether it's 

in SaskTel or SaskEnergy, as technology changes, and I guess 

SaskTel may be even more at the vagaries of technology than is 

the gas market, because of the massive changes that happen 

almost instantaneously in that market, that rates have to be 

reviewed constantly.  And he knows that and I know that.  And 

obviously our staff are reviewing this on an ongoing basis.  

And the way the process will work is that after the consultation 

they will come forward with recommendations to the board.  

The board then makes recommendations.  CIC has 

involvement; cabinet has involvement; caucus has 

involvement; the legislature has involvement.  This is the 

system that I think has worked very well. 

 

If the member -- and I say this sincerely -- if the member has 

other ideas, and he doesn't have to do it here today, I would 

very much appreciate meeting with him off the record and 

confidentially with the president and myself.  And it may be 

that his ideas warrant that kind of a private discussion.  But if 

there's a mechanism better than that, than having the staff 

consult on a very regular basis, bring forward 

recommendations for change or renewal to the board of 

directors of SaskEnergy, then the consultation that goes on 

with Crown Investments Corporation and then cabinet and 

caucus and then the legislature, if 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2647 

there's a system that you'd like us to inject into that and you 

want to tell us privately, I'm very much available to meet with 

you for ideas and concerns and options that we might look at. 

 

And maybe that's, Mr. Chairman, where we should leave that at 

today, because we know that this is a changing market, just as 

many of the Crowns are.  We know that over time inequities 

result.  I'm not sure where they're at but our staff are reviewing 

that, and we're going to try to make the system work as best we 

can for economic development, for the consumers, and also 

protect the entity of the Crown corporation. 

 

And we believe very firmly we've done a lot of work on this 

piece of legislation.  It's gone through many hoops to get this 

far, this being the final stage and a very important stage as 

well.  And that's why the member opposite is very right in 

raising his concerns about the legislation. 

 

But if there are other things that you want to talk to me about 

privately, that you don't want to raise in this forum, I'd be more 

than willing and available to meet with you to discuss them 

further. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the minister's 

offer to talk, and obviously I would take that up, but I have 

always understood that the place to air things such as we're 

talking about this morning is this legislative Chamber.  This is 

where the rules and regulations are made.  This is where the 

Act should be viewed by all Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

I received a letter, Mr. Minister, from the Urban Municipalities 

Association, asking me to support your legislation because in it 

there is a provision for them to recoup monies that they lost; 

because way back in the '40s they had gotten grants in lieu for 

natural gas when it was first brought in and distributed to the 

cities. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I can appreciate that urban municipalities 

would like to get this 2-plus-some million dollars back because 

provincial governments have off-loaded on them in so many 

areas.  But the simple fact is, that two and a half million 

dollars, which then has to go back on the natural gas industry, 

onto the large users, all the people that use the system, maybe 

throws a wrench into what we see is a true picture for the price 

of gas. 

 

In other words, we're saying:  here, urban municipalities, here's 

your money; that will keep you happy for a while -- you're 

back in on the cake.  But that's not the proper way to put the 

price of gas in perspective. 

 

At least, that's not my view.  I would rather see government 

give urban municipalities their money in some other way and 

not tie it to the price of natural gas, which is a distortion. 

 

And that's what I'm saying to you, Mr. Minister.  If there was 

some type of regulatory mechanism in place, they would 

clearly speak out against these types of distortions.  It's not the 

proper way to look at the consumer's impact and input into the 

price of natural gas.  And I think in all due respect to the people 

in urban municipalities -- I know that they are under 

tremendous pressure -- but I do 

believe that there maybe should be a better way to relieve those 

fiscal pressures than to muddy up the natural gas market with 

an artificially imposed fee that has some historical thing that 

isn't relevant in today's natural gas world. 

 

And that's the type of thing that I fear, Mr. Minister, of giving 

the public a picture that isn't proper.  And the only way the 

public will have that is with a regulatory mechanism.  And 

that's why I would like you to give some assurance that that 

process is going to come forward in a public way so that the 

public will have some input in a regulatory mechanism, so that 

we don't get these unnatural distortions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The fee that the member refers to 

was agreements and a series of letters that date back to 1956 to 

. . . I don't, not quite sure, but about 1959, where I believe 109 

communities had some agreement with the utility to provide a 

fee or a grant in lieu of taxes, I guess as it's become known as.  

And the ongoing pressure that you felt from SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and those 

municipalities who felt that there really had been a breach 

when SaskEnergy was set up and that transferred from 

SaskPower . . . there was a period where those letters and 

agreements were not honoured.  And they feel very strongly, as 

you might, that these letters should be honoured. 

 

You must be aware as well that SaskEnergy doesn't benefit at 

all from that clause.  It's simply a flow-through, where we 

would collect the fee and pass it along.  And it goes along, and 

it fits into the very complicated deregulation that you people 

supported.  And it's now there.  It's an issue.  And SUMA is 

wanting us to honour those letters, as well they might.  The 

communities want us to honour them.  And we're saying in this 

instance, we agree that they're with that position. 

 

Now what we do on the other end to make life work for the 

industry is another story that we're consulting on, working 

with, and trying to derive a solution.  Now if you're saying that 

we shouldn't do that in that clause, the mechanism is to move 

an amendment.  And we'll debate that and see what happens.  

And finally we're coming around to an option to the Bill.  And 

we could obviously . . . You could prepare an amendment, put 

it forward.  And obviously we are in a position where we 

would debate it.  And I think in the end of the day, we would 

vote against the amendment.  Because I think SUMA has a 

legitimate argument that there are ongoing contingent liabilities 

here that have to be met, therefore it's in that clause of the Bill. 

 

But if you're saying that this is going to cause a problem and a 

distortion in the system that has to be looked at, you're 

probably right.  And we will be looking at negotiating, talking 

to the people who are affected to see what we can do to make 

life easier for them.  And further than that, I don't know what 

commitment I can make to you. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

want to go back to where we were when we were talking 



2648 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

a little while ago about the debt structure.  I think you said that 

there was 600 million -- you were carrying 600 million in the 

new corporation.  I think you also said that the debt/equity ratio 

is 80 per cent, 20 per cent.  And there was a 8 to $900,000 that 

I didn't write down what you said.  Could you refresh my 

memory on that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Okay, I just want to get this clear, 

because in the event that I was misunderstood or that we 

haven't got the numbers straight, the debt in the corporation is 

about 600 million, the total assets about 720 million, and equity 

about 120 million. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, this 

600 million, you brought that from SaskPower into the new 

corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- This would be the long-term debt 

that remains, that would have come from the shift that the 

previous government made from the Sask Power Corporation. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- I understand then that this 600 million was 

originally in SaskPower and we've shifted it over now to 

SaskEnergy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Okay.  I want to just take a moment 

to . . . The original amount of debt that was shifted would have 

been in the area of something slightly over 700 million.  Of that 

700 million there was a determination, or there has been 

comment made in the Gass Commission and by others, that 

there was an inordinate amount of debt shifted from SaskPower 

to the new corporation when it was structured. 

 

And one can argue why that occurred.  Many will say that it 

was getting the corporation ready to be privatized, that they 

wanted to shift more than the proper amount of debt from 

SaskPower to the new corporation, then privatize it, and 

therefore picking up an inordinate amount of debt from 

SaskPower. 

 

Then the $700 million in debt grew to something in excess of 

800 million over the last few years of your government.  So 

that when we came to government, the recommendation was 

that about $226 million, roughly, should be shifted back to 

SaskPower -- that being about the right amount that should 

have been . . . should have taken place in the initial deal. 

 

So we've now done that and shifted back the proper amount of 

debt to SaskPower.  That will now show up in SaskPower 

books, leaving the debt in SaskEnergy at around $600 million. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- In section 22, there is reference made to 

outside the boundaries of Saskatchewan.  Now if you . . . Could 

you outline what your plans are to do business outside of the 

boundaries of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The reference in the clause would 

refer to that very small portion of the Many Islands pipeline -- 

it's a stub line that goes into Alberta -- and that would be the 

only application. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- One final question, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister.  Then I can -- I want to go back to the 600 million -- I 

can assume from what you said that while SaskPower carries a 

load of debt and now SaskEnergy is a new corporation, that 

SaskEnergy will not assume any more of SaskPower's debt.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Just for the record, that's absolutely 

correct.  You've got that.  The debt now in the two corporations 

is as it should be, as per the Gass Commission and the analysis 

that we've done. 

 

The Chair: -- Because of the number of clauses, I wonder if 

members can agree to proceed through the Bill on a 

part-by-part basis with the exceptions of clauses 26 through 29 

where I believe there are amendments.  Is that agreed? 

 

Part I agreed to. 

 

Part II 

 

Clauses 3 to 25 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 26 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, section 26 of 

the printed Bill.  I would: 

 

 Amend section 26(1) of the printed Bill by striking 

"Notwithstanding The Pipe Lines Act but" and substituting 

"Subject to The Pipe Lines Act and". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 26 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 27 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Section 27 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend subsection 27(1) of the printed Bill by striking out 

"Notwithstanding The Pipe Lines Act but" and substituting 

"Subject to The Pipe Lines Act and". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 27 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 28 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Section 28 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend subsection 28(2) of the printed Bill by striking out 

"or any other authority". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 28 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 29 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  I believe this is 

our final House amendment.  Section 29 of the printed Bill: 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2649 

Amend subsection 29(2) of the printed Bill by striking out ", 

the member of the Executive Council responsible for the 

administration of The Highways and Transportation Act and 

the clerk or administrator of" and substituting "and". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 29 as amended agreed to. 

 

Parts II to VII inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to thank the 

officials who are with us here today.  Mr. Baker and his group 

have done a lot of work on this legislation, and I think all 

members who have worked on this Bill really would want to 

thank them. 

 

I also thank the critic from Wilkie who I think raised some very 

important questions, along with the member from Thunder 

Creek and Estevan.  So I think the work that has been done on 

this Bill will really bode well for the province. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister, I too would like to thank the staff for helping us 

through this.  I'm sure they done a lot of work.  And it's quite a 

large Bill and the reason we wanted to progress through it a 

little bit is because it's a new corporation, and we certainly 

appreciate the work.  Hopefully it will be a good Bill -- I think 

it is.  Thank you very much for your help. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 88 -- An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 60 -- An Act to amend The Community Bonds Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 66 - An Act to amend The Industrial Development 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

Bill No. 78 -- An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored 

Venture Capital Corporations Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 21 -- An Act to continue SaskEnergy Incorporated, 

to make certain consequential amendments to certain Acts 

resulting from that continuance and to validate certain 

transactions involving SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the 

amendments now be read a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave I move that 

Bill 21 now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 

 

 


