




















































Hansard: May 25, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 581 

 May 25, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a 

petition to present to the House.  It is the same petition as 

presented by my colleagues, the member from Maple Creek 

and the member from Kindersley.  It deals with the farm 

situation and the gross revenue insurance program. 

 

I won't bother reading it all out to you, Mr. Speaker, but the 

main issue is that the farmers would like to have the '91 GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) returned.  I would like to 

lay this on the Table, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, I have reviewed the following 

petition pursuant to rule 11(7) and it is hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of the citizens of the Province of Saskatchewan humbly 

praying that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to 

(1) allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand; (2) start working 

with the Federal Government and farmers to design a 

program that will be a true "Revenue Insurance" program; 

and (3) ensure that the new revenue insurance program be set 

up on an individual cost-of-production to return ratio instead 

of risk area formula. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 

Deputy Clerk: -- Mr. Swenson as chairman of the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts presents the first report of the 

committee which is hereby filed as sessional paper no. 62. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my pleasure as 

the chairman of the Public Accounts Committee to table the 

committee's report for the year ending March 30, 1990. 

 

The committee report this time is broken into two parts, Mr. 

Speaker.  The first part was with the deliberations of the 

previous legislature, and the second part of the report deals 

with the time period after the election of October 1991. 

 

The committee has undertaken a couple of initiatives during 

that time.  One because there were a number of people new to 

the mandate of this Standing Committee on Public Accounts, 

we've gone through a series of orientation seminars with two 

purposes in mind:  one was to of course bring new members up 

to speed on the mandate of the committee, and the second one 

was to review the guidelines as presented by the Canadian 

committee of Public Accounts.  It's an organization that is 

active all across Canada. 

 

They do analysis on a Canada-wide basis of things such as the 

role and purpose of the Public Accounts Committee, 

parliamentary control and accounting of public monies, and the 

role of the comptroller, the role of the Provincial Auditor, the 

operation of the Department of Finance, the budget cycle, and 

of course the mandate itself of Public Accounts committees in 

various provinces and indeed federally. 

 

So what your committee did, Mr. Speaker, was to compare how 

Saskatchewan stacked up against other jurisdictions, how 

Saskatchewan could look at improving on the way that its 

committee functions.  And indeed, Mr. Speaker, I would say 

that Saskatchewan did stand up very well in comparison to 

other jurisdictions in Canada.  We found areas of agreement 

where we could improve upon certainly.  And the committee, 

as it begins its deliberations tomorrow, will be looking at 

implementing some of those recommendations that were 

adopted by all members of the committee. 

 

The committee looked at about 20 different areas of public 

expenditure, Mr. Speaker, and I'm not going to go into any 

great detail on any of them.  Some areas that the Provincial 

Auditor has commented on for a number of years, probably 

will comment upon again in his next report which has been 

tabled in this legislature. 

 

I think, needless to say though, Mr. Speaker, that with the 

advent of the discussions around accrual accounting, the Gass 

report, and other initiatives that are taking place within 

parliamentary government around Canada, that you will see the 

Public Accounts Committee in this province looking in new 

directions to perform its tasks.  And with that, Mr. Speaker, I 

would table my report on the Public Accounts. 

 

I'm told, Mr. Speaker, that procedure would be to ask for leave 

of the Assembly that the first report of the Standing Committee 

on Public Accounts be taken into consideration before orders of 

the day. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am sure the next 

time we'll get it right.  I move: 

 

 That the first report of the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts be now concurred in. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

rise to associate myself with the remarks of the member for 

Thunder Creek, the chairman of the Public Accounts 

Committee.  I think that he has accurately and succinctly 

described some of the major activities of the committee that 

may be found in the report. 

 

Before I sit, I just briefly want to make mention of the fact, or 

to elaborate . . . and we've said that some of the report is in fact 

the work of a previous committee, from a previous legislature.  

And I think I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I did not point 

out that those individuals: Mike Hopfner, who was the member 

for Cut 



582 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

Knife-Lloydminster; also Harry Baker, who was the MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for Biggar; one of the 

members who is not now on the committee but is a member of 

the legislature, the member for  Wilkie; also the member for 

Regina Rosemont, who was also a member of the committee at 

that time; Lloyd Muller, who was the MLA for 

Shellbrook-Torch River; you, Mr. Speaker, who was a member 

of the committee at that time; Lloyd Sauder, who was the MLA 

for Nipawin; and Herb Swan, who was the MLA for 

Rosetown-Elrose.  And I think that . . . again much of the work 

that was done was done by those members and we thank them 

for their efforts in this regard.  And I support the motion, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for me 

today to rise and introduce to you and through you to members 

of the legislature, three people who are seated, two in your 

gallery, and a third in the west gallery. 

 

The two in the Speaker's gallery, seated at the top back, are Leo 

Weaver and Gary Dawson.  Both are sublocal chairmen with 

the Amalgamated Transit Union.  Both these gentlemen and I 

have a fairly lengthy working history together, and it was my 

pleasure to meet with them a little bit earlier today. 

 

The third person I want to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, is 

Harley Toupin, who is the executive director of the 

Saskatchewan Safety Council, seated in the west gallery.  

Harley and I also have a fairly long history together.  I was on 

the board of the Safety Council some years back when Harley 

was originally hired by the Safety Council. 

 

I ask all hon. members to join me in welcoming these three 

individuals to our Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you, 13 grade 12 students from 

the Eastend School and the teachers Brad Hauber, Robert 

Gebhardt, and bus driver Randy Morris.  I ask that all the 

members welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to join with my 

colleague from Shaunavon in welcoming the 13 grade 12 

students from Eastend.  Welcome to the Assembly. 

 

But I want to introduce to you and through you to members of 

the Assembly a group of 12 English as a second language 

group of students from SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology) who are seated in your 

gallery.  Along with them is their teacher, Ron Mang.  And I 

know that all members will want to join with me in welcoming 

them here today and wishing them a good stay. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

(1345) 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this 

is day one for the implementation of the new amendments to 

the rule and procedures for this Assembly. 

 

The public expectation of politicians amongst other things 

these days is that they want members to be accessible, to be 

effective, and to be open, and that they expect the 43 private 

members to have a more visible and effective role in the 

legislature.  So part of the democratic reform package of this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, is to raise the profile of private 

members and to provide a new role for government members. 

 

Accordingly we are introducing today a series of new rules, the 

first of which I am participating in right now -- the private 

member statements -- a 90-second opportunity for any member 

to make a statement on an issue pertaining to constituency that 

may not otherwise be raised.  Every member will have an 

opportunity to make such a statement every six to eight days. 

 

There are other reforms including question and answers after 

the time debate on Tuesday.  No seconders will be needed for 

motions.  Therefore any member will be able to introduce a 

motion and register any motion.  And the TV guidelines are 

revised to better reflect the operations within the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will be monitoring and accepting 

recommendations on the new rules and regulations by the 50th 

day of the sitting and we hope to work to a . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's with a great 

deal of pleasure that I report to this Assembly the happenings 

of last Friday wherein the native women's healing lodge to be 

built in the Maple Creek district in the Cypress Hills was 

announced by Solicitor General Doug Lewis; accompanied by 

Member of Parliament, Geoff Wilson; the mayor of Maple 

Creek, Grant McAlister; and Chief Gordon Oakes; along with 

many members of the community including local reeves and 

other mayors from other towns. 

 

It was found that after extensive research, negotiations, and 

study, Mr. Speaker, the federal government appointed the eight 

panel member . . . eight-member panel, excuse me, along with 

three members from the elder circle.  And there was a 

unanimous decision by that group to place this facility at the 

Maple Creek site. And we wish to take a moment to 

congratulate the people involved for a job well done, especially 

the people of that community who wrote up the report.  It was 

an excellent report. 

 

There were 45 communities that applied for the facility to be in 

their area and so it must have been a very difficult choice 

indeed.  And so we want to congratulate the 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 583 

people that put that report together for that area.  It was 

reported as being an excellent report and that it was a very 

deserving choice indeed.  And I also would extend my 

congratulations to all involved.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to raise a 

concern from the Shaunavon constituency.  On Tuesday, May 

19, there were lightning strikes which ignited grass fires in the 

Masefield community pasture.  And these fires took out 40 

square miles of grasslands leaving 26 patrons of the community 

pasture with little-to-no grass for 1,200-and-some head of 

cattle. 
 

Last Friday I wrote letters to the federal Agriculture minister, 

Bill McKnight, Environment minister, Jean Charest, and other 

federal officials to see if perhaps we can't have emergency 

grazing in the Grasslands National Park.  And I'll be asking the 

support of all the members of this House in doing that in the 

future.  Thank you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was home for the 

weekend in Kelvington-Wadena talking to many of my 

neighbours, who are farmers like myself, and they agreed that 

farmers . . . the worst thing they need right now is another bill.  

And they agreed that what we proposed last Friday was a good 

idea and the right thing to do. 

 

And what we had proposed was that the federal government 

deduct the 41 million overpayment in western grain 

stabilization plan from the 500 million owed by the previous 

promise and a third line of defence and to immediately pay the 

balance of that money.  And I am again today calling on the 

federal minister to comply with those recommendations. 

 

Last Friday we had a chance for unanimous approval of those 

recommendations, but the opposition refused to vote by 

speaking out the clock, thus causing the debate to die on the 

order paper.  And if the members opposite are sincere about 

helping us in the crisis in agriculture, please join us, and let's 

work together for a better tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to make a statement 

on the healing lodge as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased to hear the healing lodge, you 

know, coming to the province of Saskatchewan.  And I 

certainly hope that the control and the employment figures rise 

in regards to the Nikaneet Band in regards to their healing 

lodge itself. 
 

Being from the other side of the province, up in the North, one 

of the concerns was the access.  And a lot of the people were 

still very concerned in my area who come to Prince Albert and 

La Ronge and Saskatoon, on the question of access.  So I 

would like to . . . I certainly hope that the plan includes, you 

know, a means of providing access for the people from the 

northern area in making sure that they have places to stay 

which . . . and being able to have, you know, the funding which 

they would be able  

to get, food and everything and shelter and all these things, if it 

was in a central location. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to 

make a comment on the University of Regina convocation that 

was held on Friday.  It was my pleasure and I was proud to be 

in attendance at the morning ceremonies of the convocation.  

And I congratulate all of those people who worked so hard to 

obtain their degrees, their certificates, their work study 

program completions, and so on. 

 

At the convocation there were two honorary degrees bestowed 

upon Dr. Ursula Franklin and Dr. Roberta Bondar.  And in the 

morning ceremonies I was very pleased to hear the comments 

and the presentation from Dr. Franklin who stated that in 

science and the economy, we no longer can have all of our 

efforts go to maximizing profit and greed; that we now have to 

look at how we can minimize the disasters that have been 

created for the economy and for the environment. 

 

The many people who were in attendance were very proud of 

the graduates, and our representative, the hon. member from 

Regina Dewdney, was our representative of our government.  

He was also there as a proud parent. 

 

I noted in the comments from some of the people in the 

audience, there were many mature students who also went 

back; and the comments of the two beside me who were 

hollering, way to go, mom, when the degree was completed. 

 

So I rise to congratulate all of the people who had convocated 

on Friday, and to say the congratulations to the two people, Dr. 

Franklin and Roberta Bondar, who received their honorary 

degrees. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Mr. Speaker, the federal agricultural minister, 

Mr. Bill McKnight, has ordered the Farm Credit Corporation to 

continue the push for farm foreclosures in Saskatchewan, and 

to actively oppose any attempts by the province of 

Saskatchewan to deal with the situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. McKnight has shown himself by his actions 

to be unwilling to act as a representative of Saskatchewan 

farmers.  Take a look at the statistics for the period April 1, 

1992 to May 20.  The FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) has 

issued 167 notices of intent to foreclose.  This represents 67.1 

per cent of the total notices.  This does not indicate the crisis is 

all but over. 

 

Our farmers are in a crisis so devastating that they need all the 

help they can get to stay on their land.  And now the federal 

Minister of Agriculture is saying that he doesn't want to be a 

part of a plan to help farmers stay on the land -- a minister who 

lives here, a minister who represents the 

Kindersley-Lloydminster area, a minister who is a farmer of all 

things, a man who should understand what it's like in this 

province right now. 

 

I find it incredibly hard to believe that Mr. McKnight 



584 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

really cares about the farmers of Saskatchewan.  If he did, he 

would be helping us ensure leaseback protection for 

cash-strapped farmers. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Community Employment Program 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

today is to the Minister of Social Services.  Madam Minister, 

you have announced what you are calling a new welfare work 

program, and so far the main thing you say that is new about it 

is the approach taken to welfare recipients.  Will you confirm 

that if under your program you offer a job to a welfare recipient 

and that recipient refuses the job, you are saying there will be 

no consequences?  In other words, an able-bodied person can 

turn down a job and just keep collecting welfare.  Is that 

correct, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

I will confirm that the program is voluntary.  What I will also 

confirm is that we are having no trouble finding people who are 

willing to work in this province.  In fact what I find in my 

constituency is that people who are on social assistance want 

nothing more than a good, decent job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- What this program does is it offers 

them the opportunity for exactly that -- a good, decent job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the same 

minister: you and your government have always said the Tories 

have been tough on these kind of people.  You've always said 

that.  The question again to you, Madam Minister:  when there 

is a job provided, when a job is provided for a person who can 

work, should that person be expected in fact to work for the 

money the taxpayers are providing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I think I would like to ask the 

member opposite, first of all, what these kind of people are.  

We have a lot of people in this province who exist in a state of 

poverty.  I don't know if that is these kinds of people to the 

member opposite. 

 

But what I would like to say is what I said before; we have a lot 

of social problems in this province created primarily in the 

1980s when the members opposite were in power, such as a 

doubling of child poverty in this province.  What we are 

providing these people is what they want most: an opportunity 

to work, as well as opportunities to upgrade their skills. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The minister 

is saying that we do not have a welfare problem in this 

province.  The way this government has been firing people and 

people losing jobs by the thousands, you're going to have to 

have some way to control your Social Service department that 

the people that need it.  Will you, Madam Minister, tell us how 

you are going to control the people that really need social 

services and the ones that don't need it.  How are you going to 

control it now?  Tell us, Madam Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, let's inject a few basic 

facts into this debate.  When the members opposite were in 

power from 1982 to 1992, what we saw in this province was a 

30 per cent increase in the welfare case-load.  So don't talk to 

me about putting people to work.  What happened under your 

administration was you put more people on welfare by different 

social policies that you put in place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  The 

minister seems not to understand that with her tax and rate 

increases she is making everyone pay for these bad decisions.  

That's what's happening out there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Madam Minister, today you're even taking money away from 

little children who go to buy a soda pop.  That's what you're 

doing.  So if someone can work . . . and who won't work?  

You're not answering my question at all.  They won't work.  

You will take away from the kids pop money to pay a strong 

man not to work.  That's the question I'm asking.  You're trying 

to get around it.  Now answer the question. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I am in no sense 

getting around your question.  I am very proud of what we call 

the community employment program.  What it does is it takes 

NGOs (non-governmental organizations), volunteer agencies, 

child care facilities, food banks that are providing valuable 

services to their communities, and it offers them an opportunity 

for extra help to provide jobs that they couldn't otherwise 

afford to pay for. 

 

On the other hand, it gives our people on social assistance 

on-the-job training which is part of a career plan that involves 

on-the-job training as well as upgrading of skills and basic 

literacy. 

 

This is a wonderful program of which I make no apologies, and 

we are having no trouble getting people to line up for it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, it's very evident to see that the 

minister was not watching a lot of years what the New Careers 

program was doing.  Very evident. 

 

A new question to the Minister of Social Services, Mr. 

Speaker.  Madam Minister, you say that under your system, if 

an able-bodied individual has an employment opportunity, that 

individual can choose to live off 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 585 

taxpayers' funds.  This is going backwards, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, can you also confirm that you have fired 20 

people from your Social Services department including 

individuals from the investigations unit whose job was to 

ensure that taxpayers' dollars are being targeted to the 

individuals that need it? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- To answer the second part of your 

question seeing as I've already answered the first part, what we 

have done in the department is again something I'm very proud 

of.  We have redirected funds away from what used to be called 

the fraud squad, so that what we have there is basic 

accountability -- accountability that the tax dollars are well 

spent, but we don't have harassment. 

 

We've taken those dollars and put them where they're needed -- 

front-line social workers that can deal with people's problems.  

That's what we've done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  She 

didn't answer my question, did she or did she not fire these 20 

people.  She did not answer that question, and I'll expect her to 

answer that question when she gets up. 

 

And further to that question, Mr. Speaker, not only did these 

individuals, these 20 individuals return a portion of taxpayers' 

money back to the people, their presence also served as a 

deterrent for anyone wishing to take advantage of the system.  

Their work is more than just what they return to the system. 

 

I trust you did no analysis of the effects of the removal of these 

positions as many of your cabinet colleagues have also 

neglected to do. 

 

I'm wondering why you fired them at all rather than just trim 

the staff to a level that was satisfactory to what your objectives 

were. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Again if I could inject some facts 

and statistics into this discussion.  What we did was we 

redirected funds from one part of the department to another 

part of the department.  We did not end the auditing function. 

 

But let's put some numbers on this.  The special investigations 

unit cost the taxpayers of this province $600,000 last year.  Do 

you know how much they collected? -- 230,000.  That is a 

negative of almost 400,000.  It is a negative of almost 400,000.  

We're taking that money and putting it to much better use -- 

front-line social workers to deal with the social problems that 

the members opposite created. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  She still 

hasn't said . . . Madam Minister has not stood to her feet and 

said yes, I did fire those 20 people.  She will not 

admit that, even though we all know she did.  But she just 

won't . . . she wants to get around it.  So therefore she's talking 

about a new policy.  But will she and will you, Madam 

Minister, table your new policy so we all in Saskatchewan can 

see it? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- We certainly will.  It's called 

Changing Directions.  It's out there for the members opposite 

to see.  We've asked for public input into it. 

 

Again, what I say is what we have done in the Department of 

Social Services is we have talked about a redirection of 

services to the clients to try to deal with the social problems.  If 

we don't begin to deal with the fact that we have one of the 

highest child poverty rates in Canada, if we as a government 

don't begin to deal with that, we're handing our children a 

terrible legacy.  And this government is going to deal with that 

problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the same 

minister, a short question: did you or did you not fire 20 people 

from Social Services? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- We did not fire 23 people.  We 

disbanded part of a unit.  The people were given the 

opportunity to exercise straightforward bumping rights. 

 

And by the way, while we're talking about Grant Schmidt's SS 

police or the fraud squad, the member opposite from Rosthern 

did a 50 per cent reduction last year.  He was moving in the 

right direction.  We've carried it a bit further.  We're putting the 

money to where it's needed -- front-end social workers who are 

serving people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- The minister has been . . . she thinks she's 

answering questions, but really she's just skating around and 

she's not answering directly.  And I have a new question.  

Maybe she can answer this one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Madam Minister, you and your NDP (New Democratic Party) 

colleagues felt the need to gut the GRIP program because you 

didn't trust hard-working farm families.  You didn't trust 

hard-working farm families, many of whom will be working at 

the . . . near the poverty level this year.  You called it a moral 

hazard and accused honest producers, taxpaying producers, of 

knocking the system, and took their protection away from 

them. 

 

On the other hand, you say there's no need to protect taxpayers 

from the possibility of misuse of the welfare system.  How 

does that square with your Minister of Agriculture's deplorable 

actions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

What we've done with GRIP is make it market sensitive.  I 

would have thought the members opposite would have 

supported that. 



586 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

You are putting words into people's mouths.  You said that you 

got people on social assistance to work in the 1980s.  The stats 

say opposite.  The stats say that there were 30 per cent more 

people on social assistance when you finished with the 

province than when you started, so don't talk to me about 

putting people to work.  That's what we're doing. 

 

You assume that because we don't have a fraud squad, that 

we're not monitoring the system -- there's no quality control.  

That is false.  There is quality control and there will continue to 

be quality control. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you.  It's my last 

question to the minister.  Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, when 

she's been answering these questions, she just gets onto her 

own policy, her own program, but not answering directly what 

I've been asking her.  She skirts around the questions.  But 

maybe you can answer this one too.  Maybe you could try to 

answer this one, please, Madam Minister. 

 

You also stopped the cheque pick-up program which 

uncovered numerous instances of taxpayers' money being sent 

to unqualified recipients.  This was not a massive system for 

those who needed the assistance, Madam Minister.  And in this 

time of restraint and given your massive tax grab, do you not 

feel that taxpayers deserve some assurance that their money is 

going to those people that need it?  Do you not agree with that, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to answer 

that question.  Our commitment is to treat poor people in this 

province with decency and respect. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- We are simply not about to say to 

people, we will with the one hand take away your 

transportation allowance and with the other hand we'll expect 

you to pick up cheques -- a practice which, by the way, cost the 

department money. 

 

What we're doing is we are monitoring people's activities but 

we're using the people best equipped to do that -- front-end 

social workers.  We will continue to treat people in this 

province with dignity and respect. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Investments Corporation Annual Report 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 

recognizing me.  My question this afternoon is addressed to the 

minister responsible for the Crown Investments Corporation.  

Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker, the Crown Investments 

Corporation recently released the annual report for the year 

1991.  The annual report revealed a substantial loss, and simply 

put, it was not a very healthy picture for the Crown sector in 

Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Minister, could you tell the House today what exactly is 

the financial condition of the CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan), and which of the Crown 

corporations were principally responsible for the poor 

performance of the Crown Investments Corporation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, the annual report for 

CIC, tabled for the first time this year; for the first time we're 

providing a complete set of financial statements. 

 

They show a consolidated net loss of $381 million.  The 

corporations principally contributing to this were: an operating 

loss at SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation) of $43 million; STC (Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company), $6 million; a $189 million loss 

associated with the privatization of Cameco; $64 million 

write-down of CIC's investment in the Bi-Provincial upgrader; 

a $47 million write-down on the Weyerhaeuser income 

debenture; $50 million provided to Meadow Lake pulp mill, 

not as a loan; a further $70 million of CIC's investment in 

NewGrade in addition to the 162 million put in earlier. 

 

By and large, Mr. Speaker, we are cleaning up the messes 

created by the PCs (Progressive Conservatives) during their 

years in office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Supplementary to 

the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, would you 

explain to this Assembly what caused the Potash Corporation 

of Saskatchewan and Cameco losses and what do you plan to 

do to rectify that in the new year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Primarily the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well given the 

rather paltry nature of the questions opposite, it was thought 

needed to supplement . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  If the minister has an answer to the 

question, he'd better get to it right away. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, the loss associated with 

PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) and Cameco were 

as a result of the privatization.  Mr. Speaker will know that the 

system that the PCs used is that you sell assets for less than 

what they're worth so that the shares will rise on the market and 

people will experience a gain. 

 

That's sound for the investor but the bill is coming home to the 

taxpayer.  And this year's losses at CIC are the taxpayers' bill 

for your phoney gamesmanship with privatization. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I have a question for the same minister.  Mr. 

Minister, is it not true that within the confines of CIC and also 

at Cameco there are letters from various agencies, Warburg's 

among them, who say that there has been no permanent 

impairment suffered by Cameco Corporation in its share 

offerings.  Is that true, Mr. Minister? 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 587 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker there are at least two 

documents suggesting there's going to be . . . that there must 

have been some permanent impairment of the Saskatchewan 

taxpayer.  One is the previous reports of the Provincial Auditor 

and the other is the Gass Commission suggesting the taxpayer 

has had to carry a lot of freight because of the phoney 

gamesmanship which you people played when you sat on the 

treasury benches, Mr. Member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Minister, is it not also true that by taking these foolish 

write-downs right now, that any gain in share value and any of 

those corporations in the future can be taken as a profit by the 

government opposite.  Is that not true? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you.  The member opposite 

will understand that you're calling the last year's president of 

the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants, Donald Gass, 

foolish.  It was Donald Gass who recommended it.  We are 

following the Gass Commission.  Keep in mind whose advice 

you're criticizing with such trite comments, Mr. Member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- As usual, Mr. Speaker, the ministers don't 

like answering the questions. 

 

The minister outlined a number of costs associated with CIC 

and the debt associated with it.  This Chamber has heard last 

week that Power, Tel, many of the major corporations had 

large profits associated with them. 

 

Mr. Minister, is it not true, is it not true, sir, that if you did not 

take these unnecessary write-downs so that in two or three 

years you could show large capital gains in those areas, you in 

fact would not have that debt in CIC?  Can you confirm that, 

sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm not sure, Mr. Speaker, if it would 

be good parliamentary practice to describe the questions as 

wilfully obtuse, but they certainly seem to be. 

 

Mr. Member, the Gass Commission recommended it. We are 

taking the recommendations of the Gass Commission.  Surely 

members opposite can understand that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Question to the same minister.  When in 

trouble the NDP hide behind the Gass Commission. 

 

I don't think, Mr. Minister, at any time the Gass Commission 

recommended taking unnecessary write-downs.  What you're 

doing, sir, what you're doing on selective basis is using Gass 

numbers one day and something else another, and you know it. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you answer the question.  If the shares of 

Cameco, if the shares of PCS, if the shares of other companies 

associated with the CIC umbrella go up in the next few years, 

by taking this write-down, sir, will you achieve a capital gain?  

Answer the question, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say it again for 

the member opposite.  The shareholders will experience the 

capital gain; the taxpayer is going to get stuck paying off the 

loss. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a question to 

the minister of PCS . . . the minister responsible for PCS. 

 

Who is it, Roy asks?  The minister responsible for PCS.  Mr. 

Speaker, the reason I ask that . . . Mr. Speaker, the reason I ask 

that is because the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Let's have some order.  Okay? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- If the government would listen to the question 

I think they would maybe some of them be amazed that some 

minister over there took it upon themselves to send a couple of 

individuals to the PCS annual meeting in Saskatoon.  I'm 

simply asking the question, Mr. Speaker, would the appropriate 

minister inform the Assembly of who those two individuals 

were? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- As the minister in charge of CIC, the 

two individuals who went were Don Woloshyn and Doug 

Karvonen. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister:  Mr. Minister, so it was under your direction 

that these two individuals were sent to Saskatoon to perform 

their Laurel and Hardy act at the PCS annual meeting.  Mr. 

Minister, please tell the legislature what the purpose was of 

sending these two individuals to that meeting so that they could 

properly embarrass the people of Saskatchewan at it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, the two individuals 

went to the annual meeting to exercise the right of this 

government to vote its shares and to ask questions at the annual 

meeting.  Questions were asked and were duly answered by the 

management.  We are simply exercising the right we have as 

any shareholder has. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Question to the same minister: Mr. Minister, 

is it not true that those shares that your two political friends 

were voting that day are in fact held in trust for tens of 

thousands of Saskatchewan people who have the right to 

convert the potash bond to shares of Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan at a later date?  Is that not true, sir? 



588 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The shares are owned by the 

Government of Saskatchewan.  Under a complex arrangement 

they may or may not be released to bondholders.  There is no 

certainty about their release. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister:  Mr. Minister, are you saying to literally tens of 

thousands of people in Saskatchewan -- my two children 

included, as are many other children, seniors, all people across 

this province who have potash bonds and have the understood 

right to convert those to potash shares -- that your government 

is now changing the rules and saying that they don't have that 

right, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to answer the 

question if I can of the hon. member because I find that the 

question is strange coming from the official opposition. 

 

This member of the opposition now is criticizing us for 

exercising not only a right, I would say, Mr. Speaker, a duty, a 

duty to look after the shareholders' interests that still are vested 

directly or indirectly in the province of Saskatchewan.  He 

criticizes us for doing that when he failed to do his job in 

protecting the interests of the shareholders of the province of 

Saskatchewan by privatizing the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, the loss of over $400 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Sir, I say to you, those days are over.  

We are here to look after the interests of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan and not the private investors as you 

have the last nine years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 21 -- An Act to continue SaskEnergy Incorporated, 

to make certain consequential amendments to certain Acts 

resulting from that continuance and to validate certain 

transactions involving SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 

The SaskEnergy Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 10 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the 

proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Penner that Bill No. 10 -- An 

Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act and to make 

consequential amendments to certain other Acts resulting from 

the enactment of this Act be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Speaker: -- If the member wishes to speak to the 

adjourned debate, he's too late.  He'll have to make his 

comments on Committee of the Whole. 

 

Is the member asking leave to revert back? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Yes I do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you to 

the House for giving leave to continue this debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a very complex and very intimate Bill.  

It's going to affect a lot of people across this province, a lot of 

industry, and a lot of jobs.  There needs to be more consultation 

with the industry and with the people affected concerning this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our critic today was unable to be here.  He has been discussing 

this matter with various people in the industry.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, at this time I would like to adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I have to remind the member from 

Souris-Cannington that he has already adjourned debate on this 

Bill and he's not able to do so.  He may speak to it but he will 

not be able to adjourn debate. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wasn't aware 

of the ruling on that.  I will take my seat at this time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The concerns of the 

opposition in regard to this Bill, Mr. Speaker, are that as usual 

we're not absolutely positive that in Bill No. 10 that the 

minister responsible has done the type of consultation that we 

would deem necessary to see this Bill truly meet the concerns 

of the people involved in the particular industry. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Which Bill is it? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- It's Bill No. 10. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Are you sure? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Absolutely positive. 

 

We've seen unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, too much of this type 

of thing going on in the legislature.  And I listened with interest 

to the minister's comments on second reading to see if there 

was any indication that people in Saskatchewan will go 

forward with these changes with the full confidence that 

increases in royalties and taxation won't have detrimental 

effects on the people involved. 

 

And I can tell the minister, Mr. Speaker, as one who formerly 

filled that role, that one of the successes of those 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 589 

industries in Saskatchewan through some very difficult times 

was the fact that there was an ongoing consultation process.  It 

wasn't always that the government simply gave in to industry, 

but it was a clear recognition that the bottom line, the bottom 

line of many very small companies who are situated in 

basically our smaller urban areas around Saskatchewan, that 

the bottom line sometimes amounts to a couple of thousand 

dollars change one way or the other. 

 

The other thing that we must always be cognizant of in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, is that the availability of Crown land for 

development, particularly to the small and medium producer, 

has to be there -- that if we as a province in our wisdom take 

too much of the pie before the pie ever gets cut, those lands 

will not be developed accordingly.  And it's always a fine 

balance of trying to predict what international commodity 

prices are going to be, versus what the ongoing costs of 

operation of your medium and small producer are, so that they 

can be viable in the future. 

 

These people in many areas of our province, Mr. Speaker, form 

the backbone of the employment.  They are involved in the 

service industry.  They are the folks that pick the guys up out 

of technical school.  They are the folks that give farmers 

part-time employment.  They are the people that in many cases 

form the tax base in rural Saskatchewan so that when they need 

a few extra bucks for the rink or they need a few extra dollars 

for a community project, if Main Street needs a little more 

paving, it's often these small- and medium-size resource 

companies, whether they be in oil, gas, mining. 

 

I know of situations in my own constituency, Mr. Speaker, 

where an individual involved in the sand and gravel business 

made a very major contribution to Palliser Park located on 

Lake Diefenbaker.  The ability of those individuals to keep 

employing people and to still make those contributions to their 

local community, besides the province as a whole, is a very 

narrow thin line.  And the whole trick to governing that sector 

of our economy is to talk to them and talk to them and talk to 

them on an ongoing basis. 

 

And I will await with interest, Mr. Speaker, on the minister's 

comments in Committee of the Whole as to that ongoing 

consultation process that he has undertaken with these types of 

individuals and companies around this province in bringing 

forward a Bill which certainly does have monetary costs 

associated with these individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as my colleague from south-east Saskatchewan 

said the other day, there are a number of individuals around 

this province particularly that we are in consultation with.  We 

do believe it's necessary to hear people's views and we are still 

listening to them, Mr. Speaker.  And with that I would beg 

leave to adjourn debate on Bill No. 10. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1430) 

Bill No. 11 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the 

proposed motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 11 -- An 

Act to amend The Marriage Act be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 

the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 

day. 

 

Bill No. 13 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 13 -- An Act 

to amend The Adoption Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  When this Bill 

had second reading I wasn't here, Mr. Speaker, and my 

colleague from Rosthern said a few words and asked for 

adjournment.  And it was given to me on Friday.  I had quite a 

few people to contact about this. 

 

This Bill may be all right, Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, 

but it takes me back to 1980-81 when this same government 

had a Bill pertaining to adoptions and there was things at that 

time that came to light through . . . complications to the Bill. 

 

And I'm trying to, Mr. Speaker, and, Madam Minister, I'm 

trying to contact some of these people over the weekend which 

was very difficult, to get their views on it.  I think it would be 

only fair seeing that I'm the critic, that I contact those people 

and see what their thoughts are on it.  And I ask for an 

adjournment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 14 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 14 -- An Act 

to amend The Child and Family Services Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again the same 

thing with this Bill. I read through it and read through the 

explanatory notes, and these same people . . . I'd like to contact 

some people.  And seeing that I only had the weekend, I ask for 

adjournment on this also, Mr. Speaker.  And I will not hold 

these Bills up, as soon as I can call . . . contact these people.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 15 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 15 -- An Act to 

amend The Wills Act be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 

the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 

day. 

 

Bill No. 16 



590 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 16 -- An Act to 

amend The Jury Act, 1981 be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 

the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 

day. 

 

Bill No. 17 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 17 -- An Act to 

amend The Commissioners for Oaths Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 

the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 

day. 

 

Bill No. 18 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 18 -- An Act to 

promote Regulatory Reform in Saskatchewan by repealing 

Certain Obsolete Statutes be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 

the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 

day. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister please introduce her 

officials? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair.  I would 

like to introduce the officials who are here to help us today.  

On my left is Ms. Susan Amrud, who is a Crown solicitor in 

the legislative services of the Department of Justice, and on my 

right, Mr. Maurice Herauf, director of the maintenance 

enforcement office, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, just a 

couple of questions, as we technically have no problem with 

the Bill that's laid out before us today. 

 

But one question I have and I would ask the minister is, in 

clause 10 of section 3 -- we're talking of where there are arrears 

owing pursuant to a maintenance order -- it says: 

 

 . . . the director may fix an amount to be applied toward the 

arrears by way of a continuing garnishment. 

 

We're wondering, Mr. Chairman, where the garnishment comes 

from.  Are these arrears going to be collected from any funds 

that are then allocated from, say the person that you're going 

after to get the funds that should be going to say, a spouse in 

the family?  Or will funds be garnished 

from that amount to pay for the arrears? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I'm not completely sure of the purport of 

your question.  But what happens under section 3 of the Bill -- 

10.1 -- is that the director can fix an amount by way of 

continuing garnishment.  Continuing garnishment is when it 

stays on and every month the employer deducts that amount.  

In other words, you don't have to serve the garnishee every 

month as we do in some other situations under law in 

Saskatchewan.  So this is a continuing garnishment that is there 

until the arrears have been paid.  The amounts that would be 

garnisheed are the ordinary amounts that are garnisheed by 

such a garnishment. 

 

Now with respect to exemptions.  It would be the . . . As to 

what monies are exempt, it would be the ordinary exemptions 

that have existed under the law with the exception, later in the 

Bill, there is one provision that makes some further exemptions 

with respect to UI (unemployment insurance) and something 

else.  But it doesn't change the exemptions that exist today.  

Does that answer the question? 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Guess maybe I 

should have asked what are we talking, when we talk about 

arrears here, what are we specifically talking about?  I guess 

the question I was trying to place, Madam Minister, was the 

fact that would arrears be taken from any money collected from 

one spouse to be given to the other in their ongoing 

commitment and maintenance orders or maintenance funds? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The arrears would be the arrears under 

the maintenance order.  For example, if a spouse owes a spouse 

$500 a month and has only been paying 250, over a period of 

three or four months there's arrears of 750 to $1,000.  Those are 

the arrears that we're talking about.  It's arrears under a 

maintenance order that's in existence and that hasn't been paid 

or has only been partially paid. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So I take it then, Madam Minister, that these are 

the arrears that specifically we're looking at going after so that 

indeed if one spouse is continuing their commitment or their 

responsibility to the other spouse. 

 

Another question, Madam Minister.  What process does the 

department go about or go through to enforce the orders, the 

enforcement of maintenance or enforce the orders that it has 

before it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The process that is followed is as 

follows:  first of all the arrears . . . the order, rather, would be 

filed in the maintenance enforcement office, then a letter would 

be sent to the respondent, to the person who is to be paying the 

maintenance. And if the payments don't come in when they're 

due, they begin the process of enforcement automatically. 

 

Now the order that comes in may be an order only for 

maintenance in the future or it could be an order for arrears and 

maintenance in the future.  So depending on what the order 

says the enforcement then will be either for arrears and 

maintenance in the future or for maintenance only. 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 591 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To the 

Madam Minister.  Once an order has been made, what type of 

tracking is in place now to find the individual to whom the 

maintenance order has been placed? 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The process that's followed is this: that 

once an order has been made their enforcement office can 

search any provincial data banks to determine where the 

respondent is living.  So they can try and get information from 

the provincial data banks to locate the respondent.  They also 

can file a tracing request with the federal Department of Justice 

which, in turn, will attempt to find some information as to 

where the respondent is living. 

 

The enforcement office also has the power to date -- before 

these amendments come in, but these amendments expand on 

that -- to ask third parties information about where the 

respondent may be living and how this person can be located 

and where they may be working. 

 

Now the amendments that we have under section 4 of the Bill 

expand on that power as to what kind of information they can 

get from third parties. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, the provincial data 

banks that you were talking about, would that include the 

health care numbers and that type of information? 

 

Would it, Madam Minister, when you're talking about the 

federal government's tracking, would that include the federal 

income tax or even provincial -- would it include income tax 

provincially? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- No.  And we have no idea what the 

federal government looks at with respect to tracing.  All we do 

is put in a tracing request and they will give us whatever 

information they can.  But we don't know where they get the 

information. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, what kind of a time 

frame are you looking at here, from the time you request a trace 

to the time you receive a response? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- For the provincial data banks it's a couple 

days and for the federal it's about six weeks, I understand, 

six-week turnaround. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you say that you have 

expanded the tracing in section 4..  I know that it's a real 

problem.  I've been contacted a number of times as a new MLA 

concerning maintenance and tracing and it seems to be quite a 

difficult matter to trace people involved and to get any funds 

from them. 

 

I was wondering, your new section, do you expect that to make 

it easier for you to trace and more difficult for those who are 

trying to avoid paying their maintenance? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Yes.  We expect it to be easier to trace.  

Yes. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I'm 

hoping that will indeed be the case as I feel that these people 

should be paying their bills. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Yes, Madam Minister, just one or two questions 

on I believe that you indicated the other day when you 

introduced the Bill that also you would be looking at gaining 

access to any accounts or the fact that whether . . . joint 

accounts as well so that you would be able then to I guess 

garnish the funds that are needed regarding a maintenance 

order.  What's the process you would be following in that, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The process that would be followed is the 

same sort of process with respect to garnishment of any bank 

account that's not joint, for example.  The garnishment would 

be placed on the financial institution and the funds in the joint 

bank account would now be garnisheed. 

 

In the past, people were able to avoid their responsibility by 

putting money in a joint bank account and saying you can't 

garnishee it because this is a joint account.  What the new 

section does is prevent that from happening and makes these 

monies garnishable. 

 

Now it could be contested by the respondent or the bank, for 

example, who might say that none of the money in the joint 

bank account belongs to the respondent.  But if the respondent 

has an interest in that joint bank account then that argument 

wouldn't be available to him or her. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I guess that's the one question.  The other 

question that comes to our mind, Madam Minister, is the fact 

that on a joint bank account then, basically you're running into 

a third-party involvement, and we're just wondering what 

process or what format the department has looked at. 

 

In the case of garnishing funds from that account only to have 

the third party or the third individual . . . would you be 

infringing on that individual's rights?  And certainly we agree 

with the fact that no one should be able to hide from their 

responsibility, but we're concerned that maybe a person's rights 

may be infringed upon, and what process the department has 

looked at in being able to garnish these wages without it 

affecting the third party in the process. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The whole basis of a joint bank account, 

Mr. Member, is that both parties own what's in the bank 

account.  And for example the respondent could write a cheque 

on that bank account for the full amount to have paid the 

maintenance.  That's the legal principle that's behind these joint 

bank accounts. 

 

So based on that principle, the monies in that account can be 

garnisheed under the new legislation.  So therefore third parties 

that have a joint bank account with another individual will have 

to be alerted to that fact that this account can be garnisheed 

under a maintenance order, for example.  And they should be 

apprised of that by the bank when it's set up, and I would 

imagine that they will. 

 

We will be sending a covering letter out with the 



592 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

garnishee to contact us if, for example, the bank could prove 

that the respondent is only a signatory to the account and 

doesn't own any money or write cheques on the account.  But 

the principle upon which this change is made is that joint bank 

accounts . . . any member to a joint bank account can write a 

cheque for the full amount. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying then, any amount of funds 

in a joint bank account would be accessible to the court. 

 

And the other question, I guess, arises as well: is it possible 

then for, let's say, a husband or a third party then to instead of 

forming a joint account, just in turn, say, remarries and put all 

their funds into the spouse's account.  What happens there?  

Then you don't actually have a joint account there.  What 

happens in that situation? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We couldn't garnishee that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you.  Madam Minister, my question is 

with regard to people who may travel to other countries.  Do 

we have agreements with other countries so that this legislation 

can be put into effect through mutually agreed upon 

interchanges between different countries and that sort of thing? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We do have agreements with other 

countries and with other provinces.  We have agreements with 

the provinces, other provinces in Canada, and with 

approximately 35 of the states from the United States of 

America.  Most of the members of the Commonwealth have an 

agreement with us, and some other countries as well. 

 

It has to be noted, however, that when we send a judgement 

over, an enforcement order, over from Saskatchewan to 

England, for example, that the laws of enforcement in England 

are what take place.  So they would enforce that order under 

their laws, which may be slightly different.  But we do have 

these inter-jurisdictional agreements. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Yes, Madam Minister, thank you.  Could you 

supply the Assembly and myself with a list of the countries that 

are involved in these agreements?  I think it's called reciprocity 

agreements. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We'll undertake to do that. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Yes, Madam Minister -- and I'm sorry -- coming 

back again to the joint bank accounts, I guess the one . . . in 

response to the question I just asked, should a person put all 

their funds into, say, a new . . . or a third party's bank account.  

I trust then . . . I take it that, first of all, the process of going 

after arrears and payments that are due, you would look first of 

all at wages, salary and income, and gain access to a person's 

income that way before you'd look at a bank account? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I think it depends on the circumstances.  

For example, for arrears where there may be a large sum of 

money owing, we would probably look at a bank account 

before we'd look at wages that come in on a monthly basis.  So 

it depends on the situation and 

how much is owing and what is the easiest method for us to be 

able to obtain the maintenance money for the spouse and the 

family. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I guess I would ask the minister then if the 

minister would look at . . . and most likely your department and 

certainly you at the same time are . . . in light of the question 

regarding joint bank accounts, in light of the third party, I 

would ask that the minister certainly have her department look 

at ways and means of following through.  And should there be 

a loophole, maybe . . . it appears to me that this legislation is 

trying to account for some of the other loopholes that have 

existed, and certainly I guess we're suggesting that we make 

every effort possible to look at ways in which a person's 

responsible for payments to a spouse and a family are indeed . . 

. these funds are collected and indeed passed on to the proper 

people involved. 

 

And at the same time, Madam Minister, we're asking that the 

department certainly keep their eyes open and look at any way 

possible . . . I guess it doesn't matter what you do in our 

society, people will look at ways they can try and beat the 

system.  And so I guess it's up to us, unfortunately, to have to 

look at ways in which we can address the loopholes and make 

sure that people maintain their responsibilities to society. 

 

So I don't really have any other questions, and we will allow 

the Bill to proceed.  But we just wanted to ask you to give your 

assurances that the department will continue to look at ways of 

making sure we're covering up on any areas that might be 

considered a loophole or a way of getting around for one 

person's responsibility to their spouse and family. 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I thank you very much for your 

comments.  And the department will certainly take a look at 

any ways in the future that they can solve that problem.  I know 

that you are aware of the problem that exists out there, and in 

fact this Act was brought into place in 1986.  And it has proven 

to be very successful to the extent that the default rate for 

maintenance payments has gone from an estimated 80 per cent 

to 32 per cent.  And the maintenance enforcement office has 

collected considerable money for spouses and children in 

Saskatchewan.  So it was a very positive initiative that was 

taken, and we are hoping to increase the powers of the office so 

it can continue its good work. 

 

And we take to heart your suggestions that we look at all the 

loopholes that are there in this whole area of law -- 

maintenance orders and matrimonial property, for example.  

There are a lot of loopholes that are open.  We are aware of 

that. 

 

Sometimes it's simply impossible to fill all the holes, but it is 

our intention to make it easier and more effective with respect 

to maintenance orders.  And that's the purpose of the Bill.  

Thank you. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 593 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, I would like to thank the 

officials for having helped us during Committee of the Whole. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to as well 

express our thanks to the minister and to her officials for 

responding to our questions.  Thank you. 

 

Bill No. 8 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  Seated behind 

me is Mr. Ron Davis, the executive director of municipal 

finance; and seated just to my right is Dave Innes, the deputy 

minister. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like . . . we 

have a few questions we'd like to direct to the minister.  First of 

all, I was wondering if there was any consultation with the 

minister and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association) or SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) with respect to this Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I just want to 

indicate to the member that there was extensive consultation 

went on in the pre-budget period.  As you know, the Minister 

of Finance spent the better part of a month consulting with the 

various groups and organizations and local government on 

issues and areas that would be affected by the budget. 

 

I think it's fair to say that when we made this announcement in 

March 25 in advance of the budget, it came as no surprise to 

the rural or to the urban municipalities.  You'll know that this 

was budget driven. 

 

I'm not going to go into the explanation of why we are doing a 

lot of these changes other than to say that we all know the 

province is in a very, very serious economic situation -- $15 

billion in debt.  If we want to go into that I can give the speech 

again but fair enough to say that there was consultation.  It was 

done extensively, and I think you'll know in talking to the 

officials of SUMA and SARM while obviously they don't like 

to see revenue cut, they were very understanding and I think 

statements they've made in the press have basically indicated 

that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We appreciate you 

not going into that long and lengthy speech that you're quite 

capable of giving.  I would like to know what the total dollars 

that has been allocated to the urban municipalities is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, I want to indicate to the 

member that it's 53.1 million to the urbans is what is allocated. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you.  I wonder if the 

minister could indicate what the total dollars being allocated to 

the rural municipalities is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, that number is 37.5 million to 

the rurals. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Chair, I wonder as well if you could indicate 

to us how the revenue-sharing formula works. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I just want to 

indicate to the member that on the urban side the formula is 

basically made up of two main parts.  There's the per capita 

portion which makes up 60 per cent of the amount and the 

equalization which is 40 per cent. 

 

Then there's actually a third part, but it's wrapped into the per 

capita which is the base which is a very small amount of 

money in fact.  So there's the two main parts -- the per capita at 

60 per cent and the equalization at 40 per cent. 

 

I might add for the member's benefit that the pre-budget 

consultation that went on with SUMA, that they agreed that 

this percentage be allocated as to the breakdown in the formula. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  I was wondering with respect to the 

urban municipalities, what are the number of communities 

involved in the Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, there's -- 580? -- 520. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And the 520 -- is the cut-back in the amount of 

funding to those communities equally shared or is there some 

communities that will receive more or less compared to others? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- For the member's information, there 

will be some variance based on the distribution formula.  

There's a safety net that cuts in at 17 per cent, so while the 

average is 15, the maximum that there could be would be 17.  

So there's some small variance that in fact can occur. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  I wonder if you might be able to 

provide the Assembly and myself with the cut-backs per 

community, please.  Just table the information or pass it over 

would be fine. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, I'll see that the member gets 

that at the earliest convenience. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  Now I'd like to pursue the rural 

municipalities along the same line of questioning, I guess.  

There's approximately, I suspect, about 200 rural 

municipalities.  What's the exact number and could you give us 

what the . . . if there's any variance in the revenue sharing for 

those municipalities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to indicate that there are 298 

jurisdictions that you refer to.  As you know, the average is 7.4 

per cent.  And there will be some variance.  This is based on 

the amount of roads maintained and built or constructed in the 

RM (rural municipality), and it's based on the equalization 

formula.  And it's my understanding that Rural Development 

actually has that in their budget, and I'm not sure what the exact 



594 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

breakdown is on the equalization formula. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Could you provide the breakdown per 

municipality for us, please? And send it across is fine. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'll get you the same list as I was 

getting for the urbans. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, sir.  Mr. Minister, you made a 

statement a few minutes ago that you had consulted with rural 

municipalities and that they weren't surprised when you came 

up with your figures.  Well I want to assure you that as a reeve 

-- acting as a reeve at the moment -- of a rural municipality, I 

was both surprised and shocked when we found out the result 

of what your announcements were going to be.  The 7.4 per 

cent that you indicated was not such a surprise or such a shock, 

but the result of the way that it is implemented and works itself 

through the system is more than a shock to some of us. 

 

Now we have municipalities, sir, that claim to me in 

correspondence that we have 22 per cent decrease in the 

funding, another municipality reports 44 per cent decrease, and 

we have even one that reports an 80 per cent decrease.  And my 

question, sir, is how do these variances occur and can you 

explain to us the workings of this formula that results in these 

kind of changes?  And if all of the RMs that I have been talking 

to are in fact having decreases, how do you manage to come up 

with a 7.4 per cent average? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member shouldn't have been 

surprised at the changes.  I say, in consultation with the 

government, with the municipalities organization, SARM, it 

came as no surprise that there would be these kind of 

contractions in the system.  And for someone who was 

associated with the previous government as closely as you were 

and watched the deficit go up at a spectacular rate, I think . . . I 

have a hard time believing that you were shocked that the new 

government had to do some things to bring the house in order.  

Because the option to that would be to contend with the 

spending spree that the previous government had been on. 

 

I know what you're saying.  I know full well what you're 

saying, that we should have continued to borrow the money 

against the future of our children and spend it everywhere at 

the same rate.  I'm not going to get into an argument with you, 

but it's fair to say that I don't agree with you. 

 

I think it's very necessary for each government, just as in a 

business or in a family, you have to live within your means.  

And I totally fail to agree with you that you can go on spending 

a billion dollars a year more than you're bringing in in taxes.  

The province simply can't sustain that.  And for you to say that 

you were shocked and surprised that there were some 

contraction in the spending of the government, I have a hard 

time believing that you were shocked, knowing that we were 

$15 billion in debt. 

 

As it comes to consultation, my understanding is that the 

Minister of Finance consulted with SARM extensively and that 

his staff consulted in advance to the budget decisions being 

made. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you.  I think, Mr. Minister, in all due 

respect, that your answer was nothing more than a bunch of 

political claptrap and you never even got close to attempting to 

answer the question. 

 

The 7.4 per cent that you announced certainly would not have 

been a great shock or a great surprise if in fact that had been 

the figure, which is what I alluded to when I addressed you a 

moment ago.  The fact of the matter is that RMs are reporting 

to me 22 per cent as their reduction, 44 per cent as a reduction, 

and 80 per cent in one case.  If every municipality in the 

province that I talk to has a decrease more than 7.4 per cent, 

then how do you come up with an average of 7.4 per cent?  I 

would like you to explain to this Assembly how you arrive at 

those figures. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I guess I . . . I really wonder 

about the member in his approach here.  I wonder if I could just 

ask the member a question, if he knows what the level of 

funding was in the last budget that your government brought in.  

Do you know what the cut was in that budget? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- With all due respect, Mr. Minister, I do in 

fact know the answer to the question, and I think you already 

know that I know that.  And I'm not going to tell you the 

answer to that because, as my duty in this House is recognized 

in opposition, it is for us to ask you the questions on this year's 

budget, not on what happened in the years gone past. 

 

And you still have not answered my question as to how you 

come up with this figure and what formula you in fact used.  

You haven't showed us anything, and I reiterate once more to 

you that we would like you to answer those questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to give you the formula we 

used.  As you know . . . as you've indicated but you won't 

indicate to the House, the cut in last year's budget, in the 

budget of the members' opposite, was 15 per cent.  And our 

formula was to cut in half the amount of your cut. 

 

So in fact you had twice as much cut in the last budget that you 

folks did than we're doing now.  So for you to stand 

sanctimoniously and say, I can't understand how you could 

have a 7.4 per cent cut when you had a 15 per cent cut, tells 

you about the honesty and integrity of the members opposite.  

You're no more shocked than the man in the moon.  You knew 

full well that there would be these kind of cut-backs because 

you were making them even to a greater extent in last spring's 

budget. 

 

So don't stand here and tell us about how shocked and terrified 

you are at a 7.4 per cent decrease when you cut it by 15 per 

cent.  Where are you getting off playing this game?  You know 

as well as anyone that you folks drove this province to a debt of 

$15 billion.  And you were beginning to admit it in last year's 

budget when you announced and had included a 15 per cent 

cut.  You know that. 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 595 

So don't tell me that you're shocked and surprised at a 7.4 per 

cent cut, which is half of what you were recommending.  That 

simply isn't being honest with the members of the Assembly, 

and more importantly it isn't honest with the rural 

municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I believe the member opposite was a reeve at the time 

when the last budget was introduced, and he would have got 

notice from the Conservative government that the rate was 15 

per cent cut.  I want to ask you, what did you do as a reeve of 

your municipality in letting the member from Estevan know 

that you weren't happy with the 15 per cent cut? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, for not answering 

my question.  It allows me some more time to ask it again. 

 

To begin with, yes you're correct, I was a reeve.  And yes, the 

amount that was cut last year was 15 per cent and it was based 

on revenue sharing on gravel programs and on maintenance -- 

specific programs.  And those programs were cut a specific 

amount that you could identify and predict with a calculator 

when you sat down and did the mathematics. 

 

This year however we have supposedly a 7.4 per cent reduction 

that turns out to in fact be not based specifically on these items, 

and we can't tell just yet what it's based on because you haven't 

answered our question.  And we want to know, what is it truly 

based on; what is the formula for rural municipalities; how do 

you come up with this figure?  Why do some municipalities 

have 22 per cent reduction, other municipalities 44 per cent, 

other municipalities 80 per cent reduction in their cost sharing? 

 

How did that happen, how do you explain this, and how do you 

call that a 7.4 per cent reduction and how do you compare it at 

all to anything that happened with the past administration 

which incidentally, just for your information, I protested as 

vigorously last year as I will this year because the choices of 

cutting in rural municipalities is not a good choice then and it's 

not a good choice now. 

 

Because this province needs to have a road network that works 

for rural people, and we're not able to supply that if we 

continue to down-load from the provincial government.  And 

you're down-loading, that's what's happening.  So could you 

answer the question: how does this formula work in rural 

Saskatchewan and why does the 7.4 per cent not show up with 

any municipality that I've talked to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- If the member would have been 

listening, I mentioned in an earlier question -- it may have been 

from the member from Kindersley, however -- that we based 

the formula on road maintenance and road building and 

construction and based on an equalization formula.  And it was 

done after considerable negotiation and consultation. 

 

And I wonder if the member would table here in the Assembly 

his letters of protestation to the then premier, the member from 

Estevan, over the proposed 15 per cent cut to municipalities.  

Can you table those letters for us? 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I don't believe, Mr. Minister, that I indicated 

that I wrote letters.  I know the former premier personally well 

enough that I delivered my protests in person.  If you will also 

read Hansard from last December, you will find that I lodged a 

considerable complaint against that particular cut, which your 

government finished off with a Bill in this legislature.  And I 

protested it at that time and it's on public record. 

 

Now if you would be so kind, sir, as to talk for a minute about 

the consultation that you never had with SARM and/or with 

SUMA, you might indicate in all fairness to the people of this 

province that those consultations must not have been very 

effective.  Because I am told just of late that SARM is 

attempting to find out what this formula is and exactly how it 

works, because they can't figure it out.  They want to know if in 

fact there has been an error in the mathematics. 

 

They are not questioning your principles, sir, nor are they 

questioning your integrity, but they are questioning the 

possibility that there may have been mathematical errors in 

applying the formula.  And because none of us can get hold of 

an exact copy of what that formula is, no one who is a 

mathematical expert has been able to put it to the test to find 

out if in fact you have an average of 7.4 per cent in your 

reduction, as you claim; or if in fact those municipalities that 

claim 80 per cent decreases in funding along with those that 

have the 44s and all the rest that I've mentioned to you, in fact 

would come up with a figure that is not 7.4 per cent. 

 

Obviously if you decrease several municipalities, you must 

have some that are in the opposite direction.  We would like to 

know, sir, can you supply us with a copy of the formula and 

how it works exactly on paper so that we can find out how this 

mechanism is put in place?  Because it's not the system we had 

last year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to indicate to 

the member for Maple Creek that the president of SARM, Mr. 

Bernard Kirwan -- I've had a number of meetings with him 

since the election.  While not specifically related to this issue, 

I'll take it upon myself after we complete the Bill, I'll give 

Bernard a call and we will talk about the cuts that we are 

having to face as a result of the $15 billion debt. 

 

But my assumption is here, knowing that that member and his 

government when they were in power had proposed a 15 per 

cent cut, that there's a fair bit of politics being played with the . 

. . or attempted to be played with municipalities.  And that 

surprises me.  The member opposite, being a reeve or a former 

reeve, knows full well that one thing that RMs don't like is this 

attempt to inject partisan politics into the running of the 

municipal organization.  And I'll get you the formulas as to 

how it works because it's very simple and I think the member 

opposite will be able to understand it. 

 

But I want to say to you that I will be approaching Mr. Kirwan 

and finding out whether or not the complaints that you're 

lodging here, that you took the same complaints when you 

were facing a 15 per cent cut by your political party only a 

short year ago.  My bet would be that you 



596 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

didn't write any letters at the time and that you didn't have a lot 

of protest because it was being done by a government that you 

supported and were getting ready, in a very tough nomination, 

to try to win the nomination for your political party. 

 

And I guess what's interesting is how things change once that 

individual got elected. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that assurance 

that you will in fact finally agree to deliver to us a copy of the 

formula so that we can figure out what's going on. 

 

You have made several implications about political intentions 

and I say to you that you are playing a media political 

campaign now and not a campaign with rural municipalities 

and their money.  You're attempting to tell people that there's a 

7.4 per cent decrease in funding when in fact it turns out to be 

22 per cent in one municipality and 44 in another and 80 per 

cent in another.  And you have not yet explained to our 

satisfaction, sir, how exactly these figures are arrived at. 

 

But I am happy that you're going to consult with Mr. Kirwan, 

the president of SARM.  It is enlightening to me, and I'm very 

happy that you're going to question him about my activities in 

the past because you will be quite happy to learn that Mr. 

Kirwan is the reeve of the RM of Gull Lake.  I am the reeve of 

the RM of Carmichael.  We share the same office.  We are 

neighbours in the same town.  We converse a lot.  We don't 

have to send letters to one another.  We greet one another on 

the post office steps on a lot of days and we discuss a lot of 

these things and we certainly did protest past cuts as we will 

this one -- and have done -- at the SARM convention level. 

 

And if you will check the minutes of those meetings, you will 

find that the councillors and reeves of this entire province have 

protested cuts over the past years.  It hasn't been restricted just 

to a few people. 

 

Now, sir, that we've finished with the political rhetoric -- 

possibly -- perhaps you could be kind enough to explain to me 

out of the $37.5 million that you say that you are presently 

going to be giving to rural municipalities --  I believe I got that 

figure from you and I hope I got it right -- how much is given 

to each municipality?  Can you give us that figure, possibly not 

today, but if you could give us a written documentation of how 

much each municipality will get and what percentage of 

reduction that is to each municipality, and of course if there are 

some that got an increase, we'd appreciate knowing that as 

well. 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I guess we can continue on here, 

Mr. Chairman, but these questions are all being repeated.  I 

already indicated to the member for Kindersley that I'd get him 

the list and send it to him at the earliest convenience.  But I 

mean if we want to keep asking the same questions over again, 

it's no problem.  But I did indicate already that we would get 

that list of the $37 million breakdown. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I was under 

the impression that you'd made that commitment for the urbans 

and I wanted to be sure that you were making that for rural as 

well. 

 

Now in past it has come to my attention that when 

municipalities were asked to take cuts, there were maximums 

placed on those cuts.  For example, when a 15 per cent cut was 

made, if there were some error or margin of error needed 

because of the differences in equalization or whatever that 

you've explained before -- and I won't go into the details how 

that all works -- but apparently there was a maximum put on 

how much anybody could be cut by say, for example, maybe 

17 per cent. 

 

Have you determined to also put a maximum amount on the 

figure that you're going to use for an individual municipality? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, what I want to do is get the list 

for you which will clearly outline . . . and I won't only get the 

cuts for this year, I'll get it for the previous year as well.  I'm 

not sure about the safety net you talk about in Rural Affairs.  

My officials with us today don't recall there being a safety net.  

But I want to take a moment and get Rural Affairs to get the 

documentation for me and then I'll . . . if there is a safety net, or 

was, I'll get that to you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That'll be very 

much appreciated and the comparison will be appreciated as 

well. 

 

I have another question with regards to these cut-backs.  Now 

you have made some statements that justifies that, but in reality 

what happens is that as you down-load the costs of running a 

municipality by reducing the amount of provincial money 

available to rural municipalities, you create some very distinct 

problems in our municipalities.  And unless a municipality is in 

a position where they are to justify increasing local taxation to 

farmers and business men, then they find themselves with less 

dollars to work with.  And that's obvious. 

 

Have you done any research as to how the effects of your cuts 

will affect rural municipalities in terms of how many jobs will 

be lost and those kinds of things that are the direct result out in 

the country? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, there's no doubt that the 

member is right in that cuts to municipalities are difficult and 

that the same tough decisions that are being made at the 

provincial level, as a result of your mismanagement, is now 

having to be made at the municipal and RM level. 

 

But the simple fact is, when you have had a government that 

has squandered literally billions of dollars on mismanagement 

and waste, that somebody's got to pay.  And basically the only 

people who can pay for your mistakes are the taxpayers.  That's 

the sad situation. 

 

There are many people in the province who think that the 

members opposite should pay -- that you, in fact, sir, as a 

member of that caucus who were responsible for the $15 

billion debt, should have personal responsibility for that.  I 

keep hearing it over and over again. 
 

And if you want to divvy up and pay for some of the 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 597 

 mistakes of your former premier and leader, I'm sure that we 

would be interested in how you would do that, or if you've got 

some positive suggestions about what you would do in order to 

keep the payments at the same level as last year.  Would you 

cut more health care programs?  Would you increase taxes 

more?  Would you run the deficit higher?  I guess when I sit 

down I would like to hear from you, not only that you want 

more money spent on RMs, but where do you think the money 

would come from? 

 

Do you as the . . . Many of the supporters in my constituency 

believe that the Conservative members should pay an extra 

levy in order to help pay off the debt.  Because . . . I don't argue 

that point but I know there are many, many people in the 

province who do think that there should be some personal 

responsibility on the members who drove the deficit up to $15 

billion. 

 

So I agree that this is difficult.  I agree with that.  But I wonder 

now if the member would stand in his place and tell me where 

the money should come from in order to get the extra several 

millions of dollars that he's suggesting we put into the 

revenue-sharing pool.  We've already cut the salaries of cabinet 

ministers.  We've frozen the level that MLAs get.  We've cut 

the advertising, which was at a very, very high level, by 30 or 

40 per cent.  We've put some very serious restrictions on travel 

by cabinet ministers.  We've kept the cabinet at a very, very 

much lower level than the previous government. 

 

Can you tell me: do you think it's the responsibility, for 

example, of previous members to be helpful in bringing 

forward positive alternatives? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I searched 

diligently through that preamble for the answer and didn't hear 

it at all. 

 

Just for your information, sir, I've been the reeve of my 

municipality for a long time, and a councillor for quite a while 

before that.  And in the last 11 years we have maintained our 

mill rate at 37 mills with no increases for 11 consecutive years.  

If you had learned from that type of example, which is 

displayed by many, many municipalities throughout this 

province, you would not have had to cut $46 million out of 

agriculture and then come up with a $517 million deficit on top 

of it all this year. 

 

If you used a little bit of the sense that's used in rural 

municipalities in balancing budgets, you'd know how to do it.  

And I expect you have the ability to find that kind of 

information out, although you certainly don't seem to be 

expressing it today. 

 

My question was, how many jobs, in your research, are going 

to be lost as a result throughout Saskatchewan?  How many 

building contracts will now be cancelled?  How many building 

contracts will not be offered?  How many building contractors 

are going to be going broke in this province as a result of your 

decisions?  And will there be some alternative programs for 

those people? 

 

Now you've got a whole bunch of nice questions you can 

answer.  And when you get done with that I want to talk to 

you a little bit about the gas taxes and how they're going to 

affect our municipalities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I want to indicate to the 

member that this conversion happened awful suddenly.  I 

would be very interested to be a fly on the wall when you used 

to have discussions with Minister Joan Duncan from Maple 

Creek while the deficits were running rampant.  Or whether or 

not at PC conventions you took Devine in a corner and shook 

him a bit as he was driving the deficit higher and higher, and 

whether you got a positive result from him. 

 

But in terms of how many jobs will be lost if any, it will be 

about half of what it would have been if we had implemented 

your 15 per cent cut. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I believe that you in fact, with all due respect, 

Mr. Minister, did in fact implement the cut last December that 

was proposed from the year before's budget.  So I want to ask 

you, seeing as how you've managed to not answer the last 

questions, you have imposed a 13 cent gas tax on 

municipalities in the past budget here.  Now in past, 

administrations have allowed rural municipalities to be exempt 

from those taxes through applications and providing of receipts 

and that sort of thing.  Do you have any intentions of doing that 

through Rural Development or through any other branch of 

government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well first of all I want to indicate 

that the first 10 cents of the 13 cents was put on by your 

government, and you know that.  And you really should try to 

be more honest in the committee and say look, we put on 10 

cents tax and were wondering why you put on 3.  But I'm not 

sure what your argument is.  If you think we should have put 

on the 10 that you did to make it 20, if you're arguing that we 

should have put on 20 cents, then I simply don't agree with 

you. 

 

But for you to say that we put on 13 cents, you know that isn't 

honest.  And you know that your premier the member from 

Estevan and the member from Morse who also was in cabinet 

at that time, and the member for Thunder Creek, voted to have 

the 10 cents put on municipal governments on their fuel. 

 

Can you comment on that?  Were you upset at the time that you 

put on the 10 cents?  And did you write letters as a reeve to the 

premier, or did you go to your PC convention and argue 

vehemently that the 10 cents not go on?  When did you get 

converted to the idea that there shouldn't be tax on fuel for 

RMs? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, for your information, it's 

not necessary to lobby a government to take something off that 

you receive an exemption for at the end of the year, and a 

rebate for.  And you had the 10 cents rebated to municipalities.  

And if you would have listened carefully to my question, you 

could have avoided all of that political humdrum again and 

gotten to the answer which is: will you as well be rebating the 

taxes that are placed on gasoline and diesel fuel used by rural 

municipalities?  Will you be making that option available to 

rural municipalities, as was done in the past and is done for 

school units? -- or was. 



598 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- When it comes to rebates that Rural 

Affairs would give out to rural municipalities, I will just say to 

you that these are very good questions for Estimates on Rural 

Affairs. 

 

At this point, being the minister bringing the Bill through, I 

don't know what the plans are in Rural Affairs, but I would 

imagine in the next or so we'll be doing Rural Affairs.  And I'd 

ask the member to just sit on that question and bring it back up 

at that time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well I find it a little 

bit disturbing, the kind of answers that we've been receiving 

this afternoon, Mr. Chairman.  It's unfortunate that the minister 

. . . the House Leader has to take responsibility for the minister 

in their absence.  It's unfortunate that the minister responsible 

wasn't here this afternoon to . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  I will ask the member, as you're 

aware, it is not appropriate to refer to a member's presence or 

absence, and I'll ask the member to follow that guideline, 

please. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman, I wasn't aware of that. 

 

The minister who's answering the questions this afternoon 

wants to deal with the political answers for all of these types of 

things.  And if they want to do that, we can do that quite well 

as well.  We can go into that all afternoon, if you like, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

But I think that the Bill is what we're looking at here this 

afternoon.  And while we had some difficulty getting some 

answers on some of the things, it's important I think to 

recognize that they are being cut back.  We want you to be able 

to confirm to us with respect to the urban municipalities as well 

as the rural municipalities, that the cut-backs are what you say 

they are. 

 

And with respect to that, I think it's important that you provide 

that information to us, the breakdowns on the urban 

municipality cut-backs and the rural municipality cut-backs, as 

soon as possible.  And we would ask the minister if they will 

be able to provide that information to us prior to Estimates, so 

that we can go over that information. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- As I indicated now I think for the 

fourth time, Mr. Chairman, I intend to do that and we will give 

the list, I would expect, tomorrow. 

 

I want to say to you that the way we got into this issue of 

political statements during committee on this Bill was when the 

member for Maple Creek sanctimoniously stood in his place 

and said he was shocked by the fact that there was going to be 

a cut to rural municipalities when his government had proposed 

a much higher rate of cuts.  That's how we got into that. 

 

The only point that I make is . . . and I'm trying to answer every 

question that you put to us.  I've answered now four times the 

issue of giving you lists of RMs and urbans and the amount of 

grant that they're going to be getting, so it's 

not that I'm avoiding.  But when the member from Maple 

Creek rises in his place and talks that he's very disturbed and 

upset at the cuts, it really isn't legitimate when his government 

was doing much more of that very thing. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When we talked 

about sanctimonious people, I suspect that the minister would 

have some difficulty looking himself in the mirror when he 

talks about those kinds of things. 

 

I wonder if the minister would be able to provide for us today 

which municipality in the province received the largest 

cut-back, if he could just provide us with one piece of 

information. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- What I intend to do is give you the 

full list.  I think I can get it ready by tomorrow but I just don't 

have those numbers here, and I'll get those for you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, surely with your officials 

there this afternoon you could provide us with the name of the 

municipality -- one name of one municipality -- that received 

the largest cut-back and what in percentage term that cutback 

was. 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- As I indicated, you're asking for the 

one jurisdiction of cuts.  I can give you that because I gave it to 

you earlier.  But for all of the urbans, of the 520, I can give you 

the maximum for all the 520, that the maximum is 17 per cent. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was only asking for 

one.  If you could give us the name this afternoon if you can, 

please, the name of which urban municipality received the 

largest cut-back and which rural municipality received the 

largest cut-back, and what those cut-backs were in percentage 

terms. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I just did.  I tell you that in the 

urbans, of all of them -- I don't have the list of exact names -- 

but the biggest cut, the biggest cut is 17 per cent. 

 

And I find it interesting, Mr. Chairman, that half an hour ago 

when they asked that question, the member was very satisfied 

that I was going to get him the list.  Now he's becoming very 

agitated because we don't have the list.  And I don't know 

whether it's because somebody has talked to him, or what.  But 

I intend to get you the list tomorrow of all of the municipalities 

and the level of grants and the changes that have occurred.  

And I mean we can keep debating this till tomorrow and I'll 

bring it in tomorrow, but that commitment satisfied you half an 

hour ago and I'm not sure what has changed. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Chairman, that commitment did not satisfy 

me a half an hour ago.  The commitment of the providing all of 

the information satisfied us.  I'm only interested in one 

municipality right now.  If you could provide for us this 

afternoon the name of the municipality that received the largest 

cut-back, and in percentage terms, what that rural municipality 

was. 

 

I appreciate your answer with respect to the urban 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 599 

municipality receiving a cut-back of 17 per cent.  Now if we 

could deal with a rural municipality: what is the name of the 

municipality and the percentage decrease that they'll receive 

this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- As I indicated to you, the average 

cut, the average decrease is 7.4 per cent.  As you know, this 

falls in the area of Rural Affairs.  I'm putting together the total 

list for you for tomorrow. 

 

Obviously we don't have the number here, but I do have it for 

the urban municipalities and the maximum or the safety net 

limit was 17 per cent.  And that will be the maximum that any 

of the urbans have in reduction. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well if that's the best 

we can do, I guess that's the best we can do.  We'll have to wait 

until tomorrow.  But I find it interesting that the minister 

wouldn't be able to put his finger on that kind of information.  

We're only asking for one simple answer to one simple 

question. 

 

But if that's all that there is we'll . . . we will wait until 

Estimates to ask the minister who is responsible, who hopefully 

does have the answers to those questions. 

 

And I appreciate the opportunity to ask some questions.  I 

appreciate some of your answers.  Some of your answers, sir, I 

think this afternoon were of a very political nature and I find it 

disturbing that we had to go through all that. 

 

I think it's important, Mr. Chairman, that when we ask these 

kinds of questions, particularly as new members to the 

Assembly, that it's important that the minister answers to the 

best of his ability on those things, and if the minister can't, the 

minister responsible for the Bill should be able to answer those 

questions.  So I guess we'll leave it at that and ask that the 

minister is able to provide that information to us as quickly as 

possible. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to clarify 

for the minister one little point: the RMs of this province were 

not so much shocked by getting the reduction and nor were 

they so terribly shocked to find out that it would be 7.4 per 

cent.  They obviously would not like to have that happen but 

they probably would have been willing to try to work with you 

to get the province working and make all these things happen 

that need to happen. 

 

But what they are shocked and dismayed at was the devious 

way that the percentages are distorted.  The 7.4 per cent has not 

in fact been 7.4 per cent for any one municipality that we are 

able to identify.  We find municipalities with an 80 per cent 

decrease.  We find municipalities with 44 per cent decrease.  

We find municipalities with 22 per cent decrease.  But we find 

absolutely none with 7.4. 

 

And my question is, Mr. Minister, how many RMs will be 

forced into bankruptcy with the devious percentages of 

decreases that you are perpetrating on them today? 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I want to say that in closing -- 

I guess that's what we're doing here is closing this round -- but 

the Minister of Rural Affairs just stepped 

 in and I asked him how the formula differs.  He says there's 24 

points to the formula and it's exactly the same one that you 

people used when you did your cuts. 

 

And somewhere the previous premier or the minister will have 

that.  The devious cuts as you referred to them, Mr. Member 

from Maple Creek, is the same devious formula that you people 

had when you did your cuts last time. 

 

But if you've lost that document, I'll get it for you so you know 

the devious nature that was perpetuated on the RMs was 

designed by your government. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

with all due respect, we will be happy to examine the 

information that you're going to supply us and we will be 

happy to try to discover for ourselves why everyone has more 

of a decrease than what you purport through the media.  And 

we'll be happy to try to find that out for ourselves and to 

investigate that information for ourselves because you are 

unable to give it to us. 

 

Unfortunately we had been led to believe that it was your 

responsibility to answer the questions here and that you would 

in fact have this information for us. 

 

I will go back and repeat the question that you didn't answer.  

How many rural municipalities do you estimate will be put into 

bankruptcy as a result of your down-loading and cut-backs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well just finally in closing, I know 

that . . . well we can go on as long as you want. But I know the 

member opposite asking the question is a reeve. 

 

The minister indicates that he was sent a letter, that individual 

from Maple Creek, with the complete formula.  When the 

announcement came after March 25, you received a letter that 

included the full formula as it would affect your RM, and that's 

the formula that affects all RMs in the province. And we can 

get that formula for you again. 

 

But for you to come here and say we have no idea about the 

devious formula when it was sent to you from the government, 

I'm not sure we could come and read it to you, but you have 

that somewhere in your RM office.  But I'll get it for you again. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The only word 

that properly describes your statements is not parliamentary 

and I won't use it.  We do not have your formula and I have not 

been sent that formula.  And if we have, it is lost in the mail 

and I will give you the benefit of the doubt that possibly that's 

where it is.  It certainly has not crossed my desk and I certainly 

have not seen it. 

 

And so I will thank you for saying that you will deliver it.  And 

we who are in the municipal system must say to you that we 

are very displeased with not only your arrogant display here 

today, but your lack of response to letters and correspondence 

and phone calls from many municipalities throughout this 

province on these very critical issues. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 



600 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 5 -- An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I see in the Bill, after 

studying it the last while, that there will be a reduction of 5 per 

cent to the Wascana Centre Authority.  And I just wondered if 

the minister could tell us the total number of dollars that the 

Wascana Centre Authority will be receiving, and what they did 

receive last year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The amount for this coming year is 

833,190, and that would be 5 per cent less than what it was last 

year. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Does this represent to 

the Wascana Centre Authority any problems as you see it, Mr. 

Minister?  Will they be cutting back on any jobs?  Or was there 

any consultation with the Wascana Centre Authority before this 

Bill was introduced? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member opposite will want to 

know that obviously when there are reductions and 

contractions in these kind of systems that it's difficult for the 

people who administer the programs. 

 

Having said that, we were faced with the unenviable task of 

trying to clean up a mess of 10 years of mismanagement and 

waste, $15 billion in debt, and we're trying to do this as evenly 

handed as we can.  It's clear to everyone in the province who 

has watched the previous government operate that we were 

positioning ourselves for a disaster if someone didn't come 

along and take the bull by the horns and get a handle on the 

ever-increasing mountain of debt.  We've done that. 

 

For the Wascana Authority, we wished that we were in a 

position obviously of increasing the amount of money we give 

in grants, but we weren't.  And a 5 per cent allowance of a 

reduction seemed to be the number that was in order where 

basically the structures could be maintained.  Obviously new 

and exciting expansions aren't going to be in the works, but if 

we get the debt under control and the province turns around 

some day soon, with the proper management we will be in a 

position to put back into place increases, as we did when we 

were managing the province some 10 years ago. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  I wonder if the minister could 

indicate the number of jobs that will be lost as a result of this 

measure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- We're hoping that there won't be 

any, although the Authority will have to work that through.  

And it becomes a question of whether you maintain the same 

number of staff and do your contraction in other areas in terms 

of maintenance or in terms of expansion.  We're still hopeful 

that the number of jobs that were available last year in the 

Authority will be maintained this year, but that still has to be 

worked out. 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, while we recognize that the 

province is certainly facing difficult times, I find it difficult to 

understand that while in opposition all of the Regina MLAs at 

that time suggested that when they reached government, if they 

ever did -- and they have achieved that goal -- when they 

reached government, that they would increase spending in a 

number of areas, and the Wascana Centre Authority was one of 

the areas that they would be increasing spending in. 

 

And I would just wonder how you could . . . at the same time 

as promising to make the commitment to the people of 

Saskatchewan that you would increase, you in fact have 

decreased the amount to the Wascana Authority. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- What we want to clearly indicate is 

that we know that this is not an easy exercise.  We also want to 

make it clear that we do intend as a government to increase 

spending on things like parks when we can afford it. 

 

The main thing that people voted for in the election -- I could 

get out the platform card if you care to hear the litany -- but 

was on the theme of fiscal responsibility and balancing the 

books of the province.  And this is a very small part of getting 

the financial house in order.  And when we do that, and when 

we get things in order, then we are committed, yes, to 

improving parks and spending more money. 

 

But obviously you know in your own household, and if you've 

been in business, that you simply can't go on spending more 

money than you're taking in.  So the first point is to get your 

spending under control where your income equals the amount 

that you're expending and that your expenditures and income 

are in balance. 

 

And that's going to mean that we're going to have to tighten up 

in many, many areas, including in the Wascana Park.  Now it is 

unfortunate we have to cut back 5 per cent.  But having been 

elected to clean up the mess of the previous administration, 

everyone has to do a small bit to make this happen, and 

therefore the 5 per cent cut. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, for your advice 

with respect to my household management.  I'll take that under 

the kind of advisement that I'd normally take advice from 

someone such as yourself. 

 

When you talk about why you have to make those kinds of 

cut-backs and how when you're managing your household you 

have to be responsible in that kind of management, I 

understand exactly what you're talking about, Mr. Minister.  

But I don't go around when I'm looking at that kind of fiscal 

management, Mr. Chairman, and make all kinds of promises 

then. 

 

I look at the situation . . . and I am an employer and have a 

couple of businesses.  I don't go and tell the people within my 

businesses that we're going to make a bunch of changes around 

here, we're going to increase the amount of spending around 

here, and then when budget day rolls around say to them, oops, 

sorry, I guess we won't be 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 601 

doing it any more, folks, because we found things are different 

than what you thought they might be, when in fact you knew 

all along what they were. 

 

So I find it a little bit irresponsible that the minister would 

suggest that while on one hand they would increase spending 

when the money is available, yet on the other hand they go 

around and make all kinds of wild promises that they would do 

it in advance of an election when people are making a decision 

based supposedly on the facts. 

 

Mr. Minister, while I find it important I think that governments 

try and get their house in order, as you've suggested that you're 

trying to do with this one, I'm not sure that cutting back in all 

areas such as the parks and highways and agriculture are the 

areas that you should be cutting back in.  And I'm just 

wondering if the minister could elaborate to us when they feel 

that they will be in a position to make the kinds of changes in 

spending that they have promised. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member might be interested in 

knowing that we had made a commitment to attempt to balance 

the books in our first term of office.  You will know that from 

documents you will have read. 

 

But when the member talks about a 5 per cent cut being 

intolerable and difficult for the park to deal with, I wonder if he 

remembers back to 1982-83 when your government cut the 

same park by 20 per cent.  And the member sitting beside you 

will remember full well because he was in the caucus at that 

time.  And if he didn't vote in favour of the cut, he then lost his 

vote.  But the Wascana Park was cut by 20 per cent.  And that 

was at a time when things were in a much, much better state of 

affairs. 

 

And here again it goes back to what the previous discussion 

was on Bills.  And I don't want to become political, but for you 

to stand here and say politically that we're cutting by 5 per cent 

and that's horrendous for the park, knowing full well that your 

government cut the same park by 20 per cent the year after the 

election in 1982, doesn't ring true. 

 

And I wonder, Mr. Member, if you can tell us about where 

your concern was of your government and the member from 

Estevan in 1982 when you cut the same park by 20 per cent.  

Do you want to explain that to the Assembly? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  While you continually 

want to deal with the past, some of us in this province would 

like to deal with the future.  And that's what I understand you're 

attempting to do in this Bill here.  It wasn't me that went 

around and made all kinds of promises to everybody about 

increasing spending; it was you and the members responsible 

for that kind of action from the MLAs in Regina.  I didn't go 

around making those kind of promises.  It was you folks that 

did that. 

 

Now maybe we could get down a little bit into the heart of the 

Bill.  I wonder if the minister could provide us with the 

information on the statutory formula that's apparently been set 

aside. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Just a comment to the member. 

I mentioned earlier that the total budget for the Wascana is 

$833,000.  And as you know, the former premier last week on 

Friday was arguing for us to spend an extra $6 million on the 

Dr. Mainprize Park down in his constituency; and knowing that 

you've already spent $6 million -- wasted, I might add, in that 

park -- for yacht slips and docks and fancy operations that are 

second to none anywhere in Canada.  And even on the sports 

page of Saturday's Leader-Post, the golf club in Estevan and in 

Weyburn talked about not knowing what the PCs were thinking 

about when they wasted that $6 million in Dr. Mainprize Park. 

 

That $6 million that you wasted there and forced this 

government even to spend more money on, could have been 

well used in existing parks around the province, including the 

Wascana. 

 

But I want to say that when it comes to the funding formulas, 

the statutory portion funding, this excluding maintenance 

payments is 1.7 Regina mills.  And the participating parties' 

share of the totals: the province is 55 per cent; the city is 30 per 

cent; and the university, 15. 

 

And I've got similar numbers for the other parks that we'll be 

dealing with and I'll send those across to the member so he 

doesn't have to worry about writing them down.  I'll give you 

those so you have them while you do your analysis. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 6 -- An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 

Authority Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  We just have a couple of quick 

questions with respect to this Bill.  Most of it deals with 

easements, and as well the funding for the authority.  I wonder 

if the minister could tell us what the total number of dollars 

going to the Meewasin Valley will be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, the provincial portion -- I think 

is what the member is asking for -- is $789,100. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Chairman, a question for the minister.  Is 

there any changes in the amounts of the participating parties' 

shares of the total amount? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes.  I just want to indicate to the 

member that they're all down by 5 per cent, and it's part of that 

list that I sent to him. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, no, I was wondering if there were 

any changes in the formula relative to last year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- It's my understanding in asking 

officials that the formula remains the same as it was in previous 

years. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Does the minister expect there to be any job 



602 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

loss as a result of this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- We, I guess I'll say, expect not; 

again maybe a better phrase is "hope not."  Similar to the 

Wascana, we're hoping that the 5 per cent can be achieved in 

other ways, possibly in expansion, new programs.  But in terms 

of jobs, we hope that the same number of jobs will be 

maintained. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- What I would just wonder quickly, if the minister 

would indicate if there was any consultation with the Meewasin 

Valley Authority? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, there was consultation at the 

ministerial level -- met with the board and explained the 

financial dilemma that the province was in and discussed the 

potential of this kind of a cut. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I wonder if the minister might indicate to us what 

kind of effect this may have on the university funding, whether 

there's any changes with respect to the funding for the 

university? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- It's my understanding that the same 

commitment will be there from the university as was there 

previously.  The same essential funding will come from the 

university as per the formula.  The formula basically hasn't 

been changed, so the university will still be responsible for, I 

believe, 29 per cent . . . twenty-nine and one-third per cent. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Minister. I wonder if he might be 

able to indicate to us what the intent of the changes with 

respect to easements are? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, they're in fact . . . will allow 

for voluntary easements.  I want to make that clear: that it's 

voluntary easements for Meewasin to build foot and bike paths 

between the park and the Wanuskewin Park that is being 

constructed, and my understanding, will be open some time this 

summer in Saskatoon. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Can the minister 

tell us what portion of the province's statutory grant goes 

toward the Wanuskewin Heritage Park? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, it's my 

understanding that under this Bill that none of the funds from 

this Bill will flow to the Wanuskewin. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So the minister is saying that under the 

previous funding arrangement with Meewasin that there was no 

cross-over at all between Wanuskewin and Meewasin as far as 

the province's statutory grant. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, it's our 

understanding that there may have been, in the initial start up 

of Wanuskewin, that some of the money may have transferred 

but there is no intention of that taking place this year. 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Does the minister know if there was any 

consultation between the Indian bands?  Have all been . . . The 

Wanuskewin project and the proposed changes that 

the government is proposing with Meewasin, was there an 

ongoing discussion with those Indian bands? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, you may be 

interested in whether this is on topic or not.  I mean I'll answer 

it, but I think we're getting off of the beaten path here. 

 

I don't know for sure whether Meewasin Authority had 

consultation or not with Indian bands as to where they 

appropriate their funding.  But I do know that Economic 

Development, in the six or seven months that I've been around, 

have consulted extensively with Indian bands as to the form, 

shape and longevity of this park and the role that it'll play in the 

economy of the province. 

 

I guess I'm not quite sure what detail you're getting at.  But if 

you're asking whether the Authority had ongoing discussions or 

not with the Indian bands, I can't speak for that.  But when it 

comes to the government, in a number of different areas we've 

had a lot of negotiation and consultation with the Indian bands 

when it comes to the development of this park. 

 

And I think it's fair to say that the people of Saskatoon and the 

people of the province should be very proud of and, in fact, go 

up and see the park, because it really is one of a kind in Canada 

and I think will go a long way to help economic development 

in the Saskatoon area. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I can appreciate your remarks as far as 

Wanuskewin, Mr. Minister.  The former government took a 

great deal of pride in promoting that particular venture. 

 

But you said in an earlier answer to the member from 

Kindersley that part of the Meewasin Valley Authority funding 

involved bicycle paths, walking paths, connections to the 

Wanuskewin project.  Obviously, if it was felt important 

enough to make those connections between Meewasin and 

Wanuskewin, that it would have been in order, I think, to make 

sure that the potential that the minister talks about with 

Wanuskewin would have been built in in any discussions you 

would have as far as funding goes; that if there are drops in 

funding on Meewasin that'll affect Wanuskewin, that perhaps 

Wanuskewin is going to get it made up in another area.  Can 

the minister enlighten us as to those discussions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well the reason that the bicycle 

paths and footpaths are being allowed for is that's part of the 

mandate of the Authority.  When it comes to the discussions 

that Economic Development department is having with 

Wanuskewin, and Tourism within that department is having 

with them, that's a whole other debate and I don't know 

whether we want to get into that or not today. 

 

But fair to say that we've had a lot of involvement with 

Wanuskewin and we think it's going to be a great asset for the 

city of Saskatoon and for the province.  It's included in many of 

our brochures and discussions that we have and at the national 

conference of tourism in Saskatoon it was a major theme of the 

discussion that went on at that conference. 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 603 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman and the minister, I can 

appreciate the minister saying that the proper place to do it is in 

his Estimates and that he probably does know a lot about 

Wanuskewin. 

 

The problem is, sir, that you aren't the minister responsible for 

the Meewasin Valley Authority and yet are in the House here 

giving us direction on that and it's most difficult to ask 

questions about Meewasin . . . well, Minister, you just said 

you'd be happy to talk about Wanuskewin in your Estimates.  

I'm saying there are ties between Meewasin and Wanuskewin, 

and it would have been nice to have had the minister here to 

ask these questions in detail because obviously if any 

discussion between the Indian bands and Meewasin took place 

or with the minister, that particular minister would have done 

it.  I don't expect this Minister of Economic Development to be 

party to those conversations.  I can appreciate the spot you're 

in, sir. 

 

I just think it would have been proper during these Estimates 

when discussing the Meewasin Valley Authority which has an 

integral part to play with the University of Saskatchewan and 

the Wanuskewin Heritage Park that you would have been able 

to tell the House about those discussions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

is totally confused about the mandate of Wanuskewin.  What 

I'm saying is that it is not the mandate of Meewasin to look 

after Wanuskewin.  You're asking in the wrong area and you 

wouldn't get any different answer from the minister responsible 

for the park because it isn't within the mandate of the Bill. 

 

The question you're asking, which I've answered for you at any 

rate, falls under the purview of the department of Economic 

Development and Tourism.  All I'm saying is that if we want . . 

. I'll answer any of the questions that you ask, and you certainly 

wouldn't get more answers on Wanuskewin from the minister 

in charge of Meewasin Valley because that's not the authority 

of Meewasin.  It is much more under the mandate of Economic 

Development. 

 

So I would make the argument, sir, that you're getting many 

more answers than you would with the minister because you're 

asking questions about a function and a jurisdiction that doesn't 

fall under the Bill.  And I guess that was my point to the 

chairperson earlier. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well in all due respect, Mr. Minister, the 

Wanuskewin Heritage Park and the Meewasin Valley 

Authority both share the valley of the South Saskatchewan 

River.  And the two of them, through various arrangements in 

the past, play an integral part in the development of that river 

valley. 

 

The only question I asked was what consultation the minister 

responsible for the urban parks -- in this case Meewasin -- had 

had with the various native groups that are associated with 

Wanuskewin.  You tell me that they only talked to Economic 

Development.  And I, sir, find that strange that they would not 

want to talk to the people who are right next door to them who 

obviously have an integral interest in what they're up to, 

because you're 

hooking the two of them together with bicycle paths and 

footpaths.  And that ultimately the plans for the South 

Saskatchewan River valley in Saskatoon have a larger picture. 

 

And I would find it strange that only one department of 

government would be talking to the Indian bands.  I would 

think that they have a vested interest in what the river valley 

will ultimately be like because it impacts on their ultimate 

plans.  I believe there's talk of ultimately spending up to $15 

million on Wanuskewin over time.  That's a very large 

expenditure of taxpayers' money and I think we would want to 

do that with some cohesive plan, not the natives talking to 

Economic Development on one hand and Meewasin talking to 

the minister from Melfort on the other hand.  I think, sir, that 

there should be some integration of those two plans. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'll try to get the member's head 

around this one more time, that the lead department on this is 

Economic Development.  Meewasin has a certain role to play 

in the valley, as you know.  This is a very, very positive 

project, unlike the Dr. Mainprize Park that you were arguing in 

favour of the other day. 

 

I guess what I have a hard time knowing for you fellows is how 

you can be negative on a project that everybody else in the 

province is totally behind.  Wanuskewin is popular not only in 

Saskatoon but right across the province.  The management of 

it, the Meewasin Valley Authority's involvement in it, the 

provincial government's involvement -- everybody's satisfied 

with it.  And you come here today complaining about whether 

or not this project is going to cost too much money and you're 

negative on it.  Yet when it comes to Dr. Mainprize Park, 

where everybody agrees that millions of dollars were being 

wasted, you're there defending and saying it was a great deal. 

 

And I wonder when you're going to come on side with the 

people of the province in supporting those projects that the 

public support and give up on some of your pipe-dreams like 

the dust bowl that you created down in the south-east part of 

the province.  You left us with a dry dam to operate. 

 

Just imagine that.  For the first time in the history of the world, 

we have a definition called a dry dam to operate, which is 

going to cost thousands of dollars.  And you're totally in 

support of it.  You want us to spend millions of dollars on a 

golf course by this dry dam.  But when it comes to 

Wanuskewin, which is developed by the native people in 

conjunction with the government, you're negative to it.  And I 

can't understand your attitude. 

 

Come on side with things that are positive, like solving the debt 

problem, like building the Wanuskewin Park with our Indian 

friends who have done a great job.  How is it that you can be 

negative and say that this project isn't working right?  You're 

the only person in Saskatchewan who I've heard say that. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, to the minister, I think 

the minister is the one that's a little confused here.  It was the 

former government that started Wanuskewin in conjunction 

with the Indian bands in this province, the 



604 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

former government that made sure that there was provisions to 

make sure that Wanuskewin, in conjunction with Meewasin 

and the University of Saskatchewan, proceeded in an orderly 

manner to be what we ultimately all believe it can be. 

 

The question was simply to the minister, are they doing their 

homework?  Are they doing the proper consultation between 

the groups involved when they're into budget cuts, to make sure 

that that project isn't put in jeopardy? 

 

It wasn't members opposite who are criticizing Wanuskewin at 

all.  In fact we're looking after the interests of Wanuskewin 

because we recognize what a wonderful project it is.  We're 

simply saying to the minister, are you doing your homework to 

make sure that all the pieces are still fitting, or in your urge to 

hack and slash your way through Saskatchewan society, you 

simply aren't doing your homework. 

 

I simply asked the question, was the proper consultation done 

to make sure that all those pieces are proper?  And the minister 

goes into a tirade about things that aren't even connected to the 

South Saskatchewan valley.  If the minister hasn't done his 

consultation or the minister that should be answering hasn't 

done hers, then simply go back and do the consultation.  That's 

all I'm saying, Minister, so that the taxpayer, when they are 

spending this money, make sure that Wanuskewin gets done.  

It's you, sir, that are negative. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to say to the member that the 

Wanuskewin was doing just fine before the member got up and 

tried to play politics with it.  It's going very well and is planned 

to be opened.  I'm sure the member opposite will want to be 

there.  And everyone is very pleased with the progress that is 

being made. 

 

My comment is, I can't understand why you want to inject this 

negativism onto an issue that everyone thinks is going very 

well and is very positive.  I don't understand that.  On the other 

hand, when we cut back by 5 million last week on a program in 

south-east Saskatchewan that even the golfers down in that area 

say they don't want, you stand in the House and argue that we 

should spend and run the deficit up a further 5 million to have a 

21-hole golf course.  And you're very positive about that. 

 

And this is what confuses the public: you're negative about 

Wanuskewin, saying that this isn't going to work, and yet for a 

21-hole golf course down there where there isn't a tree within 

miles, because you ripped them all down, you say you want to 

build a golf course and spend an extra 6 million. 

 

It's this convoluted vision of the future of Saskatchewan that is 

very, very hard for the people to keep up on.  It's this jumping 

of the gears in the thought process that really has a lot of 

people confused. 

 

The Chair: -- No doubt the exchange that the members are 

having is a useful one, but I would encourage that the questions 

which are asked are somehow related to the Bill that's before us 

and also that the answers are relevant to the matter before us. 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I said in my 

earlier comments, I think the relationship between Meewasin, 

Wanuskewin, and the University of Saskatchewan are on the 

Bill, that they are relevant.  And the only point I was making to 

the minister, which he seems to side-step around, is the fact 

that this government seems to be very loosey-goosey when it 

comes to consulting with people before they start to destroy 

their lives. 

 

The question was very simple and I still haven't heard a 

straightforward answer from the minister.  Now the minister 

may not know because he isn't the minister responsible.  The 

simple question was:  had the proper consultation with the 

Indian bands involved in Wanuskewin taken place before the 

cuts occurred to Meewasin?  And if the minister can assure me 

that that consultation took place, that they were in agreement 

with everything that the government's doing, I'm satisfied, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I want to say again that the 

cuts don't affect Wanuskewin.  And I don't know how many 

times I can tell the member this. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want you to listen closely because this is 

important.  The 5 per cent cut -- the 5 per cent cut does not 

affect Wanuskewin.  It will be affected by what my Department 

of Economic Development does or doesn't do. 

 

And so for the fifth time, I want to say very clearly, the project 

is going along very well.  It's planned to be opened on time.  It 

will be a great bonus to tourism in Saskatchewan. 

 

What you're trying to do is to say that somehow the cuts here 

today will affect Wanuskewin.  And you're not accurate in that.  

You're attempting to deceive the public.  The cut . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Did you consult? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well we didn't consult because they 

don't affect.  But this is the fifth time. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You said you didn't -- you said you 

didn't consult. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- We didn't consult with Wanuskewin 

because the cuts don't affect them.  Now the member from 

Rosthern, who is . . . I don't know where he spent his football 

years, but he obviously didn't wear a helmet -- maybe he can 

understand that. 

 

The simple fact is that the cuts don't affect Wanuskewin.  Do 

you understand?  They affect Meewasin, and the park of 

Wanuskewin is going to come on stream as planned, when it is 

planned.  Now that's the point. 

 

Now if you want to get on with other questions about the Bill, 

leave Wanuskewin to the department, who are doing an 

excellent job in bringing it on.  We can talk about the Bill. 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 605 

But the cuts do not affect the Wanuskewin Park. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 4 -- An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley 

Authority Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just a couple of quick 

questions to the minister.  What is the total number of dollars to 

be allocated to the Wakamow? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member will want to know that 

the total amount the province will provide here is 126,553.  

And this basically restates the major cut that was made back in 

1982 by the previous government and the member from 

Thunder Creek will probably have a grasp of this because in 

1982 when the new Conservative government was elected, one 

of the first things they did was to slash the Wakamow Valley 

Authority by 20 per cent.  And this Act will replenish that and 

put the 20 per cent back in. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Has the amount that the city is responsible for for 

the Wakamow, has that changed any, relative to last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The formula still remains at 40 per 

cent province of Saskatchewan, and 60 per cent from the urban 

municipality. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, on 

the Wakamow Valley funding, during the department's 

consultation with Wakamow, the fact that the park is maturing 

at a far greater pace than what was anticipated means that the 

ongoing maintenance costs of that particular urban park are 

different than say Wascana or Meewasin.  Has the government 

given any consideration to changing the formula in recognition 

of the maintenance that is required under the existing formula? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I think the comment that I 

made earlier about the Wascana in Regina, that we intend to 

review all of the structures as money comes available once we 

get the books balanced . . . But I think it's fair to say that the 

injection of the extra money this year will go a long way to 

solving what the member opposite is trying to talk about 

achieving, that is putting more money into the system. 

 

In terms of the formula, the 40 per cent from the province, the 

40 per cent falls somewhere between the amount of the formula 

in Regina.  It's less than the Regina formula but more than what 

is put into the Wakamow in Saskatoon.  So it falls somewhere 

in between. 

 

But this is on an ongoing basis under review, and if the 

member has ideas of things that would make that park work 

better, we would be very interested in hearing his ideas.  I think 

the key part of this Bill is reinstating the 20 

per cent cut that the previous government had made. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I can appreciate the effort the 

government has put forward to bring Wakamow's funding more 

in line with other urban parks in Saskatchewan and I can assure 

you that I personally appreciate it as do people in Moose Jaw 

and area.  But the fact is that this park is maturing way beyond 

its scheduled implementation plan as designed back in the late 

70s, and it has a tremendous volunteer component attached to 

it. 

 

And the other thing is that Wakamow has been able to access a 

number of other government programs.  And the question I 

would have to the minister, in your department's consultations 

with Wakamow on this particular funding level -- and I'm sure 

you did have consultation with them -- what is their 

expectation as far as access to other government agencies like 

the former New Careers Corporation which is now under a new 

heading?  Did your department give consideration to helping 

them out in these areas also? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The Wakamow is certainly eligible 

for any of these government programs.  You'll be aware that 

the New Careers has been involved in the park, and my 

understanding is there could be ongoing discussions and work 

take place at that level.  But there's many other areas that are 

possible. 

 

I think it's key to know that Moose Jaw is very effectively 

working and looking at the park and tourism in general as a 

destination area and also a retirement centre.  And our 

discussions with the current mayor and city council have been 

very positive, and this includes dealing with the Wakamow in 

the future.  But really I think Moose Jaw is one of the 

communities -- one of a number of communities of about that 

size -- that are really setting in place some very exciting plans 

for using the Wakamow and other attractions that they might 

have to make it a destination area for tourism. 

 

So we have, I think, a very positive relationship with the city.  

And also, I suppose, having two members who are very active 

in the process in helping to get the funding in place that is 

needed to make the Wakamow work, has been very helpful to 

us.  And I think that's why under the previous administration 

they had two MLAs from the former party who allowed a 20 

per cent cut.  And you really have to work hard as an MLA, 

and I think our two MLAs are doing that, and it's part of the 

reason that we have a structure put back in place that replaces 

the 20 per cent cut that was made in 1982. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I appreciate, Mr. Minister, your 

commitment to Moose Jaw being part of a "destination 

tourism" locale in the province.  Certainly there are a number 

of things that would predicate Moose Jaw being in that 

position.  But I really wonder at your rationale then to cancel 

the plans for the golf course that would have worked in nicely 

with "destination tourism" in the fact that Moose Jaw people 

were ready to put their own money on the line in order to 

achieve that, and certainly with assistance from the provincial 

government, but that they could fulfil some of these destination 

dreams that have been in the works for a long time.  And 

Wakamow 



606 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

Valley Authority was one of the groups within Moose Jaw that 

was a very strong proponent of a golf course because they said 

it would strengthen their ability to do the things that they want 

to do because it would increase the amount of traffic. 

 

And I hope, sir, that you will give Moose Jaw that tourism 

designation so that they can in effect put their own money up 

and achieve some of these things. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well first of all I want to say that 

there was no change made that stopped a golf course from 

being built in Moose Jaw.  I mean people can go and build a 

golf course whenever they so choose.  I think what the former 

minister is attempting to do here is confuse the issue about their 

community bond program. 

 

The reason that your government didn't approve the community 

bond for Moose Jaw, the so-called greens -- and it wasn't 

approved, let's remember that, by your government -- and our 

government didn't approve it, neither the Conservative 

government approved it or the NDP government because the 

criteria of the bond Act doesn't allow for golf courses.  That 

was the reason. 

 

Now you can ask why you set up a community bond structure 

that didn't allow for golf courses, but I think it's not very 

accurate for you to say, why didn't you allow for a golf course 

to be built under the community bond program when I didn't 

set up the Act to allow for it.  And you know that.  And so why 

wasn't the golf course allowed under The Community Bonds 

Act?  Because golf courses of that nature were not allowed for. 

 

And now you may want to make amendments to the Act when 

we bring it before the House, and we would have a look at it, 

that all golf courses and all skating rinks and all whatever you 

want to do with community bonds be allowed for.  But for you 

to say that we should have stretched the rules of your Act 

which didn't allow for golf courses, and allowed that one to go 

through, I don't think is accurate. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I can appreciate the constraints 

of the Act, having worked with it in some detail for some time.  

But the very fact of "destination tourism" being one of the 

components of that Act and Moose Jaw being one of the 

communities, I think, that eminently qualifies for it, and 

certainly the Wakamow Valley Authority being a very strong 

proponent of that further development, either within the 

confines of their own borders or adjacent to it, I think, sir, 

would be worth considering. 

 

And I would encourage you to review the Act if you felt there 

were that many constraints upon it.  But I think with the 

"designation tourism" that Wakamow . . . or adjacent to 

Wakamow, certainly would have qualified and been a benefit 

to the entire community.  And any time a community feels it's 

worth putting up $2 million of their own money to endeavour 

like that, I think they should be listened to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I find it 

interesting that every time there's something positive going on 

around here, the member for Thunder Creek gets up and is very 

critical and negative.  Here we have a 20 per cent increase for 

one of the parks, that he cut by 20 per cent, and he's negative 

about it.  He doesn't like it. 

 

At least some of the other members were up asking questions 

about some of the contractions that were taking place.  And I 

can understand their concerns.  This member, he wants to fight 

over Wanuskewin, one of the most positive parks in Canada.  

And he wants to put a negative cloud over it.  Wakamow, 

getting a 20 per cent increase to restore the cuts that his 

government made -- maybe when he was minister he couldn't 

get increases for it -- but he wants to put a negative spin on it. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, to outline that the people in the area are 

not disappointed or upset and to show how out of touch he is, I 

have a letter here from the chairman of the board of directors at 

Wakamow Valley -- and it's dated May 21, that's a few days 

ago -- to the minister, and I want to read it into the record 

because it doesn't go along at all with the negative implications 

that the member for Thunder Creek is trying to give here.  And 

the letter says: 

 

 Thank you (very much) for your letter of May 13, 1992 in 

which you advised The Wakamow Valley Authority Act will 

be amended to restore the statutory funding formula to that 

(that) existed prior to 1983. 

 

And I might remind you that 1983 was the year that the 

Conservatives came to government and made the big cut.  So 

they say thank you for restoring that. 

 

 To say the least, Wakamow's Board and volunteers were very 

pleased to hear of this amendment, and have asked me to 

again thank you for allowing us to make our presentation to 

you. 

 

Consultation and all of that that went ahead of the decision 

being made.  So we want to say first of all we're restoring it to 

the position before you cut it, and we had consultation. 

 

 Further, my fellow Board members and I are looking forward 

to our participating parties meeting to discuss their respective 

obligations and responsibilities towards Wakamow, 

particularly as they relate to maintenance of our river valley 

parks.  We believe this is crucial to Wakamow's long term 

financial stability and must be resolved in the immediate 

future. 

 

 Again, thank you for letter.  If I can be of assistance in your 

deliberations with Wakamow's other participating parties, 

please do not hesitate to (comment) . . .  Sincerely, Arnold 

Giddings, Chairman, Wakamow Valley Authority, Board of 

Directors. 

 

So I don't know what you're getting at because everyone's 

happy about this project.  And why you'd want to put a dark 

cloud over a happy day for the community, 20 per cent increase 

in their funding, it's beyond me. 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 607 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well once again, Mr. Chairman, the minister 

doesn't listen clearly.  And I think if he checks the verbatim he 

will notice that I complimented the government on restoring 

the funding level by 20 per cent.  That I asked a few questions 

given the rapid maturity of the park, the same as Mr. Giddings 

does in his letter, about how Wakamow will have needs 

because they have moved so fast with community support that 

they've outstripped their ability to maintain the park.  And I 

was only asking a few more questions in relation to the 

"destination tourism" designation that obviously is very 

important to Wakamow and some of the things that they wish 

to achieve. 

 

And it's no secret to anyone in the community that the board of 

directors of Wakamow was very strongly in favour of 

"destination tourism," i.e., golf courses and other things that 

would enhance their valley. 

 

The minister said that perhaps he would bring in amendments 

to the Act that would satisfy his requirements vis-a-vis the 

community putting up money for one of those things.  I 

compliment him on that.  I'd be happy to work with him when 

he brings those amendments in. 

 

So, sir, there was no negativism at all from this side.  We're 

simply asking questions pertinent to Wakamow and giving you 

compliments, and even then the minister won't take them when 

they're given.  So it's very difficult for the opposition to meet 

all the requirements, sir, that you seem to want of us. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'd just like to thank the authorities 

who came and helped me through the four bills that we passed 

and also to thank the opposition and also let them know that 

we'll get you those lists.  I think there was three or four items. 

We've made copious notes and we'll get those to you as soon as 

we can, hopefully tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We'd also like to 

extend our thanks to the officials for coming this afternoon and 

to the minister for dealing with our questions. 

 

Bill No. 9 -- An Act to amend The Mineral Taxation Act, 

1983 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Would the minister introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The officials 

with me this afternoon are, to my left is Bruce Wilson, the 

executive director of petroleum and natural gas division; and to 

my right here is Hal Sanders, manager of the revenue 

operations. 

 

Clause 1 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To the 

minister, in the explanatory notes for Bill 9, it says in there for 

each nominal section the tax will be charged.  What do you 

mean by each nominal section? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, each nominal section 

means 640 acres of land. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, how much additional 

funds will this tax change mean? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- The additional funds that we expect to 

receive from this tax is $2.1 million. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- How much tax was collected last year 

through the previous system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- The previous system gave about 5.7 

million. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So this year you're expecting to generate 

about 7.8? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- That is right, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay.  How many property owners 

would be affected by this, be they corporations or individuals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- There are somewhere in the 

neighbourhood of 600 organizations that would be affected by 

this. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, you say organizations.  

Will this just be organizations or will individuals also be 

affected? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- If an individual has more than five 

sections of land where he holds the freehold mineral rights, the 

individual could be affected.  But by and large, these are 

corporations and companies that would be affected.  Only those 

individuals or companies that own five sections or more of 

freehold mineral rights are affected by this Act. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Are all individuals then who hold more 

than five sections affected?  You said, could be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- If I said could be, that was a mistake.  

They would be.  Five sections or more are affected.  And I've 

just been told that there are probably seven individuals that are 

affected and the others are corporations.  There's a total, I think 

I mentioned earlier, about 600. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Have you done any impact studies, Mr. 

Minister, on what effect this will have? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, we have done some 

impact studies, and our assumption is that some of the land that 

is currently being held in freehold mineral rights may be turned 

in to the Crown.  As the numbers may indicate -- I don't know 

if you did a calculation on the numbers or not -- but $5.7 

million, originally it would have been 5.7 million acres under 

the old system, and the 



608 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

2.1 is not half of 5.7.  So we expect that some land may be 

turned in to the Crown, and our anticipation is that about a half 

a million acres may be turned back to the Crown that are 

currently freehold mineral rights. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, would you be prepared to 

table those studies that you have done? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't think that we have 

any studies that we can table on paper.  This is from the 

experience that we've had in the past, is the number of acres 

that are turned in when there are increases in the taxation end 

of it.  This is the experience we've had in the past and it's not a 

scientific study.  We anticipate that this may happen.  On the 

other hand it may not happen.  So it's simply a matter of 

speculation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, I thought you said you had 

done some studies.  Perhaps you consulted with someone in the 

industry.  If so, could you let us know who they are? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- We did not consult with people in the 

industry as to what effect it may have of turning in the land.  

Our department people have a history of this kind of taxation, 

and the Estimates that I'm giving you here today are the 

department's Estimates of what may happen. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, in 

the opinion of your officials, what is the threshold level, the 

break-even level say on marginal production land that we 

would have in the Kindersley fields as to what is commercially 

viable and what isn't these days, given the price of oil. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure just how the 

question is related to this particular Act, but in answer to your 

question, in the Kindersley area, the threshold . . . There are 

people operating wells in the Kindersley area that produce 

between one and two barrels a day. 

 

Now I think it's fair to say that these are probably not very 

economically viable.  But they are operating some of these 

wells between one and two barrels a day.  Certainly anything 

above that would be considered economically viable with some 

of the methods they are using in the Kindersley area to extract 

the oil out of he ground. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, to the minister.  It has a great 

deal to do with the Bill before us, because any time that 

someone incurs more costs associated with production, their 

ability to produce is lowered. 

 

And I ask the question because I know a great number of the 

wells in the Kindersley area are into swabbing; they're into new 

styles of pumps; lots of things that can give them a little of an 

edge to keep those wells in production. 
 

You have increased their fees by 50 per cent in the lands 

affected by this particular Bill.  If that 50 per cent increase 

means that those swabbing operations discontinue, it means 

that those wells become shut in, discontinued, walked away 

from, employment opportunities in the community become 

less.  And a 50 per cent increase is fairly dramatic on the lands 

that we're talking about, and that's why I asked you about the 

threshold level of 

 production and what the analysis that you had done. 

 

And I might say the same, Mr. Minister, occurs in northern 

Saskatchewan where people go out on the weekend.  They 

prospect; they look for the ability to find minerals that they in 

turn can sell to a larger company.  You've increased their fees 

by 50 per cent.  That may predicate that a lot of acres get 

turned back to the Crown and exploration doesn't happen. 

 

So I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, in relationship to the analysis 

that your department has done, will you have lands turned back 

to the Crown that formerly were producing and paying taxation 

and royalties to the province? 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  It now being 5 o'clock, we stand recessed 

until 7 o'clock. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


