




















































Hansard: August 14, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2531 

 August 14, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 3 -- An Act to amend The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  At the 

present time I would like to withdraw the amendment I had 

proposed for clause 7 and that we stand clause 7 for the present 

moment and that we move on to clause 8. 

 

Clause 8 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have 

another amendment to propose on clause 8 and I will start off 

by reading the amendment: 

 

 Clause 8 of the printed Bill is amended: 

 

  (a)  by renumbering the clause as subclause 8(1); and 

 

  (b)  by adding the following subclause thereto: 

 

   "(2)  The following section is added after section 40.2: 

 

   'Bad faith offence 

 

   40.3(1)  Notwithstanding section 40.1 where any person 

ostensibly acting pursuant to the authority of this Act, 

any other Act administered by the minister or any 

regulations or orders made pursuant to this Act or those 

Acts has, in bad faith, entered on any land or into any 

building without a warrant and without reasonable and 

probable grounds on which to base a belief that: 

 

    (a)  a hazardous substance, waste dangerous good, 

hazardous waste or other material that could cause or 

may cause pollution is present on the land or in the 

building; or 

    (b)  an activity that could reasonably be expected to 

cause pollution is being performed on the land or in the 

building; 

 

   that person is guilty of an offence and liable on 

summary conviction: 

 

    (a) to a fine of not less than $2,000.00; 

    (b) to imprisonment not exceeding six months; and 

    (c) to make full restitution to the owner of that land or 

building for any damages caused as a result of that 

entry. 

 

   (2)  Such standards of care and reasonable belief as may 

be imposed upon a peace officer acting with authority of 

a warrant to search for and seize goods pursuant to The 

Narcotic Control Act (Canada) are hereby adopted and 

imposed upon all persons 

referred to in subsection 2.3(1).'" 

 

Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, you might call this the bad 

faith clause as compared to the clause that's already in the Act, 

40.1, which could be termed as the good faith clause.  And I 

would like to read a little bit of that clause: 

 

 . . . administered by the minister or any regulations or orders 

made pursuant to this Act or those Acts is in any way liable, 

except in the case of negligence, for any loss or damage 

suffered by any person for anything done in good faith or 

omitted to be done pursuant to the authority or supposed 

authority of this Act . . . 

 

This exempts the government officials, when they do make an 

entry without a warrant for search and seizure, from any 

liability. 

 

The clause I'm suggesting, Madam Minister, says if they do 

enter, but in bad faith where they had no reason to be in there -- 

they were in there to harass to somebody or for some malicious 

purpose -- then this clause would take effect and the members 

of your department that may have been involved in it, or 

yourself, then would be liable for some prosecution, and the 

owner or the person where the entry was made into would have 

some sort of restitution.  They could go back to the courts then 

and say, there was an illegal act performed here against myself 

and my property.  And I want some restitution.  And this would 

give the courts the ability to say, yes; there is some restitution.  

And the person guilty of the offence will be punished for it, 

Madam Minister.  And I believe that this clause does have 

some very good merit. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, 

the cases that he is citing here are already taken care of within 

the Act.  Section 40.1 does not preclude or immunize the public 

officials from acting outside the prescribed actions within this 

Act.  I mean, they still have got to make sure that their actions 

are not negligent.  They cannot act irresponsibly.  And section 

40.1 does not immunize them from any actions brought 

through civil actions or through trespass under the Criminal 

Code. 

 

So your amendment does nothing to add to what the Act 

already says is protection there for the public already.  Where 

there is negligence, where the officials are acting maliciously, 

the public is already protected by the Civil Code and the 

Criminal Code of Canada.  So I would say that what you have 

here does not reinforce the public interest.  But it may hamper 

the ability of officials to do their work.  And we would not 

agree to that amendment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you may feel 

that it would hamper your officials in the performance of their 

duty.  But I would say that it would make them more 

responsible in the performance of their duty, especially in those 

cases where they're entering into a location without a warrant. 

 

And it sets out some prescribed avenues in which they could 

operate, which is the Narcotic Control Act of Canada.  There 

are some set of rules in there that they could then follow, and it 

sets out a set of penalties for 



2532 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

those who do not meet that criteria. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, there are several other 

Acts that were passed by the last government that have the 

same right-of-entry provisions as this one does, and those Acts 

do not extend that bad faith amendment.  I would like to read to 

you one under The Oil and Gas Conservation Act that was 

passed in 1991.  There is a right of entry without warrant in 

that under section 7.31, for the same purposes as are prescribed 

in this Act. 

 

So I would say that the Act that we have before us today is no 

more Draconian or no more malicious in its intent and it will 

act as responsibly . . . the officials acting under this Act will act 

as responsibly as the officials were intended to act under the 

Act that was passed by the last government. 

 

There are a number of Acts that have the same right-of-entry 

provision.  There's the gas and oil Act that I just mentioned, 

The Child Care Act that was passed in 1989, The Medical 

Profession Act in 1989, and Renewable Resources, Recreation 

and Culture Act in 1989.  They all have right-of-entry 

provisions and none of them go so far as to say there should be 

a bad faith clause at the end to protect the public.  By inference 

the public is already protected by other clauses within the Act 

and under the Civil and Criminal Code of Canada. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 8 agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- We'll go back to clause 7.  Before we do, I just 

wanted to clarify that the member for Souris-Cannington 

withdrew the amendment that he had previously moved.  By 

leave, is that agreed? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1915) 

 

Clause 7 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to: 

 

 Amend clause 7 of the printed Bill: 

 

  (a) by renumbering it as subclause 7(1); and 

 

  b) by adding the following subclause after subclause 7(1): 

 

  (2) The following subsection is added after subclause 

38(2): 

 

   '(3) Except in circumstances that are considered by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council to be an emergency, the 

minister shall shall seek advice and provide a reasonable 

opportunity for the public to be heard respecting 

prescribed regulation or any prescribed amendment to 

any regulation under this Act.' 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Couple  

of questions for Madam Minister.  In the amendment that I had 

proposed, we talked of giving "reasonable advance notice" and 

you have changed that to "shall seek advice."  Also you have 

made the change from "reasonable opportunity for public 

consultation" to "reasonable opportunity for the public to be 

heard."  I wonder if you'd mind explaining what the differences 

are between those two sets. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- When we're talking about allowing an 

individual a "reasonable opportunity to be heard", that implies 

that there shall be advance notice.  A person cannot be heard 

unless they know there should be a reason for them to make a 

submission or response to the regulation. 

 

So it is redundant to put into this amendment the fact that there 

shall be advance notice.  When we put in the words "shall seek 

advice", that also implies that there has to be advance notice to 

have someone alerted that the amendments and the regulations 

are going to be changed in order for them to have the 

opportunity to make a response. 

 

So both of the statements "shall seek advice" and "provide a 

reasonable opportunity to be heard" implies that those people 

have to have advance notice that the regulations are going to be 

changed. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, would you give me 

your definition of the difference between "public consultation" 

and "public to be heard"? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- "Public consultation" has a broader 

definition than "the right of the public to be heard."  It can be 

more selective as far as giving whether it's a public hearing.  It 

can be narrowed down to having a meeting with the officials 

and other people who are interested. 

 

So the right of the public to be heard is a little narrower in its 

definition than public consultations, which takes on the 

connotation of a formal setting with a panel and many of the 

public presenting submissions and written or oral submissions. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  My 

concern between the differences is that the public be given the 

opportunity to have access to yourself or to your officials as the 

process develops and as the amendments and regulations are 

developed.  So my concern is that everyone who might be 

interested be given access to the process. 

 

When you talk about "reasonable opportunity for the public to 

be heard," how will the public be informed that amendments 

are being made, that the regulations are being changed?  Will 

you advertise it in the gazette?  Or will you also advertise it 

perhaps in the Leader-Post and the Star-Phoenix?  And if it 

deals with a particular locality, within some of the local 

newspapers? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, it will have to be managed 

on a case-by-case issue because it depends on what kind of 

regulations we are changing and the number of people that will 

be involved in those changes that have a right to have either an 

explanation or have input into 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2533 

them.  So it's very difficult to define what manner the public 

will be able to give an opportunity. 

 

The whole idea behind this is to make sure that the people that 

are going to be impacted upon by these regulations will make 

sure that they have had a chance to understand what the 

regulations are going to be and have a chance to respond to 

them.  And that is what is intended in this amendment. 

 

And I think it's set forth very clearly that it is incumbent upon 

the department to make sure that people either in the vicinity or 

stakeholders have an opportunity to know that the regulations 

are being set and that they will be given a chance to respond in 

some manner, whether it's a full-blown consultation or whether 

it's a meeting with officials, or a meeting with other people in 

the area to make a response. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  In the 

case of a . . . I'm thinking now of the underground storage tanks 

where it affects everybody province wide.  In that particular 

kind of a case, would you then advertise it perhaps in the two 

major provincial newspapers? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- In that case, obviously it affects many, 

many people in the province and the two provincial newspapers 

probably wouldn't be enough.  I think it would mean that we 

would have to hold meetings in various areas of the province to 

allow people, whether they are selling fuel or whether they're 

farmers, to get a chance to understand what the changes would 

be.  So there are cases where you can't have one public hearing.  

You might have to have several meetings with the public. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  On the 

latter part of the amendment where you talk of prescribed 

regulations, would you mind describing that term and what you 

mean by it. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Prescribed amendments mean those of 

substantive nature, the ones that are important enough to 

involve many people in the public rather than allowing a 

process of review or consultation on minor ones such as a 

change in a word or a change in a phone number.  "Prescribed" 

means the ones that are very important and have an impact on 

large numbers of the public. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I believe 

that between us in the last period of time we've managed to 

accomplish something with this Act.  Although we didn't agree 

on everything and I still have some concerns about some of it, I 

think we can agree on this amendment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I thank the member opposite for his help 

and I agree that the amendments that were brought forward 

help to clarify and to make this Act an even better Act. 

 

The Chair: -- The question before the committee then, is the 

amendment moved by the minister with respect to clause 7. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, I've received a number of phone calls over the last 

short period of time since we last met in this House concerning 

the underground fuel tanks.  And at that time you stated that 

there was . . . none of your officials were out there when tanks 

were being removed, and there was no charge for those 

officials.  But in consultation with the people involved out on 

the sites, they agree that your officials are indeed not there. 

 

But that what happens is there has to be a certified installer or 

inspector there which I would think represents the department, 

although it's a private individual because it's your regulation 

that says that person has to be there.  When that person is on 

site, there is a cost to the individual who is removing the tank.  

Is that true, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, under the regulations 

there has to be a qualified installer there in order to certify the 

tank.  And that is a charge that the owner of the tanks will have 

to pick up for that service. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I think most of these 

people that are involved in this don't have an argument with the 

idea of having the installer there to inspect their facilities, 

perhaps . . . well definitely once they're in the ground, still open 

that you can see it, or even perhaps quite so much while it's 

being installed. 

 

Their problem is, is why do they need that inspector there 

while they're taking the tank out of the ground.  That's their 

concern.  The inspector, they can't touch it.  They can take the 

surface off, but once it starts getting down to the work of 

removing the tank from the ground, that inspector according to 

what I'm getting told by them has to be on site.  And so the cost 

is there from 30 to $36 an hour for that man to stand there and 

observe them digging the dirt out of there and removing the 

tank. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I think there may be a need to make sure 

that if there is contamination of the earth around the tank, that 

they have to verify that there was a leak in the old tank.  And if 

the tank comes up and goes back down, there has to be a 

reasonable inspection of that tank as it comes out of the ground 

to make sure that whatever certification is required has given 

the inspector sufficient time to allow him to inspect the tank. 

 

I'm a little bit confused about why you feel that this is not a 

process that protects not only the person who owns a tank but 

also the public so that there is no contamination being, you 

know, taken away before the inspector has a right to have a 

look at it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, if the tank was . 

. . The problem that I see and the complaints I'm getting on it is 

that the inspector is there for the full time of the excavation and 

the removal.  If the inspector would come after that point, the 

tank is still sitting there, say on top of the surface now.  It could 

be tested for leaks.  The ground samples could still be taken.  

Then it would only take a short period of time. 

 

But as the person is standing there perhaps for a day while this 

tank is being dug out and removed because there 



2534 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

could be other tanks in the area . . .  He has to be careful when 

you're doing it; it's not just a quick process.  And I think that's 

the problem with it, is the length of the period of time that that 

man is standing there. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I think in that case we should have a look 

at it and see if there is . . . If a person is standing there with no 

apparent purpose and for no use, then perhaps we should look 

at that and make an adjustment in when those inspectors have 

to be there. 

 

We weren't aware that this was happening.  But if it is, the 

officials of the department will take a look and maybe give 

better direction to the people who are certifying the tanks. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, if you would do 

that, I think that would satisfy us and hopefully the people out 

in the general public that are paying this cost, to save them a 

little bit of money in this process and make it a little more 

efficient.  Thank you, Madam Minister. 

 

Clause 7 as amended agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, I would just like to thank 

the minister and her officials for their time and their 

co-operation this evening.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, thank you.  Mr. Chair, I appreciate 

the help and the debate from the members of the opposition, 

and as I said, I think that we can all be very proud and very 

happy with the Act as it now stands. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

(1930) 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 -- An Act to amend The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 

be now read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 88 -- An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Power Corporation Amendment Act 

1992. 

 

This Bill amends the Power Corporation Act by providing 

SaskPower with the authority to expropriate land where 

required for the purpose of installing underground cable to 

perform control protection and communication functions in 

conjunction with the operation of power lines. 

As members know, SaskPower provides an essential service to 

the people of Saskatchewan.  This service consists of the 

delivery of electricity through a grid of transmission power 

lines established throughout the province.  A critical 

component in the safe, secure, and efficient operation of these 

transmission lines is the cable used to perform the protection 

control and communication function. 

 

To date, this cable has been installed as an overhead line along 

with other lines which together comprise the transmission 

power line.  As a result of technological advances, it is now 

possible that in some instances the function of this line can be 

performed more efficiently and at less cost to the province by 

using underground cable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would therefore move second reading of the 

Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  When 

we look at the question of SaskPower expropriating land, we 

have to take into consideration the total volume of land that 

SaskPower actually has access to across this province. 

 

While the service they supply us is definitely one that is wanted 

and needed, there is also a cost to those land owners when 

SaskPower does gain access to their property -- gains access 

through expropriation.  While the corporation may pay crop 

damage when they enter onto somebody's land if there is 

indeed a crop on that location or a grass, as the case may be, 

after that point, the corporation still has access to that property, 

but there's no longer any compensation paid.  In the case of 

power lines, those power lines are in place.  The farmers or the 

producers have to travel around them, but they receive no 

compensation for the inconvenience they cause. 

 

With pipelines or with underground buried cable, that 

inconvenience is perhaps not there, but what you get in that 

case though is risers at some point.  Now if SaskPower is to put 

their risers at the edge of the property along the road line then 

there's not very much inconvenience.  But when those risers are 

out in the middle of the field there is indeed a problem.  And 

I'm hoping that the minister will take a look at some 

consideration of providing some compensation to those farmers 

in the case where a riser would be out in the middle of a 

property. 

 

At this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'd like to move that we 

adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to introduce the 

officials that are with him here tonight. 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2535 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to introduce on 

my immediate right, the deputy minister, Mr. Stuart Kramer; 

on his right, Harvey Murchison, acting assistant deputy 

minister; behind Mr. Kramer, Hal Cushon, the manager of 

market analysis economics branch; and behind Mr. Murchison, 

Ross Johnson, the acting director of administration. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We have, through 

the Estimates that we did with the Associate Minister of 

Finance, we provided a working copy of 34 questions, I 

believe, that deal with various aspects of the administrative 

functions of the department, and also the minister's office. 

 

I'm going to begin with the first question that deals with your 

office, Mr. Minister.  And could you provide us with that 

information as it relates to the staff that you have in your own 

personal office.  It has a number of items that it deals with and 

I believe you have a copy of the information.  If you don't 

mind, go through this one (a) the first question, with titles, 

salaries, job descriptions, qualifications and employment 

history, and those kinds of things.  And go through that one and 

your staff.  And then we'll proceed to . . . If you could send the 

information over so that we could have it on hand then too, 

then we'll start from there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  I want first of all to 

say that we do have in the hallway, boxes full of answers that 

follow the standard questions you've asked. 

 

In my office under the salary of Agriculture and Food are Gilda 

Treleaven, ministerial assistant 2, with a monthly salary of 

$3,282, no job description, but she's as I say, a ministerial 

assistant.  Her education -- she has a degree in law from the 

University of Saskatchewan and a Bachelor of Arts from the 

University of Saskatchewan.  Her employment history with us 

is she began in our employ in late fall and previous to that she's 

worked in a number of law firms.  She practised with 

Treleaven & Treleaven from 1974 to 1988, and practised law 

with Graf & Zarzeczny in '88 to 1991. 

 

JoAnn Buhr is a ministerial assistant 2, monthly salary of 

$2,893, again no job description.  Her education -- she has her 

Bachelor of Education from the University of Saskatchewan.  

Her employment history is that she has been a farm labourer 

from 1989-1991. 

 

Gordie Nystuen is a ministerial assistant 3, monthly salary of 

$3,750.  He has as well no job description.  His education is a 

Bachelor of Science in Agriculture, University of 

Saskatchewan.  His employment history is that in 1989 he was 

a field person for the Farm Debt Review Board; 1988 he was a 

partner in the Golden Acres seed farm; 1987 he was with the 

Bank of Montreal as a commercial accounts manager; 1986 he 

was with Hoechst Canada as a marketing representative; and 

from 1983-1985 he was a Farm Credit Corporation credit 

advisor. 

 

Bev Oshanek is a ministerial assistant E, monthly salary of 

$2,756, no job description.  She has a grade 12 education.  Her 

employment history is that she was with the Department of 

Agriculture and Food from 1984 to 1989, with the Public 

Service Commission from 1989 to 1990, and with the 

Department of Agriculture and Food from 1990 to 1992. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Could you send that over for me too, Mr. 

Minister, if you don't mind? 

 

The second question I have has to do with those individuals 

who have been terminated, vacant positions eliminated, list of 

all persons fired, retired, terminated in the department since 

November 1.  I'd like to have a separate list of the positions 

eliminated, including the names of incumbents where 

applicable, and deal with it on that basis.  Then that probably 

has the information available to us on all the items we've got 

listed there as well, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I have here the full 

information as requested by the member opposite.  I would 

table it with him if that were adequate.  Rather than read the 

information at length, if there was any particular detail the 

member would want, I would be happy to read it into the 

record. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'll go on to the next question and I'll just look 

through it, and then you can deal with the second one that deals 

with lease and leased offices throughout the province, the costs 

associated with all of those, and we'll go through that that way. 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I have here two pages of 

computer print-out with the leases.  They are all leases from the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation with one 

exception, a lease with ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation 

of Saskatchewan) and then another page of ACS leases.  I will 

provide those to the member opposite. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- One of the names that appears on those that 

have been dismissed is Mr. Zilm.  I wonder if you would 

elaborate a little bit on his termination.  I know that he's been a 

Department of Agriculture official since the early 1970s and I 

was wondering if there are any provisions that would reflect 

negatively on his person.  I don't want to know about them, but 

I'd like to know what the position that you took in releasing 

him from his responsibilities were. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, with respect to those 

relationships there was an amicable separation.  There was a . . 

. Mr. Zilm offered his resignation in and there was a mutually 

agreed-upon package that was made at the same time as the 

resignation. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- There's another one, Mr. Jack Drew.  It 

doesn't say what happened to him.  Do I take it he was released 

from his responsibilities also?  It doesn't indicate here any of 

that on it.  Would you mind providing that for me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Drew was a special advisor 



2536 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

to the premier in the previous government in the area of farm 

finance and that expertise was no longer required in my 

circumstances.  And Mr. Drew's resignation was requested and 

the final negotiations have not been completed on that package. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So that the minister is working through that 

process with the former deputy minister, is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes. 

 

The Chair: -- I'd just like the government members to come to 

order, observe decorum, not interrupt the proceedings in any 

way -- in any way. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The next item is a list of vehicles supplied by 

the department as it relates to who has the authority to use them 

and all of those items too, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to inform the 

member opposite that there is a record of the vehicles here and 

the details the member asked for with . . . for Ag and Food, the 

Ag Credit Corporation, the ag development fund and the 

Tripartite Beef Board. 

 

What is not here is the record that would follow the extension 

agrologists and those people that were moved from Rural 

Development into Agriculture at the time of the budget.  So I'll 

forward those to the member. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Does the Minister of Agriculture have those 

or would he be able to provide those to us in a reasonable time, 

or is the transfer not yet completed?  Would you provide that 

information for me so that I would be able to know what was 

going on there too? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, we have the list of 

vehicles in our department.  The previous records of travel and 

costing did not follow us.  They are in Rural Development, but 

they are available if the member opposite would like them. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Does the list of places that you accommodate 

with Department of Agriculture also include the rural service 

centres and their relationship or is that still with the Rural 

Development? And are those listed as a part of that?  Would 

you have that information for me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  For the member 

opposite, the cars are now in Department of Agriculture and 

Food, but the space is with the Department of Rural 

Development as part of the rural service centre network. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is it your plan, Mr. Minister, to keep Rural 

Development from providing those facilities?  And the second 

question would be, are you going to leave the other 

components of the rural service centre in that framework or are 

you planning on amalgamating some more of those? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I guess, Mr. Chairman, the arrangements 

that are there presently are not at the moment comtemplated to 

be changed in any planning framework that's now in place. 

Mr. Martens: -- Would the minister provide for me in one of 

the questions that we've asked, for all the advertising done, the 

breakdown of the production, distribution, direct mail, 

communications costs, the activity that was done, including the 

salaries in relation to that.  For the work that was done 

externally, a copy of the invitation to tender and an explanation 

for the final tendering selection, including whether or not the 

selected tender was a low bid.  Provide that for me, and then I 

have another question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, that information is 

here for the Department of Agriculture and Food, for the Ag 

Credit Corporation, and for the Tripartite Board. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Another question that I have, Mr. Minister, do 

you include items like the ag development fund in all of these 

Estimates of the information that you've provided?  You've 

mentioned the Ag Credit Corporation, and what about the Milk 

Control Board? 

 

And I know that you're now in the process of moving the . . . or 

I'm assuming that you're moving the Farm Land Security Board 

and the Farm Ownership Board into your responsibility.  Are 

those included or . . . maybe they're not, but we were told by 

the Minister of Justice that there was some questions that we 

could ask you about that.  And I'm not sure whether your 

administration is doing that or whether their administration is 

doing that.  And we only ask you about policies. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Right.  Thank you very much.  The Milk 

Control Board is completely self-funding and functioning in 

that regard, so there are no inclusions here.  The ag 

development fund in this case is included in the Department of 

Agriculture and Food numbers even though on some of the 

other files there are separate files when the information is 

separated and they are identified in your files. 

 

The Farm Land Security Board and the Farm Ownership Board 

remain in the Department of Justice.  It was agreed, I 

understand, in the Estimates of the Department of Justice, that 

because those have almost more to do with Agriculture than 

Justice that the discussion would occur here but their authority 

remains in the area of Justice and the officials are available to 

us here to answer any particular questions you might have 

about those areas. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I notice in the advertising that the supplier of 

the advertising is the Phoenix Group.  Would you provide for 

me the individuals who are the principals in the Phoenix Group 

and who owns the company and, if it would be possible, the 

individuals who provide the service inside these items here. 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the Phoenix Group is one 

of the groups that has been hired for work in the department.  

We don't have the detailed information on the Phoenix Group 

with us at this time but it can be provided to the members.  I'll 

ask our officials to make note of that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On events and donations on page no. 9, 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2537 

on question 4, there's $885 through Ag Credit Corporation.  

Would the . . . I believe it's through Ag Credit Corporation.  

Would the minister be able to provide that for us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Excuse me, I've lost the place of the 

question you're asking. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- It's on the top of . . . The number on the top is 

page 9. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Of your question sheet? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- No, of your answers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- On which department? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- It deals with the item on providing a list of 

advertising.  There's a . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes.  

Page 9, at the bottom of the page, there are events, donations, 

projects -- $885.  Would you be able to provide us a list of 

those? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, we may have to have a 

copy made of the page since we've offered the member 

opposite our only copy of the record, but any information the 

member requires we will be able to provide.  Can you just note 

again for the officials the exact question you'd like answered? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- It deals with events, donations, projects, 

November 1, '91 to March 31, '92, and April 1, '92 to June.  

And it has a total of $885 and it's dealing on the tab with ACS 

so . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you.  We'll provide that 

information. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Could the minister provide for me a list of the 

opinion polls that you have dealt with? 

 

On question 4 . . . question 5, I'm sorry, on the page that I gave 

you, it says . . . if the Estimates for this department do not have 

a communications vote, why is it that this department chooses 

not to submit? 

 

Do you have a communications vote? . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes.  Okay.  So I'll just leave that to go 

through the process later on. 

 

Could you provide a list of the opinion polls, the costs, the 

breakdown of internal costs on the polls and tenders?  And if 

not a tender, then why?  Could you provide that for me, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, we'll forward the 

information to the member here. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- As it relates to your public policy on your 

Crown corporation, of Ag Credit Corporation, do you do a lot 

of these buying locally?  I notice that there's Weyburn, Tisdale, 

Yorkton, and a number of places.  Would I be correct in saying 

perhaps Swift Current would appear occasionally on one of 

these items too?  Would you be able to give me that 

observation? 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, if I could ask more 

specifically again, with respect to ACS, is this a general 

purchasing policy or with respect to a particular question here? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- A general purchasing policy on items by Ag 

Credit.  Is it head office doing it out of Swift Current under 

tendering or are they doing it in Tisdale or North Battleford or 

Prince Albert? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, while there is some local 

purchasing done in the regional offices, the officials inform me 

that most of the purchases for Ag Credit Corporation are done 

through the Swift Current office by tender. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I wonder, did you provide for me the polling? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- It was the last file provided, file number 

six.  The page ran away with it.  I might just advise the member 

that there is one very recent poll there and none for the other 

two agencies. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Yes I have the . . . I just placed it underneath a 

number of others.  The next question that I have is, trips paid 

for department since November 1, whether inside . . . and this 

is the minister and his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the information on 

individual trips is available in two boxes outside in the hallway.  

They could be brought in if the member opposite would like to 

review them or they could be provided at another time.  That's 

all the detailed information on the trips is there.  If there were 

any specific piece of information that we might have in our 

memories that you would like, we may be able to provide that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- No, if you supply them for me, we'll go 

through them at our . . . I'll do that over the weekend.  That's 

the only trip that I'll be taking. 

 

I want to . . . As a matter of fact I know that the minister has 

been busy on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan, and I 

know that the department does a lot of travelling, and I'm not 

going to question that.  I just want to have those brought 

forward as a part of the overall items. 

 

Can the minister tell me on question no. 8 -- I'll be asking this 

as well by vote -- whether or not the department has spent the 

'92-93 fiscal year that we are being asked to include in the 

'91-92 fiscal year.  Can you assure the committee that all the 

monies being requested in the supplementary and main 

Estimates that is attributed to the '91-92 fiscal year was actually 

used before March 31, '91; and further on in that question, 

would you be able to provide that for me please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there has been no money 

spent in the '92-93 fiscal year that will be charged to the '91-92 

fiscal year.  With respect to '91-92 departmental expenditures 

carried over to '92-93, due to cut-off dates and incapacity to 

pay the bill in the previous year, there are $60,570.51 worth of 

bills that fall into that category and the detail by branch is 

included here in the file. 



2538 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

Mr. Martens: -- Would the minister provide for me the list of 

names, titles, and salaries of employees who were, since 

November 1, '91 or are now or are budgeted to be attending 

university or other educational institutions.  Are there any of 

those kinds of information available from your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there are expenditures . . . 

there are no educational leaves provided for in '91-92.  The 

tuition and book reimbursement for Agriculture and Food in 

1991-92 was paid to eight employees for a total reimbursement 

of $1,924.23 for the nine.  And these studies are on the 

employees' own time and reimbursement was made only upon 

the successful completion of the course.  And I'll send the 

detailed information over to the member. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Do you have any employees on question 10 

that are seeking advanced education for their own purposes or 

seminars or courses for development?  This isn't meant to be a 

negative, negative question; it's just to find out what's going on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the information that's here 

is in the Department of Ag and Food.  The in-service courses, 

which is really the category here that is germane to the question 

asked, there is a list by course of the number of officials or 

departmental employees who have taken them, rather than by 

name.  And the information then is here for ACS and for the 

tripartite program.  There is direct staff and name information 

available relative to the other questions under section 10. 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Under 11, without providing personal 

information, provide aggregate values for the cost of benefits, 

and without again identifying individuals, provide what they 

have been costing the provincial government. 

 

I just want to say as a part of this that the administrator that we 

hired to move in for doing the business of the Department of 

Agriculture when the head moved over to Tripartite 

Stabilization, Mr. Harvey Murchison, has been busy I see.  And 

I want to just say that I've golfed with him and his score is 

pretty good and so is his record of performance here tonight.  

So I just wanted to acknowledge that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I appreciate those comments. I agree with 

you about his service.  The comments are probably timely in 

the sense that on this question he chose to refer it to the 

Department of Finance and Public Employees' Benefits Agency 

because that's the approach that's been taken across government 

for that question.  There is detail with respect to ACS and 

Tripartite with respect to the amounts of dollars paid on behalf 

of employees collectively.  The other information's available 

through Finance. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So they would be on a global basis with the 

Department of Finance, just like members' benefits and those 

areas are? 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The files in Finance are alphabetical as 

opposed to split by department, so they're in that fashion there. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is the department making registered 

retirement savings plans or trust funds available on behalf of 

individuals?  If so, would you mind providing that for me here 

today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there are no RRSPs 

(registered retirement savings plan) or trust funds made on 

behalf of employees in either Ag and Food, ACS, or Tripartite.  

The information is here. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Can you provide a list of all of the credit 

cards that members in your department have, amounts paid out 

to date on each credit card, the purpose, and the name of the 

institution providing the credit cards and the credit limit that 

applies to each of them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll forward this 

information to the member opposite in a minute. 

 

With respect to the department, there are two cards, one for the 

Deputy Minister and one in the human resources branch. 

 

With respect to the American Express cards, they are provided 

in this case to the employees, those two.  But they are not 

charged to the department.  The billing must happen through 

expense billing.  And the member who uses the card must pay 

the costs directly to American Express.  Mine, I shredded.  And 

the ACS . . . I mean that's the card, not the records.  The ACS 

has cards for their senior management and their assistant senior 

management.  And the detailed information on each of those 

cards are here.  The November 1 to March 31 numbers range 

from a low of about $120 to a high of 1,299.  And on the 

Tripartite Board, Wes Mazer has several cards.  And the detail 

of that is here as well. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It seems, Mr. 

Minister, that you and the member from Morse have a system 

going here.  So we'll just continue on for a while till we get all 

of your file folders right. 

 

We'd like you to, question 14, provide a list of all the persons 

who have cellular phones for which the department is 

responsible, supplier of the phones, whether they're leased, 

owned, that sort of thing, a breakdown of the costs associated 

with those phones since November 1, 1991, and your estimated 

costs for '92-93. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there are four phones that 

have had billings in the time period that's asked in the question.  

One is mine.  One is Al Theede's with the livestock branch.  

One is George Bourhis with the livestock branch; he's an 

inspector.  And the other one, the member opposite may have a 

personal interest in, and I'll let him talk to me about that later. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I think we can go the next three 

in a row here.  They involve various and sundry electronic 

devices that you are aware of.  They be 15, 16, 17.  And that's 

to do with fax machines, VCRs (video 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2539 

cassette recorder), lap top computers, that type of thing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll provide those without 

comment, and if there's questions later we'll try and answer 

them. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I appreciate that, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, 

number 18 is a list of all the written or verbal contracts 

involving $5,000 or more that your department would have 

regarding employment products or services which are not 

covered by the Crown employments contract Act. 

 

If the contract is not bound by confidentiality provisions, a true 

copy of the contract; if the contract is covered by 

confidentiality provisions, please provide the details of those 

provisions to the extent that the provisions allow.  Please 

provide the parties of the contract, the purpose of the contract, 

all costs associated with the contract.  Was the contract 

obtained by tender, and what was the need for the services of 

the contract as advertised? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there has been a 

misunderstanding by our officials with respect to the question.  

The information provided by the department is only the 

personal service contracts.  They will provide the other 

information for the agencies: ACS, Tripartite.  The full 

interpretation of the question is provided, and we'll make sure 

that you get the other information from the department when 

they've compiled it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- How long do you anticipate, Mr. Minister, to 

have to get that information? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the officials estimate that it 

would take about a week.  Hopefully by the end of next week 

they could have it.  They say it's a reasonably large job but not 

impossible to do in that period of time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That should be 

fine.  Now, Mr. Minister, no. 19 is one that your department 

would be involved in in a large way and I think what we would 

like to know, if a large number of the written publications that 

Agriculture is involved in have been discontinued in any way, 

if there have been substantive changes in the listings of the 

various organizations, that type of thing, that Agriculture has 

assisted.  So you can tell me if it's the same or similar or down 

substantially or whatever. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the question as it's stated in 

the list of questions offered to us requests information on 

subscriptions and for periodicals and magazines, etc., and that's 

the very specific information that's here as opposed to any 

assistance to organizations in any other way.  And there has 

been no change in practice and policy with respect to the 

departmental staff subscribing to magazines and journals in 

their field of interest. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, next 

question involves the coaching for results program and it is a 

program where you had salary increases based on performance 

reviews.  I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, in your department if 

that program is active and any such increases that have 

occurred in '91-92.  And will there be 

increases in '92-93?  Would you give the size of the increase 

and percentage in actual dollar terms and what portion of 

employees that were involved in the program, over the two 

calendar years, had increases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the coaching for results 

program is being used across government departments and in 

each of the agencies for which I'm responsible.  And the range 

in pay increases in '91-92 through, those ranged from 4 to 8 per 

cent in each case. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Would you please 

provide a list of all employees that have been reclassified since 

November 1, '91.  And in cases where the same employee 

received more than one reclassification, give details of all 

reclassifications for each employee, including the employee's 

name, title, and salary before each reclassification and after 

reclassification, the reasons for each reclassification, the date 

the employee was originally employed anywhere in the 

Government of Saskatchewan, and the date of each 

reclassification. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I will.  There are, I think, if 

I have it correctly here, three within the department of 

Agriculture and Food, one in ACS, and none in the tripartite 

program. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Could you provide 

the total cost to the department of all days for which employees 

were paid but during which employees did not actually work, 

including all earned days, special days off, sick leave, and any 

other paid days off, breaking down in totals by category? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the information is provided 

in days for the Department of Agriculture and Food.  For 226 

employees, a total of 1,076 days leave, an average of 4.7 days 

per employee. 

 

In ACS, total value of scheduled days off, sick leave, annual 

leave, and statutory holidays is $1.268 million.  And in the 

tripartite program, total cost to the department of all paid sick 

days, $13,541.  The actual sick leave portion of the number 

under ACS was about 15 per cent of the total -- about 

$189,000. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm sure that'll be 

interesting. 

 

What was the total long-distance telephone bill for the 

department in '91-92 and the projected long-distance bill for 

'92-93? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- For the Department of Agriculture and 

Food budgeted for '91-92 was 188,000; actual was 

$158,334.84.  The budget for '92-93 follows the budget for 

'91-92. 

 

In ACS in '91-92 the expenditure was 233,000, budgeted; for 

'92-93, 242,000.  And for Tripartite, '91-92 was $11,144.18 and 

budgeted for 1992-93, $12,000. 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, could you 



2540 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

provide a complete list of all media monitoring services the 

department pays for, including all clipping services and 

broadcast monitoring services, detailing the names of each firm 

or person providing the service; the cost of the service since 

November 1, '91 and the estimated cost for '92-'93; the 

distribution list for the clippings or media reports; who gets the 

service, the minister's office, who else; the media sources and 

subjects being monitored; the reason for the service and a copy 

of the contract engaging the service.  Were the services 

obtained by tender?  Was the need for the service advertised? 

 

If the government also or instead provides such services 

internally, detail the internal cost associated with providing the 

service including the salaries of the employees providing the 

service, as well as the distribution list and the sources and 

subjects to be monitored with internal resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I won't respond to the 

individual questions unless the member opposite wants them 

read into the record.  There are none of those services provided 

for ACS and Tripartite.  The agencies involved are the same 

agencies as began in November.  There are four that provide 

services to the Department of Agriculture and Food:  

WestScan, since November 1, 1991, $3,700; Prairie Media 

Watch, $85; AgriData, $905; and Infomart, $950.  The 

estimated costs for '92-93 is:  WestScan, $4,500; Media Watch, 

$100; AgriData, 4,000; and Infomart, 1,000.  And other details 

in answer to the questions asked are here for the member. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Does the 

department pay for any freelance or contract writers including 

speech writers?  If so, the names of the persons being paid to 

provide the service, copies of any contracts, purpose of 

attaining the service internally or externally, a list of persons 

for whom the writing has been done and the occasions 

associated with specific writing assignments, audio-visual 

equipment including production equipment.  For the services 

obtained by tender, was the need for the service advertised? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there is one contract writer 

for the department, it's Elaine Carlson.  The contract . . . there 

was a letter of agreement signed with Elaine on January 3, 

1991.  She continues to provide that service under that same 

letter of agreement.  The total expenditures to date are $13,170. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Was that January 1, '91?  January 3, '91 or 

'92? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- '91. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, could you provide 

a list of the travel agencies the department does business with, 

the names of the owners of the agencies, the value of business 

done with the agencies since November 1, '91, the basis on 

which the agency was selected, and whether or not there is any 

contractual obligations on the department to use a particular 

agency. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- ACS, Mr. Chairman, provides none.  

Tripartite, the services are provided by Marlin Travel, but there 

is no contractual obligation.  There's a good working 

relationship there.  And the Department of Agriculture and 

Food is served by National Travel.  The value of business since 

November 1, 1991, is $89,842, and I'd have to ask the member 

opposite on what basis it was selected because the selection 

was made by the previous administration. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I would like a list 

of all committees, commissions, boards, and agencies created 

by the department or on which the department participates or 

for which the department is responsible, including in each 

instance the name and date it was created; names, titles and 

salaries and expense payments of committee members and its 

staff; similar information for committee staff; the purpose of 

the committee including terms of reference and expected 

completion date; the established authority . . . the establishing 

authority; all of the costs of the committee; and finally how 

committee members were appointed; whether there was any 

kind of advertising or public involvement in the committees' 

creation and appointments; any board, commission, agency 

members terminated or replaced. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the information is here 

with the name of the body created, the names of the 

participants with the purpose of the committee and a broad 

description of sometimes all of the information the members 

opposite ask, but a broad description of information that we 

believe would be of interest to the members.  It's not organized 

in exactly the format that the member opposite asked with 

respect to each agency. 

 

I'd ask the member to review it and if there's any further 

information or detail that would be desired to ask us for those 

specifics and we'd make any effort to provide them. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, are there any other committees, 

boards, commissions, agencies, or other bodies that are 

separate from, but responsible to, the department or to the 

minister in his capacity in this portfolio?  And if there are, I'd 

like the same breakdown attached to any of the individuals or 

whatever that was asked for in the previous question with those 

individuals. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, with respect to ACS, there 

is the board that manages the agency which is essentially 

outside of my department but responsible to me.  The other 

agencies that are here listed for which the information is 

provided are agencies with which the member opposite, I 

believe, would be familiar. 

 

For example, the Cattle Marketing Deductions Board, the 

Board for the Beef Stabilization, the Horse Racing 

Commission, the Prairie Agriculture Machinery Institute, The 

Farm Financial Stability Act, which is the Tripartite beef; 

canola development, the council of the Saskatchewan 

Veterinary Medical Association, the Agri-Food Product 

Development and Marketing Council, the Agri-Food Appeals 

Committee.  I believe that's it. 

 

Then there are a number of the supply-management bodies 

here.  So they are all directly related to the departmental 

function, but are not internal within the department.  And the 

detail is all here. 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  In each vote 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2541 

 where it states, other expenses, could you please provide a 

complete breakdown of what these expenses are?  That title 

provides no information at all and the committee cannot be 

asked to approve money for purposes which it cannot 

distinguish. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, that information is 

here in the spades -- one for each subvote.  They include 

coroners' fees and miscellaneous professional services and 

rented grounds and office equipment and aircraft and 

photocopiers and broadcasting services and repairs to building 

construction and structure, repairs to machinery, and the list 

goes on and on -- different for each subvote. And if there is any 

further detail required, I ask the members opposite to ask the 

administration to answer them for them. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Would you please 

list all fees, charges, and levies that SPMC (Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation) makes whether on or other 

government departments or agencies, individuals, employees, 

or other organizations.  And I'd like a list of everything that you 

make a charge for, how much the charges are, and what the 

expected revenues are from those charges. 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there appears to be some 

need for clarifying the question because when the member gets 

this file, he will find that there is no information in it.  The 

department does not bill the Property Management Corporation 

for any fees or levies, which is the essential point of the 

question, nor does ACS or Tripartite. 

 

The latter part of the question is listed . . . that says I want a list 

of everything you make a charge for, that seems to be more 

appropriately answered in question 34.  So this file is 

essentially empty. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you can appreciate I'm 

not the normal critic for your department, and I suspect that I'll 

let you and the critic talk about that at a later time wherever. 

 

Mr. Minister, there are numerous references in your Estimates 

where the Estimates are being changed to reflect changes in the 

organization of the department and other changes regarding 

accommodation.  Would you please provide the details of those 

changes, including what piece of the department is lost or 

gained, employees that have been transferred in or out, from 

where and to where?  And please could you be very specific 

about the changes in regard to accommodation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, there are several 

changes within the departmental structures.  The counselling 

assistance for farmers, effective August 1, 1992, management 

of existing guarantee portfolio will be transferred to the Ag 

Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan.  The additional 

information relative to that is here . 

 

The extension services were brought, transferred from Rural 

Development to Agriculture in the spring's budget.  The budget 

of $5,047,400 and 90.5 person years is 

transferred into the Department throughout that reorganization.  

The new program is the farm stress management which is 

provided for in our new budget of $400,000 and 7 person years. 

 

And the significant change to ACS relative to this budget is the 

taking in of the CAFF (counselling and assistance for farmers 

program) program.  No additional staff have been added.  

That's going to be absorbed within the ACS staff.  If there's 

more information or detail required, we would be pleased to 

look it up and and provide it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, your 

department has many policy and procedure manuals.  I think 

you would have a human resources manual, and it probably 

spells out to prospective employees how to be interviewed, on 

what basis they are judged, how successful candidates are 

selected -- that type of thing.  You will also have ones 

including policies and procedures on discipline, promotion, use 

of departmental equipment, vehicles so on.  I wonder, Mr. 

Minister, if you could provide a copy of each that is used in 

your department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there is, for the department 

here at this point, only the human resources manual.  If there 

are other concerns with respect to policies regarding other 

elements of administration in the department, I'd be pleased to 

ask the department to provide those.  There are here as well, 

two administration manuals from the ACS with respect to the 

specifics of their operations, and I'll forward those to the 

members opposite. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm sure the critic 

will understand them a lot better than I.  It's been a while, Mr. 

Minister, since I had to use those manuals on a day-by-day 

basis so . . . 

 

Is the department currently engaged, Mr. Minister, in any legal 

actions?  If so, provide me a list of all the legal actions to 

which your department is party.  And I would ask you to 

include all of your various areas that we're discussing tonight, 

including the nature of the action, the lawyers representing the 

government, a detailed breakdown of the cost to date, projected 

costs, including any contingent liabilities, any background 

details that cannot be legitimately classified as confidential. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there are within the 

department, I think, five or six independent actions, of a variety 

of sort, with some detail attached here for the members 

opposite. 

 

In ACS there are . . .  Between November 1, 1991 and March 

31, 1992, ACS initiated legal action against 31 clients and filed 

notices of intent on 19 clients.  This was with respect to loan 

recovery.  The total fees paid out with respect to these actions 

is $18,909.50. 

 

With respect to Tripartite, the beef collections, there are 11 

files of clients that I would estimate something under $10,000 

in total fees, and one with respect to a previous employee.  I 

will forward that to the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, 



2542 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

you've already indicated that from a previous question you've 

included some of those SPMC charges on this one.  I'll go 

through the question.  And then we can . . . 

 

Provide a list of all fees and charges the department levies for 

services or products, whether those fees are charges or levied 

on members of the public, outside the organizations, other parts 

of government, internal parts of the department or employees, 

including the names of the fee or charge, the amount of the fee 

or charge over the past 10 years and the total collected to date 

and the projected to be collected this fiscal year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there is a reasonably 

substantial file here of detailed information on individual fees 

and the basis of their collection, both for the department and 

for the Ag Credit Corporation.  To simply say for the 

department that the '91-92 budget provided for $19 million, 

almost $20 million in fees.  Actually collected was 

$17,223,891.  The budget estimate for 1992-93 is $5,460,800 

in fees.  I'll provide the detail. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That completes the 

list that the critic has provided.  I can appreciate that it 

probably took quite a bit of endeavour by the individuals in 

your various responsibilities to put this together. 

 

But as we've noted in other departments, Mr. Minister, this is 

the very first time that this type of system has been tried in 

Estimates.  And I think you would agree that even though it 

does take some time to put the information together, that its 

thoroughness ensures that both you and I will be very diligent 

in making sure that the taxpayers have an open and accountable 

government.  And I appreciate all the work that your 

employees have gone through to provide this information.  It'll 

be very easy in subsequent years to cross-reference how we're 

doing. 

 

I'm going to turn the floor over, Mr. Chairman, to one of my 

colleagues. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

the first question I'd like to ask you tonight is a question we 

talked about in question period today, Mr. Minister -- the 

current rates charged by Agricultural Credit Corporation -- 

ACS. 

 

Do you know what they're charging on capital loans? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Just before I answer that question, I just 

wanted to make a comment to the members previously asking 

questions. 

 

With respect to the detailed travel information that has been 

requested by the members opposite, there was several boxes of 

that information collected for the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone.  And the department would appreciate your 

understanding them taking those boxes back to copy that 

information for you so they don't have to recover it all from 

original sources.  If you could wait and receive that information 

later. 
 

You know, maybe I'll just repeat.  The travel information, 

which is several boxes full, was prepared for the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone.  The department would 

appreciate if they could take that information back to the office 

and copy it from that source so they don't have to recover it 

from original sources to provide it for you.  Thank you. 

 

The interest rate on the capital loans is ten and a quarter per 

cent. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Ten and a quarter.  Is there any review 

going on to maybe lower those interests to get in line with 

other lending institutions in the province, Mr. Minister? 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the practice of setting rates 

has not changed substantively since November, 1991, other 

than that the rates are now reviewed on a monthly basis.  They 

were established on a quarterly basis previously.  They are now 

established on a monthly basis, and they are based on a formula 

which takes as its root, the Government of Canada bond rates 

for the previous three weeks. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, we now have . 

. . do you not think that the department should be looking at a 

quick and fast review immediately?  Like this is the lowest 

interest rates in 23 years in Canada.  And I'd like to get a 

response from that, but I got some other questions I'd like to get 

answered along with it. 

 

How much of that ten and a half per cent interest, or whatever 

the interest rate can be, what is the percentage or what's the 

dollars and cents built into an interest rate that's for 

administration? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the rates established for 

these types of loans are in fact competitive with industry.  They 

are provided on the basis of the cost of Government of Canada 

bonds.  They are fixed for the term of the loan for which they 

are established.  They are subsidized to the extent that no 

charge is laid onto them for administration. 

 

This is a direct reflection of the cost of the borrowing of those 

funds under the circumstances at the time the loan is made. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you're 

saying that when we look at the vote, the cost of the complete 

administration of ACS, the interest rates would be built . . . the 

interest charge would be built into that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the government has 

budgeted within their allocation $14.773 million for the 

administration of ACS.  That is how the cost of the 

administration is borne. 

 

The loan rates are a direct reflection of the cost of the loans for 

the purposes for which they're acquired at the time they're 

acquired for the term of the loan. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- No, I know what the cost is, Mr. Minister, 

for administration.  My question is:  of that . . . in the very first 

place my question, Mr. Minister, was for new capital loans.  It 

wasn't for existing because I understand that.  Whatever loans 

are out there over the terms.  The 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2543 

same thing at FCC (Farm Credit Corporation), whatever, and 

banks, and there is some that have floating . . . a lot of lenders 

are lending out on a floating rate; that's fine, but ours are fixed 

rates.  I understand that. 

 

No, my question is, of the minister, of the funds for 

administration, how much of that would be subsidizing these 

interest rates?  You said that we subsidize, we don't charge for 

administration to the farmer.  He doesn't . . . whoever the 

borrower is, he's not charging.  He's not charged for interest 

rates.  How much money does that cost out of that fund -- 14 

million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, without giving a seminar 

on ACS lending practices, it goes something like this.  At a 

time previous, the ACS, under the capital loan program, loaned 

out money at fixed rates, regardless of cost.  They now loan out 

money at costs plus 1 per cent.  The marginal savings they 

make on the 1 per cent goes to offset costs in other parts of the 

portfolio from previous lending practices and overall the 

capital loan program is roughly on a break-even basis on that 

basis.  And as I said earlier, then the cost of administration is 

borne by the grant to ACS from the government. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well is there -- I don't want to dwell on this, 

Mr. Minister -- is there a ballpark figure that your officials 

could give you, what it actually costs the taxpayer in a total 

year for subsidizing these rates? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, on page 19 of the Ag and 

Food budget subvote 23, the amount is there at $8.776 million, 

the total cost for interest subsidies under the Ag Credit 

Corporation. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay thank you, Mr. Minister.  Now going 

back to this ten and a half per cent, I may want to come back 

on that later on, Mr. Minister, because I'll have to look at the . . 

. think about that.  I want to move on. 

 

In this ten and a half per cent interest . . . and maybe are you 

considering a new review of maybe lower interest rates for 

farmers?  Because what we talked about today in the House 

was referring to a letter from the Bank of Montreal where 

they're lending money out to farmers at five and three-quarter 

per cent. 

 

Now I'm sure that's got to be a pretty preferred customer that 

could walk into the Bank of Montreal and he's going to have to 

. . . he's not going to be a person that's sitting on the verge of 

bankruptcy, he's not going to be a person that owes every 

creditor in Saskatchewan, but that's where my question comes 

in now. 

 

Is there any preference or are you looking at a policy for 

different rates for say high rate, high cost -- well I don't know 

how to put it -- high risk, I should say, high-risk lendings, 

medium or low.  Have you ever looked at anything like that, 

Mr. Minister?  Has the Department looking at it?  I know when 

we were in government, we didn't do that but we were thinking 

about.  And I know that it's a thought that we should be maybe 

thinking about. 
 

And I was wondering what you're thinking about here.  

Because we all know that any lender lending out . . . and 

ACS is the same as any other lender -- they have more risk 

loans.  And if somebody comes in there that's got lots of assets 

can there be a . . . is there a policy of maybe looking at a 

different rate for the high or low risk or in between? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, certainly from the letters I 

get relative to the Ag Credit Corporation, there are farmers 

across Saskatchewan concerned about their ability to repay 

those loans.  And often the letters are from people who feel that 

because they are in a tougher situation, they believe that they 

should have special consideration because they have a greater 

difficulty in paying, as opposed to the reverse, where you 

would actually apply a lower interest rate to those of the lower 

risks.  So that is the policy dilemma the Ag Credit Corporation 

faces. 

 

We have a new board in place for the last couple of months.  

They are engaging in an overall review of Ag Credit policies, 

but -- and this is one of the issues under consideration -- but 

there are certainly no even policies of a particular nature yet 

being tested. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  I 

understand that it's a tough situation here.  Here's a farmer 

that's just on the line to borrow money and you charge him 

more because he's a higher risk.  But as you talk to people out 

there, the guy that wants to . . . the farmer, or whoever wants to 

go borrow money, he says to himself:  why should I pay the 

same interest rate with him when I'm not a high risk? 

 

And that goes back to when we -- in 1986, I believe it was, Mr. 

Minister -- that we lent money out at 6 per cent interest for the 

production loan.  At 6 per cent interest, I know we were 

condemned that we shouldn't have lent money to the people 

that had money.  But it's something the same thing that we're 

talking about here.  The people that had the money, at least 

they they paid it back.  The low risk, they're the . . . we . . . who 

had the trouble with. 

 

I know I remember the figures -- I'm not sure about them now 

-- but I remember a couple of years ago when we were told by 

ACS that over 50 per cent of the money was all paid back, and 

that it has been coming along, and about 8 per cent wasn't able 

to meet their obligations at all. 

 

Have you got any figures from the department of ACS? Seeing 

I see you got officials with you tonight, I thought it would be a 

good chance to ask some of these ACS . . . I'm the critic for 

ACS and when they're here, maybe we can get through some of 

those tonight. 

 

And can you give me the figures now where the production 

loan stands of what percentage of the farm . . . Could you tell 

us -- I forget the figures and I should know -- what's the total 

farmers that borrowed money on the 6 per cent production loan 

and what's the total completely paid back?  What are the ones 

written off?  And what's still . . . how many are still paying and 

whatnot?  Could you just give us a run-down on that?  I know 

that'll take a little time and that's fine. 

 

(2115) 



2544 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll begin to answer the 

question while the officials look for another little piece of 

information.  There were originally 57,614 clients who 

borrowed about $1.1 billion.  There are now about 25,000 

clients still with accounts owing, a total amount of about $393 

million.  Of that, 248 million is in accounts which are current; 

66 million are in accounts which are delinquent, that is, they're 

behind; and 78, almost $79 million is in accounts which are in 

some form of recovery process. 

 

Now the information the officials are looking for is what is the 

amount that's been written off in the program since day one, 

and I will get that information to you as soon as they have it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, that's fine.  We'll just continue 

on while they're doing that, Mr. Minister.  This doesn't come in 

the line of questions of ACS, but I did have another one that I'll 

ask you before I forget it. 

 

There was some talk here last fall and while the session was on 

and something I'd like to straighten out.  When you went to 

Ottawa and took a group of people with the department to meet 

with the Prime Minister or the Minister of Agriculture, 

whatever, to obtain funds for Saskatchewan, do you have a list 

of what the total costs of that trip cost and a list of all the 

people that went?  And I'm not in any hurry for that.  That 

could just be something you could get for me. 

 

I just want to ask you a particular question pertaining about one 

individual.  Because I have made, and some of our colleagues 

have made, an accusation that the Leader of the Liberal Party, 

her trip was paid for on that same trek to Ottawa, which there's 

nothing wrong with if it was, but she has told us that she didn't 

receive any . . . she went completely on her own.  And I'd like 

you to tell us whether . . .  find that out whether she was 

included in that or not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, I can answer the question with 

respect to the member from Saskatoon Greystone.  She did go 

to Ottawa on her own.  She was there on other business and she 

did participate in some meals with the group but there were no 

expenses paid on her behalf. 

 

With respect to the other information, the department would be 

pleased to provide that for you at a later time.  And they'll 

make sure they do that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- That's fine and there's no hurry about that.  I 

just, when you give me that answer about the member from 

Greystone, then I have to make a statement because I made the 

accusation here one day here not too long ago that she had a 

free trip.  I guess I made that this spring and she asked me 

about that. 

 

And I said if I could find out that she didn't I would apologize.  

And I wish to apologize to the Leader of the Liberal Party, that 

that is not a correct statement, that the government didn't . . . 

and I don't know where it came from, whether it came from the 

department.  That just seemed to be common knowledge. 

 

And I don't think it's fair that if she paid her own way, that 

our party or anybody is saying she did.  So I just want that 

correction on the book.  Anyways, she got in on some meals or 

something, forget that, that's nothing because we were only 

talking about the plane trip and the hotels and what not.  And if 

she paid that herself, and I'm understanding she did, then I want 

to make it very clear that I withdraw my accusation, and I just 

want to put . . . 

 

My next question, Mr. Minister, is the livestock cash advance.  

I understand that you're dropping that program or just how it's 

being phased out or whatever.  Could you bring us up to date 

on that, Mr. Minister, just where that is at? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, I would just like to say with respect 

to the travels of the member from Saskatoon Greystone that I 

believe she was invited to come with the group, so it's 

understandable that you might have become . . . that you might 

have not had accurate information about that because I believe 

we did invite her and the Leader of the Opposition to come.  At 

the time, it just so happened she was in Ottawa on other 

business, so it was an understandable misunderstanding you 

may have had in that regard. 

 

With respect to the livestock cash advance, the interest will 

begin to accrue on accounts as of August 1 . . . Excuse me, I 

need to clarify a point here. 

 

Yes, as I began to say, the interest begins to accrue as of 

August 1 for the program, but each client has their own 

anniversary date, and they have a contract for their livestock 

cash advance which extends until their anniversary date, so it's 

interest free until their anniversary date.  The first interest is 

then payable one year after interest begins to be charged.  So 

the lucky person that had a loan, a livestock cash advance, as of 

July 30, 1992, would not have their interest clock start until 

July 30, 1993, and their first interest payment would be due 

July 30, 1994.  That's the extreme case, although most accounts 

have their anniversary dates in November and December. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- And what is the interest rate they'll be 

charged at, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The interest rate will be prime plus two 

which presently is eight and a half per cent. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I did have one question that I . . . when 

they're looking up that information there for me, Mr. Minister, I 

did have one question back on the interest rates that I forgot to 

ask, and I might as well do that now so as I check off my list 

here, the questions I want to ask, then I don't have to go back.  

It was, what is the cost . . . we talked about administration, we 

talked about the ten and a half per cent interest, but what's the 

cost of borrowing the money?  What do you borrow the money 

at?  Sorry, I don't mean the cost.  What are you borrowing the 

money for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The rate on those loans is nine and a . . . 

The cost of the funds to the Ag Credit Corporation is nine and a 

quarter per cent.  And while I'm up on the question, I didn't 

complete the answer earlier with respect to production loan 

program.  The write-offs to 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2545 

date, from the beginning of the program, are $18,170,942. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, just another question on that 

nine and a quarter.  Are you telling me that that's for new 

capital loans?  That's what it's going to cost you if somebody 

come in today and say they're going into irrigation or a large 

hog or chicken project, and they're going for a new capital loan, 

that's the cheapest you can borrow money in the market-place 

is nine and a quarter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the funds are provided 

from the Department of Finance at a cost of nine and a quarter 

per cent to the Ag Credit Corporation for capital loans. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you said 

they're borrowed at a cost -- from the Department of Finance -- 

at a cost of nine and a quarter.  Is that what the Department of 

Finance would be borrowing that money for, nine and quarter?  

Or is there another administration cost comes in there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the Government of 

Saskatchewan, as I understand it, now going out to borrow 

funds for a 10-year portfolio with our credit rating, would pay 

nine and a quarter per cent. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes.  Okay, I accept that, Mr. Minister, that 

would be it.  But, Mr. Minister, if ACS were going to help . . . 

You know, they're kind of the last resort for an awful lot of 

people.  You go to ACS if . . . You know, if you're a well-to-do 

farmer and you're going to buy a new tractor, you'll go and get 

3 to 4 per cent interest through the machine . . . John Deere 

finance has been as low as 8 and 9 per cent and you can get 

deals from Case international for 3 and 5 per cent interest on 

new machinery.  And I know that's good for the farmers and 

that's where they can go. 

 

I'd just like to leave this with you, that I'd sure like to see the 

new board to shop around and see if they can't get money 

cheaper than that.  Maybe they should be going to the Bank of 

Montreal.  They seem to be writing letters out to farmers 

wanting to lend money out at five and three-quarters.  Maybe 

they should be shopping around because maybe some other 

lender will lend money a lot cheaper. 

 

So I'd just like to get your commitment -- I'm not going to 

dwell on it, Mr. Minister -- get your commitment that this is 

important because a lot of people for their livelihood and to 

hang in there have to go to ACS, and ACS has always been 

good to be the last resort of lending.  And I don't think that 

that's going to be any help to them, at nine-and-a-quarter-plus, 

if it comes out to ten and a half per cent interest and you can 

borrow money other places cheaper. 

 

If they're not able to . . .That's fine, if they're able to go.  But if 

they can't and have to come to the last resort, I think that they 

should be the lowest, if possible.  And maybe you could be 

looking at something like that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I think there are a number 

of issues raised in the question by the member 

opposite.  I don't want to dwell on them at length because I 

don't consider myself an expert on borrowing. 

 

(2130) 

 

But there clearly are in the interest rates quoted with respect to 

machine dealers and those kinds of things, marketing 

techniques involved in the provision of funds under some 

circumstances.  The issue with respect to the prime rate right 

now as opposed to the 10-year rate is very much the issue of 

providing the security of a 10-year loan, for example at nine 

and a quarter per cent, as opposed to the insecurity of 

borrowing on the short term at five and three-quarter per cent 

for example, but being left to the vagaries of the interest 

market, the capital market two years hence, when you may all 

of a sudden be again in the 18 per cent cost-of-money category, 

having enjoyed the pleasures of the five and three-quarter per 

cent market in the short term two years previous. 

 

So there's the short-term versus the long-term question that 

ACS deals with, and they're trying to provide the best rates 

they can while they're offering farmers stability and a constant 

rate. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I understand, Mr. Minister, that you're not 

going to be able to go out in the market-place and borrow 

money the same as you can for six months or eight months at 

short term, because that's what the Bank of Montreal is, they're 

just guaranteeing that for six months.  But also we're only 

paying six and a half or 7 per cent on government bonds and 

the interest rate is down.  I just encourage the department to try 

to get money borrowed as cheap as they possibly can. 

 

They got to go out and maybe you'll have to . . . I know I don't 

want to get into it with you tonight.  Next week maybe we'll get 

into a little further debate on your Estimates, Mr. Minister, but 

I don't want to get into any arguments with you, but maybe 

we'll . . . because I'm sure if I talk too much about when 

interest rates . . .  When we took over government in 1982, that 

interest rates were 18 to 22 per cent interest, and we were 

subsidizing down as low as 6 per cent and 8 per cent interest to 

any lender who would subsidize for the purchase of farm land 

and all these kinds of things.  And I'd just as soon not get into 

that tonight because I know we'll get into a debate on that's 

why the government was in debt, that's why; those are the 

things that did cost us a lot money. 

 

But I guess if we hadn't have done that, Mr. Minister, helped 

farmers with low interest rates when interest rates were 18 to 

22 per cent interest, there might be a lot less farmers than we've 

got now.  But that's the debate that we can talk about . . . This 

is Friday night and it's late and we've had a strenuous week and 

we've had a real, good day.  And as you can see, I'm asking 

questions very nicely and I'm not making any big speeches or 

rhetoric about the Department of Agriculture, and I appreciate 

you and your answers that's coming from your capable help 

that you've got there tonight, so we'll just move on in that 

manner. 

 

Another question about the livestock cash advance.  Is that 

program completely stopped as of now, that anybody else can 

come in and get a livestock cash advance?  Is that fading out, 

or where's it at, or did it stop completely? 



2546 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll just maybe give a little 

additional information on the previous question and then 

answer the question that was asked now. 

 

The officials from the Ag Credit Corporation were looking 

within the last couple of days, looking with the board at some 

of the alternative practices that you're suggesting.  And clearly, 

I think we need to keep our minds open to find the best rates 

for farmers who borrow through Ag Credit Corporation. 

 

On farm land which is completely secured, the five-year rates 

are nine and a half per cent.  In the non-business area, 

seven-year rates are nine and a quarter per cent, and 

agricultural equipment loans of five years at a fixed rate are 

twelve and a half per cent.  These are fairly typical industry 

rates at the moment. 

 

So you see that the Ag Credit Corporation rates for 10-year 

programs are certainly in the ballpark. 

 

The livestock cash advances, the policy I described earlier 

describes the practice for existing loans.  New loans continue to 

be available at prime plus 2 per cent for people who want to 

access that source of credit. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  So you're saying 

that if it's a brand-new producer and he asks for a loan on 

cattle, it's still available at the same interest rate that somebody 

else is paying.  It's still available for everybody. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, it's applied in the same way as it was 

previously other than the interest rate. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Could you just explain a little bit to me, Mr. 

Minister, what your collecting policy is?  If you have a client or 

whatever that is behind in their loans, what is really . . . Have 

you got a collecting policy or is it just different for each and 

every . . . I know no two clients would likely have the same 

situation, but do you have a collecting policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, there are in the policy 

manuals sent over earlier -- that others intend to read on the 

weekend -- some reflections of those policies, but they are in 

brief that the Ag Credit Corporation did substantially increase 

their staff to deal with their loan portfolio a couple of years ago 

so that they could provide a more sensitive collection practice. 

 

They attempt to deal with the clients individually.  They 

attempt to extend payments, sometimes adjust interest rates, do 

whatever they can when the farmer meets the criteria outlined 

in the policy in order to make it possible for farmers to 

continue in their operations if they're making every effort to 

co-operate with the corporation. 

 

And it's only in cases where all of those efforts fail, that 

realization on assets is considered. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, the question I'd like to ask 

now is . . . and ACS isn't a big holder of land, I realize that.  It's 

either more like irrigation production loans, livestock and some 

machinery, perhaps.  But in some cases, they 

must own land.  They must have taken land back or 

repossessing because in a lot of instances, I'm sure that land 

was put up for collateral for loans, especially in hog businesses, 

feedlots.  But in some cases land was put up. 

 

So if you repossess land and you now own it, do you lease it 

back to the farmers?  Or do you put it up for sale, or what is the 

policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite is 

correct in identifying that sometimes ACS does realize on land.  

They presently hold 13,315 acres from 57 clients.  It was the 

practice of ACS, until about a year ago, to return that land to 

the market-place as quickly as possible. 

 

They have, since the discussions that we have engaged in with 

other lending institutions, they have honoured the special 

practices of not foreclosing.  They are now, as an agency, 

instituting a six-year lease program consistent with the advice 

given us by the Farm Debt Advisory Committee. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, there was a noise there for a 

second.  I didn't get the acres.  Would you mind giving me 

those acres again that's owned, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- There are 13,315 acres which represent 57 

clients. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you.  I thought maybe there'd be 

more land.  It isn't a great amount of land at ACS.  You were 

saying that they're not going to foreclose any more.  Wouldn't 

they have to foreclose to . . . under the six-year program, would 

they not have to foreclose and then give them the lease, or do 

you give them a lease before you foreclose? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- No, the member opposite is correct.  The 

period of special measures when none of the financial 

institutions in fact carried through any final foreclosures was in 

the period agreed to from January to March.  And it is in the . . 

. clearly when land is taken over either by voluntary transfer or 

foreclosure that the ACS then offers the lease back. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you sent a 

paper over to the member from Thunder Creek asking about 

current legal actions.  And I'm just wondering if the paper you 

sent here, is that just legal actions against the department?  I 

think he was meaning ACS.  How many legal actions on 

Agriculture Credit Corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, if you have the file, there are three 

separate pieces of paper in there.  There is some detail on the 

departmentally based cases.  Then with respect to ACS and 

tripartite, there is a summary.  And in the case of the tripartite 

program, there is a listing of the clients with against whom 

legal actions have been undertaken and one former employee 

who's engaged in a legal action with the department, with the 

tripartite program.  And there's a summary sheet in that file as 

well.  I think the number was about 31 cases, if I remember 

from the previous answer, that ACS has engaged in. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right, Mr. Minister.  I have a lot more 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2547 

questions that I'll be talking about, but I see the member from 

Estevan here and I know he wants to ask some questions.  I 

want to get into the in-depth either later tonight or the first of 

the week about the report of the Farm Debt Advisory 

Committee.  I have a lot of questions I want to ask there. 

 

And I understand from the House leaders, this afternoon when 

the people negotiating that Farm Land Security Board and 

mediation services we know comes under Justice, but to 

accommodate the Minister of Justice so he could go some place 

this evening --  and we accommodated him -- but we were 

assured that we would be able to ask you questions.  And I 

don't know whether you have any of those officials here or not.  

If you haven't, I'm not going to get into it now.  And so if later 

on, maybe we can get into some of that.  But if not, we can . . . 

If they're here, then after my other members are through, we 

may get into that.  I just want to know whether I could prepare 

for that or not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  In fact, I think with 

respect to the officials from Justice, if we could dispose of 

those questions today, it would be good because they are here 

waiting.  But I'll respect the order that you wish to ask those 

questions in, but the members . . . the officials from the 

Department of Justice are here and are willing to answer those 

questions at your leisure. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right.  Thank you.  I guess I have some 

questions prepared but we'll let the member from Estevan ask 

questions now.  And I know we have a couple of more 

colleagues here.  If it works out . . . We'll try to work it out.  I'll 

try to accommodate.  I haven't got that many questions, but I'll 

try and accommodate them so they don't have to come back 

again the first of the week. 

 

Thank you for your answers, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A couple or three 

general questions for the minister. 

 

The announcement today with respect to FeedGAP (feed grain 

adjustment program) in the beef and the pork industry, I'm sure 

was, and the minister would be sure that it was, welcomed by 

the industry.  And in recent days, we've seen a sense of 

co-operation with people in various departments, and we saw 

that today.  And I commend the minister and the government 

and the staff. 

 

(2145) 

 

We heard about the degree of potential co-operation last night 

on the AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) agreement.  

We've seen some co-operation in the pension legislation.  

We've seen some reconsideration with respect to roads and 

highways.  We've seen acceptance of several amendments to 

the environmental legislation.  Evidently the government's 

going to review the whole role of and expense of insulin with 

respect to diabetics.  And today was announced your changes 

to the FeedGAP program and the feeding industry, particularly 

with respect to beef and hogs. 

 

The opposition genuinely commends the administration for its 

accommodating, 

or a little more accommodating, attitude.  And perhaps to get a 

better sense of where you're coming from with respect to the 

feeding industry, could you just explain a little bit -- and I'm 

sure you had a news conference today and I didn't have the 

chance to catch it -- why you decided to do what you're doing, 

and how you think it might have an impact on the industry here 

in Saskatchewan.  Because, like energy and other things, we 

are . . . the livestock don't just stay in borders.  They move back 

and forth between here and the United States, Manitoba and 

Alberta. 

 

And I wonder if you would briefly describe to the general 

public -- and I know that there may not be a lot of people 

listening this evening, but some of the public -- why in fact you 

decided to do what you did on the FeedGAP program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well, I'm sure the listening public that's 

there is a very loyal and dedicated group and deserves to have 

this information, so they don't have to turn over to the news 

channel to get it. 

 

As the member opposite may be aware, the day after, I believe, 

or several days after the introduction of the budget in spring, I 

met with Saskatchewan Stock Growers.  They raised questions 

about a number of budget items, and my challenge to them at 

that time was to demonstrate for us that the next economic 

development dollar ought to be spent in the meat sector. 

 

I want to say that in an unprecedented fashion, the red meat 

industry came together and put their own proposals together.  

They met in forums in which they had never met before and 

put forward proposals to our department and engaged in a very 

positive and co-operative discussion with the department and 

with members of our government with respect to the future of 

the red meats industry. 

 

We structured a special committee to work with the 

department, representing a number of the sectors of the red 

meat industry as well as some economists and some individuals 

who are in the farming business, to look at where the industry 

was going, to assess the effectiveness of existing programs.  

And the conclusion drawn by this committee was that in fact 

there was not an adequate analysis available to determine 

whether the present programs that had been involved with the 

industry were serving the industry well or the best economic 

development goals for the province. 

 

Their recommendation to government, then, was that what was 

required was an in-depth study, one that they expected to take 

six months, involving external consultants and departmental 

people and the industry to look, to establish  vision for the 

industry, to establish in what ways we could best develop our 

meat sector -- which as you're aware is a very critical part of 

the agriculture industry -- in what way the sparse government 

dollars could be spent to participate in the production and 

marketing of meats, of meat and further processed products 

from the basic carcasses.  There were a number of issues that 

were raised by the committee that were also suggested should 

be done in this study.  One is the impact of the subsidies in the 

neighbouring province of Alberta. 



2548 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

It's been our position that we do not believe that we can 

participate in a game for a long time with other provinces, and 

it would be our commitment to work with other western 

provinces to establish a regional strategy that let the meat 

sector, which is very competitive and very naturally one that 

should find itself in western Canada and particularly in 

Saskatchewan, that we would let them function hopefully 

independently of a lot of government interference in order to 

do business the way business needs to be done -- that is 

because it makes sense to do it here. 

 

I want to again compliment the red meat industry for their 

co-operative efforts.  They will be central to driving the study 

that will be announced shortly in terms of the detail of the 

participants and the terms of reference.  And I know that this is 

going to point to a great new era in Saskatchewan in the meat 

sector and all of the sectors in agriculture where the producer 

groups themselves will come together in a forum that is 

possible, to talk together in one place, to plan with government 

the very positive future that we see for agriculture and 

particularly the red meat sector in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well that's fair enough.  That's commendable 

that the red meat industry has come together to put forward 

these proposals because they believe in their industry.  And as 

you know from your own farming experience and university 

experience, there's considerable evidence associated with the 

spin-offs and the multiplier effects of the red meat industry in 

processing grain and value added and all the labour and so 

forth.  In fact there's considerable amount of literature on the 

advantages to a society and the community of raising hogs -- as 

you do -- or beef or poultry or any of the livestock sector. 

 

We are aware of that, and it's a serious business, this industry.  

They take it very seriously.  And evidently you're taking it 

seriously, looking at the investment and the time and the effort 

that these people have put into it.  They have huge herds of 

cattle.  They have histories of their family involved in the hog 

business and the poultry business and others.  So it's more than 

my political career or your political career.  This is big time for 

them and they probably voted everything. 

 

In that light, when they're this serious and you have decided to 

look at it again and come up and stay the course, at least for a 

while so that they can know that they can make investment 

decisions and they're going to be part of studying it and looking 

at it, would you also look at the other reasons or any other 

reasons why the industry should stay in Saskatchewan as 

opposed to being in Alberta or Manitoba or in North Dakota or 

some place else? 

 

Because there are several ways that governments can be 

involved and several ways that people will make decisions to 

go some place -- the provincial income tax level, for example, 

or the cost of gasoline or the fact that there's no sales tax in 

some place or other, or the fact that you would get easier and 

more accessible irrigation, you have more research money or 

you get lower grazing fees or you get . . . just a range of 

competitive things. 

From my experience in that portfolio, if you look at American 

states and Canadian provinces, you've found a range of things 

that show that no one was without sin when you get into the 

international meat business, interprovincial or international 

 

Now some things we could do.  That is, the interest rates ACS 

would offer, for example, compared to other jurisdictions; the 

price of gasoline, the taxes, the leases on grazing land, the tax 

system. 

 

Now you know why I'm asking this, is if you're going to be . . . 

if you're sincere in this, and I take you at your word, you're 

going to really look at the industry, why should it be in 

Saskatchewan rather than Alberta? 

 

And I believe it can be here and should be here and growing 

and we've put a lot of effort into that -- and mind you, money -- 

to encourage the studies and more packing and processing in 

bacon and so forth.  And I really believe in it.  And the 

irrigation and whatnot. 

 

Would you commit to the legislature tonight to review the 

matrix or the list of various things that governments might be 

involved in -- industry, universities -- to provide a competitive, 

as you just put it, the comparative advantage why it should be 

here rather than some other jurisdiction? 

 

Now that may be a fairly large task but there's a lot of research 

already done on it.  And some things will come up.  And some 

things that I will want to know about and people like me will 

want to know about is the question of taxes and taxation and 

the costs that government impose on the industry.  That's very 

relevant.  And it's a big number for them, and I'm sure you're 

aware of that. 

 

And you could probably include that in your analysis.  It 

wouldn't be difficult.  And you wouldn't have to be, you know, 

particularly ashamed of it or happy about one side or not so 

happy about others.  In some cases, Saskatchewan will rank 

well; in some other cases, they won't rank so good. 

 

But that would be important to me, and I would think to people 

here on this side that are involved in the livestock industry, to 

know how we rank and how we compare, and particularly 

when you've committed this review panel and this review 

agency to study all of that, to know. 

 

Now one of the questions, and this is not intended to be 

antagonistic at all, but you would know the advantages and 

disadvantages to the business community and the farming 

community and the processing and the manufacturing 

community, of even a form -- and I say this just with an open 

suggestion -- even a form of tax harmonization which would 

allow them to get . . . even if you targeted, and I've heard the 

Premier say well, we can't do it for everybody, but we'll target 

it.  Maybe we'll target some for steel. 

 

How about targeting some for the livestock industry?  If you 

could say . . . and you know what I'm talking about because if 

in fact we could have the benefit in the processing and the 

manufacturing and the value-added, and anything that moves 

up and down that system subject to the same rules the feds 

have, you're quick enough and 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2549 

sharp enough to know that there is a great deal of saving.  That 

would give us an advantage over neighbouring jurisdictions. 

 

Now you can check and compare on gas tax, and you can check 

and compare on insurance, and you can do other things.  And 

as I mentioned, sometimes we'll do well and sometimes we 

won't.  But would you be prepared to look at the elements of 

interprovincial comparison that you have some control over as 

a cabinet minister and as a government, and perhaps even look 

at the feds to see if they treat any jurisdiction differently than 

others, so that in fact the industry could really . . . If you were 

looking at investing in the livestock industry with your children 

and your people or your family for the next 20 years, you'd say 

well I really like Saskatchewan for these reasons -- obviously 

the feed grain base -- but here is what we can get on irrigation, 

here's what we can get on taxation, here's what we can get on 

energy costs, here's what it is on a combination of things. 

 

Could you and would you be prepared to include those kinds of 

things in an analysis that you do so that we could really have a 

good industry discussion on how Saskatchewan could stay, if 

you will, internationally -- certainly interprovincially -- but 

internationally competitive in the red meat industry. 

 

We're contemplating, and some are contemplating, even 

hosting international forums on agriculture competitiveness 

here in the province of Saskatchewan, associated with 

universities and others.  It would seem to me that would fit well 

with the things that we're looking at because the grain base in 

the red meat industry and the processing of those are certainly 

something that's going to be here for a long time in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And as you know, if you can make them competitive they're 

going to really contribute.  So would it be difficult for you to 

include that in your research and your analysis?  I know taxes 

are more political than some other things, but it's fairly 

significant, and the fact that you made a move today which is 

public dollars in that industry is like a tax break frankly, and 

that's pretty significant.  So you're prepared to look at it.  

Would you consider what I've just described and if you want 

some more of it on paper I suppose I could put it down but 

generally I think you get the drift. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I very much 

appreciate the suggestions offered by the member opposite.  As 

I did when I structured the GRIP committee and the Farm Debt 

Advisory Committee, I asked them to determine the range of 

consideration within very broad parameters so that they could 

do a full examination and give me a full report of the industry 

without particular direction from me. 

 

I will ask again that this committee do the same thing when it is 

struck to identify the issues that impact on the Saskatchewan 

industry and to analyse now the . . . I think they will find it 

necessary to limit themselves within some contexts.  One of the 

pieces of information that is useful for me to know is how 

investment in the livestock sector compares for economic 

development purposes to investments in other parts of the 

agricultural sector. 

(2200) 

 

But to government as a whole it's important to know what the 

relationship of those relative investments is to investment in 

other nonagricultural sectors.  Whether they will be able to 

provide that broad a scope they will have to determine.  I 

suspect they will have to place some limits on the extent of 

their examination.  It's our belief from the study that's been 

done in British Columbia recently that it will take six months 

just to focus just on the meat sector itself. 

 

The fact however is, that the sectors are imaginative and 

energetic, and working together they will even be more so.  I 

know that the hog industry, while they were discussing with us 

a proposal which led to the interim red meat production 

equalization program that was announced today, were also 

raising other questions with us. 

 

The hog industry suggested that one of the greatest limitations 

to their expansion was access to capital and they provided a 

very creative solution, suggested a very creative solution and 

they're working with the Ag Credit Corporation now to develop 

it which I think should make it possible for them not only to 

borrow more easily from our government credit corporation, 

but should make them a desirable borrower for the private 

sector. 

 

One of the things that I've heard repeatedly in the discussions 

with the red meat sector over the last couple of months has 

been that they would really like to live in a world where they 

are able to do business independently.  And they want to be 

able to cost-out the kinds of services that government provides 

so that I think they want to cut to the core of the issue of costs, 

for example in irrigation development.  If in fact it's costing a 

thousand dollars an acre for irrigation and that's being used for 

producing feed grains for a livestock industry, but you can't pay 

for the expenses on the piece of land with that kind of 

investment on it, they want to get to the bottom of that and say 

no, we need to make our judgement based on our real cost base 

and use the kinds of technologies that are appropriate for the 

production of grains.  If that's not appropriate, then we need to 

find a different product to grow on that land so that in fact pay 

it back to government in the same way that we would expect to 

pay back to private investment in those kinds of areas. 

 

So clearly the beef industry as well is looking, as they have in 

other countries, to niche markets, to special products, to 

expansions of markets.  I know the beef industry is very 

aggressive in pursuing markets across the world.  When I've 

met with ambassadors from Korea and Japan and a number of 

European countries, that they're aware of the quality of our 

beef, the quality of our breeding stock.  The people across the 

world are aware of the quality of our hog products.  And the 

production equalization program that was announced today 

also does apply to a number of other red meat areas that 

produce substantially less quantities than the pork or the beef 

do. 

 

I appreciate again the suggestions that the member opposite has 

made and I would invite him in fact to list the 



2550 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

factors that he would want examined so that the committee, 

when they establish their own parameters, see the range of 

things that are possible.  Clearly the impact of grading systems 

is an important variable that needs to be looked at in terms of 

how what's produced where, the probable path of exchange 

rates and interest rates, and as you so correctly point out, 

various policies of other provinces and the national government 

and the impact that those have. 

 

It's clear to me that the livestock sector in Saskatchewan will 

prosper when we can remove from the system the unfair 

advantages that others place into it -- an unfair advantage, I 

think, based on possibly not that sound an investment by other 

governments.  I would find it difficult to believe that the 

Alberta government will ever get a return on the investment 

they've made, and their very substantial investment they've 

made, in the red meat sector. 

 

They are also on a budget path that worries me a little bit.  

They're heading into a $2.3 billion deficit this year and I 

understand a $3.1 billion deficit next year.  It's a path that I 

think they need to change and hopefully we can work 

co-operatively with the other western provinces to develop the 

very strong western regional base in the livestock industry that 

we very naturally ought to have. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well all I want to really know is to have your 

assurance that you won't categorically rule out various things 

because they might be a little bit more sensitive, and taxes are 

one of them.  For example, as you know, in international trade 

there are certain things governments can do that are seen as 

green, which means they're not subsidized.  Crop insurance is 

one, other kinds of insurance.  I would think bonds, where you 

go in and guarantee people's investment, is getting pretty close 

to green, you know, whether it's development bonds or 

community development bonds and those kinds of things. 

 

Immigration policy and immigration money -- the livestock 

industry is very interested in the fact that there are countries 

who would be prepared to bring money in here and invest in a 

complete, international hog operation, beef operation or others.  

And there's things that the province could do with the federal 

government to help encourage that in a logical way, not to be 

subject to international trade restrictions.  But say, we're open 

for business.  And you've got money to invest, and let's look at 

it. 

 

The whole question of equity -- and the provincial government 

has just done $500 million-plus in Saskatchewan savings 

bonds, equity that you've guaranteed -- equity guarantee is as 

close to green in helping people as you can find.  And you've 

already committed yourself to that.  You've certainly done it 

with community development bonds.  And that interest comes 

back in the community. 

 

Now if we can do more of that and if you would look at, you 

know, if you will, . . . I don't know, value added processing 

bonds, industry bonds, community development bonds, where 

people are prepared to put their money into the livestock 

industry, backed up by the 

provincial government that says it's your money, not the 

taxpayers'.  We're there.  We'll do the due diligence. 

 

It has similar features as your bond that you just did, but it 

creates economic activity and likely not subject to Alberta or 

Manitoba or North Dakota or the Germans or the French or 

somebody else coming here and say, but, but, but, but.  We'll 

say, well it's their money.  It's local money going in there.  And 

we've done the due diligence and it's fair enough and no 

guarantee of return at all.  They might make a lot, and they 

might not make any.  Okay?  We just back the equity. 

 

Now that kind of thing plus immigration plus other forms of 

bonds that people might look at or financial opportunities with 

ACS or others, plus that combined with tax changes . . . not 

necessarily tax changes that you'd be criticized for in terms of 

being subsidized.  But if you looked at the bond part of it, you 

would find the community development bonds.  You end up, as 

you probably recall, that you would be sales tax free which is 

an interesting concept.  And you would be income tax free 

because they're eligible for RRSPs and postponing it. 

 

But the combination that your Finance officials, your 

Agriculture officials and your others could put a package 

together where you are income tax free.  You're sales tax free.  

You are free in terms of international concerns and attack . . . 

combination of financial instruments that involve taxation and 

governments.  I mean clearly, you're a government.  You're 

interested in it.  You're interested today by your announcement.  

I mean clearly that's there. 

 

So I just want you to, in a reasonable way, say that you won't 

categorically reject examining all forms of financial 

instruments even in terms of the taxation that you could put 

together to help formulate these.  Which are . . . some days you 

have to use your imagination.  It's a little . . . you know, it's a 

new world, new technology, money moves fast, and equity is 

much safer than debt. 

 

And I'm sure you know that.  And Saskatchewan has led the 

way in equity generation.  It goes back for generations in the 

co-op movement, as the hon. member knows, putting equity in, 

having a share.  But with new technology you can extend that 

and make it much more powerful. 

 

So I just ask the member, or the minister, pardon me, if he 

would at least include or not categorically reject the various 

financial instruments that he could design or others could 

design with him that are local, interprovincial, co-operating 

with other governments -- particularly the feds -- and 

international so that if he had immigration packages, 

immigration plus bond packages, immigration plus equity 

packages, and a combination of things that generally will be 

accepted as not, you know, not cheating, not subsidizing, not 

getting into the trade wars.  And I think there's much of it there 

particularly given our own free trade agreement but now maybe 

even the North American agreement and international, 

probably, opening up of markets. 

 

We would like, and I would certainly like, your assurance that 

all of that is open for review.  And I don't think you would have 

a problem with it.  And even if it looks at 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2551 

various taxation measures, at least, as we talked about last 

night, you could look at them.  And you say: well, I've decided 

not to do it, but at least we're comfortable that we've examined 

it in detail and for these reasons we're not going to do, you 

know, the co-operative way with the feds or some other thing. 

 

But could you have an open mind and review them with the 

industry so that they know . . . you can really lay awake at 

night figuring out ways to stay competitive and have a 

comparative advantage if not a competitive, absolute advantage 

here in the province of Saskatchewan, in the red meat industry. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the comments 

of the Leader of the Opposition in this regard because it's been 

very much the nature of the bodies that we have put to the task 

in this province in the short time that I've had the pleasure of 

being responsible for this portfolio, to in fact put people 

together who can . . . who represent a variety of points of view, 

who challenge each other to think creatively, who 

cross-fertilize their ideas and who come up with productive 

suggestions. 

 

One of the things that's very critical, I believe, is that in fact 

this committee analyse the future policy direction for our 

province so that we can in fact challenge other provinces and 

the national government to adapt their policies to fit where we 

think the industry ought to go and what facilitates the 

development of an industry as it ought to be, and what in fact 

they ought to be saying about international trade policy when 

they're in negotiations. 

 

Clearly the provinces and the industries that are in the province 

have not had enough to say at the national table in our 

international negotiations, whether it be on the Canada or U.S. 

(United States) level, or the NAFTA (North American Free 

Trade Agreement) level or the international level of GATT 

(General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade). 

 

There are a number of suggestions the member opposite has 

made.  I would expect the committee again would analyse 

those with respect to cost to government, and acceptability in 

international trade.  Clearly the idea of value added processing 

and special funding for that is an important concept. 

 

The idea of equity investment . . . I think Saskatchewan has had 

a history of favouring certain kinds of developments here.  I 

appreciate the creative suggestion that has come forward from 

the co-operative movement with respect to the co-op-based 

land trust, where they propose equity investment in land, but in 

the control of the community in which the land is.  Because I 

think the greatest . . . The greatest attachment most of us have, 

or a great attachment many of us have to our home places is the 

land on which we grew up.  And to have that land within the 

control of ourselves in the community is extremely important. 

 

There are a number of models that obviously can be used in the 

development of agriculture and the further development and 

sharing of capital and risk.  The co-operative model is clearly 

one that needs to be approached with respect to taking 

advantage of modern 

technologies.  The development of the modern red meat sector 

can be quite expensive when one uses all the available 

technologies.  Co-operative operations where a $3 million 

operation might be shared by 10 or 20 farmers within a 

community is obviously a good model to be following with 

respect to sharing in capital and sharing in risk and sharing in 

labour. 

 

There are some older ideas that possibly can be re-worked.  I'm 

sure you're familiar with the Josh Storey's Agripark concept 

that he's been promoting for a number of years with Red 

Williams.  The concept clearly has merit with respect to the . . . 

because of the high investment needed in intensive operations 

these days. 

 

So I again thank the member opposite for his very positive 

suggestions.  And we'll challenge the committee to set their 

scope very broadly and then to focus it in to make sure we get 

the most useful suggestions we can for the Saskatchewan 

industry. 

 

(2215) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm just going to 

narrow it down a little bit.  I just want you to think about not 

limiting the discussion.  And I know you'll say, I want you to 

look at everything.  But I want the committee to know that they 

can look at these things seriously.  I mean it's just a committee 

to study it.  And taxes are important.  As you can imagine and 

you know -- you've been in agriculture long enough -- taxes 

can be important, very significant, and the instruments in which 

you tax it, how we do it, whether it's bonds or the various 

taxation systems with the feds.  And it isn't just harmonization, 

it's a lot of other things.  But not rule them out, look at them.  

Because you know it's important to the industry for a long, long 

time to come. 

 

And believe me, as you probably know, other jurisdictions are 

looking at it closely and with the industry.  I want you to be as 

definitive as you can here saying that you're not going to rule 

out looking at that.  Now it may be difficult to do and you 

might not be able to do it, but if you would do it, I think it 

would give them a great deal of comfort -- it would give me 

comfort -- that well, we can look at this stuff.  I mean you can 

do whatever you want with it once it comes to you.  I mean you 

have the prerogative -- but not to rule it out. 

 

So they could say:  well the bonds worked here.  Here were the 

strengths and weaknesses of this particular system of taxation.  

Maybe there's other instruments.  Here's how immigration 

could work with immigration funds and bonds and taxes and 

the feds.  That's kind of interesting stuff, particularly when 

you're looking at the line of thought in interest.  So can you just 

not rule it out.  I mean you're not the Finance minister.  He's 

here in another capacity, or he certainly has another capacity.  

But for this industry and for other industries, it's useful to 

examine all of those things, particularly in the international 

world that we're facing today, and it would be comforting to 

know that you wouldn't rule it out.  That's the first thing. 

 

The second point I would like to know . . . And it's something 

that you probably can't answer tonight but I 



2552 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

would think it would be worthwhile.  You could be the first 

Minister of Agriculture to do it since the 1920s and you might 

like to do this -- and I probably should have.  And I throw this 

out to you. 

 

The Standing Committee on Agriculture of this Legislative 

Assembly could perform a very useful role.  Now it doesn't 

involve the ministers, but involves all parties, all parties, the 

members of the legislature; the government has the majority of 

the people on it.  And you could pick your people and they 

could rotate and they could go to work on something like the 

livestock industry, or the competitiveness, or how could we 

best diversify agriculture, and really get into good discussions 

with academics and businesses, co-operatives, and people.  

And they could invite international people here, they could talk 

to people who'd been to Japan or been to Korea, or into the 

United States.  We could have an on-going discussion that 

would really be relevant, keeping Saskatchewan competitive 

and aware and on top of being, you know, really, really right up 

front on all the potential we would have in the value added, 

competitive world here that is a gift to us. 

 

So I guess I would like you to consider that.  And certainly the 

House of Commons does it all the time.  The Senate even does 

it, bless their hearts.  Senator Sparrow's been on stuff.  I think 

the MP Les Benjamin has been on standing committees on 

transportation. 

 

I mean people do this.  People do it.  And certainly agriculture 

is relevant and topical, almost as topical as politics here in 

Saskatchewan.  So you could have this committee working, 

holding hearings, travelling, doing whatever they do, on a very 

important topic -- how does Saskatchewan stay up and ahead 

and on top of this great potential we have, because we've got 

the land base, we have the grain, we have some diversification.  

And if we start processing it, particularly into the livestock 

sector, it's a boon.  It's positive. 

 

Now that committee, I think, could be very useful in exploring 

all the ideas as this House would.  Only it's a miniature of the 

House, really.  It's three or four here, and a couple here and one 

there.  And they'd say, well let's look at this and let's ask people 

questions.  Haul in some international bankers and talk to 

people who are looking at the latest technology.  And I think it 

could be quite useful, genuinely useful. 

 

So one, would you be as clear as you could on not limiting 

what they might want to discuss in terms of looking at this 

industry and how we'd be competitive, particularly on tax and 

financial instruments.  And it's a broad range. 

 

And secondly, would you give some consideration or talk 

about it in cabinet or get back to us with the possibility of 

maybe having the Standing Committee on Agriculture of this 

legislature, that hasn't sat for decades, go to work.  And you 

could involve your MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) and you could involve who you like.  And it's an 

all-party committee and you could work 

year in and year out.  Certainly you could work on this. 

 

And I have some other suggestions that they could work on but 

this, I think, would be a good start and I think appreciated by 

your officials.  I don't see the down side. 

 

It's as cheap a research as you're going to get with people who 

really care because you've got agricultural people on both sides 

of the House.  They could ask relevant questions.  You're not 

going to pull the wool over their eyes, and they could have 

officials backing them up and it could be productive.  You'd 

certainly maintain your awareness and your knowledge base in 

Saskatchewan, compared to other jurisdictions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Again I thank the Leader of the 

Opposition for his comments.  I expect the industry group will 

look at a number of things that the member opposite has 

suggested.  I think from my discussions with the industry 

group, they want to evaluate the effectiveness -- and it's one of 

the suggestions that we've made very broadly in terms of what 

the study might do -- of existing government programs, that is 

what is the value of present involvements in equity instruments 

as you describe.  What is the value of it quantitatively?  What 

is the value of it in terms of what it does for the industry? 

 

It's my sense that the industry wants to challenge itself to say if 

the present investment of government dollars in the industry 

annually is $8 million, are we presently spending it in the way 

that best develops the industry?  Is it best to spend it in the 

kinds of tools we are presently using or might we in fact create 

more growth and more stability in the industry by responding 

to suggestions like was made by Chris Crone at the Humboldt 

pork producers meeting the other day where he said, my 

facilities are 20 years old and I'm just getting my debt almost 

paid off and I need some reinvestment in this.  If one handed 

over to the hog industry a certain amount of money, would they 

possibly recognize a special need for a young farmer in that 

circumstance? 

 

Like what are the ways in which money is best spent?  Or is it 

best spent in a health and production monitoring systems or in 

research?  This is in fact the challenge; this is in fact the 

difficult struggle that the red meat sector has with itself. 

 

When we spend money in a way that we today announced in an 

interim program in order to provide an equal opportunity for 

Saskatchewan red meat producers, while we examine the future 

of the industry, there are several millions of dollars that can't be 

spent through another mechanism.  And they recognize the pull 

for those very scarce resources. 

 

So clearly I have no interest in removing from the scope of the 

examination by the committee, elements that have a significant 

impact on the future of the industry.  And I would be very 

much guided by their own judgement of what ought to be 

within the terms and the scope of the study. 

 

With respect to the use of the Standing Committee on 

Agriculture, because it has not been used for some time 

apparently, I cannot comment on its history or its value.  

Clearly I believe in consultation.  The involvement that outside 

groups have had with the developmental policy in our 

department since I've become the minister has 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2553 

been significant.  And my discipline in adhering to the 

recommendations that have come to me has also been quite 

strict.  And I would intend to continue to respect the opinions 

of the industry when I ask them for their opinions.  I want 

members opposite to be aware that there have been a number of 

avenues through which the kind of vision I believe the 

opposition is talking about is being worked at. 

 

Clearly one of the avenues that we have not explored is the 

Standing Committee on Agriculture.  But I know the new board 

for the ag development fund is looking at the vision for ag 

development, how you do that in the absence of looking at the 

vision for agriculture.  The new board at ACS is looking at 

what the ACS board ought to be doing to best support the 

industry, and immediately it spills beyond the financial into the 

development of how to properly finance the desired goals of 

the industry into the future. 

 

The department itself will be looking at a complete structural 

review of the department itself, will be looking at a complete 

structural review of the department quite quickly.  In there, that 

same need to create a vision for the future and to set a direction 

becomes critical and when that . . . to blend that into the agenda 

of government overall, that same need to look at the whole 

world is there. 

 

I've participated in some planning sessions with the university 

that have looked at it in exactly the same fashion, and here 

you're suggesting another avenue.  And it's apparent to me that 

any additional contribution that can be made by people to the 

planning exercises can do nothing but give us a more positive 

future. 

 

And I make no commitment to use the Standing Committee on 

Agriculture at the moment because I know not enough about it, 

but clearly all the avenues that are useful ought to be put in 

place in order to develop the best future for agriculture, which 

is central to the economy of the province. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well let me just make the observation -- 

Saskatchewan tends to be a politically . . . and a partisan 

jurisdiction.  Politics is, some call it the life-blood or the blood 

sport of Saskatchewan.  I could put committees together and 

you could criticize them.  You could put committees together 

and I could criticize them.  And the public will criticize them 

and so forth. 

 

Standing committees of this legislature are elected by the 

people, and to a certain extent they can rise above that and 

listen to people's views and how can you criticize an MLA that 

was elected; they were elected and they have the right to go 

listen. 

 

And in the light of what generally your administration has been 

talking about, a co-operative attitude, which is probably a 

healthy thing to pursue because people often get tired of 

politics and tired of partisan stuff and say, well they're all the 

same.  It doesn't matter the party, they all act the same.  The 

other guy's evil and this guy's positive. 

 

That's the light that I put forward the suggestion on the 

Standing Committee on Agriculture, because it could go 

forward without political criticism because it's from this 

Legislative Assembly.  And it could hold hearings and have 

academics in industry and so forth, and I mean obviously you'd 

want to talk to your colleagues about well, what does that cost 

the Legislative Assembly and so forth, which is fair enough; 

and we have other committees that are working.  I think the 

Premier struck several committees now so it isn't that we 

haven't done committees. 

 

So it's a genuine, sincere recommendation or that I would hope 

that you might consider so that in fact we could know that it 

was tending to be non-partisan.  Because I believe the 

suggestions that you are getting and the response that you are 

coming up with in the livestock sector, and perhaps in some of 

these other areas that I've mentioned tonight, tends to be less 

partisan and tends to be more or less productive.  So I mean, 

we'll fight our political battles and go out, you know, our plan 

is better than your plan, etc., etc., and vice versa.  But for much 

of the work, they don't want any part of that.  And I honestly 

believe . . . and while I didn't do it, I recommend that you 

seriously look at, and I would not criticize it.  You wouldn't get 

criticism from this side of the House. 

 

If you or the Premier or cabinet decided this ag committee . . . 

this is the biggest industry we have.  I mean you have lots of 

credible reasons for looking at this.  It's competitive.  It's large.  

It's grain.  It's processing.  It's international.  Let's put that 

committee to work.  I don't see a down side frankly, and I've 

thought about it recently. 

 

So again, to get over some of the hurdles that we faced, I would 

recommend that you at least take it back to your cabinet 

colleagues and give it some serious consideration.  I know our 

House Leader, our Ag critics, and others would certainly look 

positively on it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well I want to say to the member opposite 

that I appreciate the co-operative tone of the remarks he's made 

tonight.  I appreciate the recognition of the advantages of 

working together in the interest of an industry that's the most 

important industry in Saskatchewan and certainly an industry 

that makes a substantial contribution to the economy -- not 

only in Saskatchewan, but of Canada. 

 

I appreciate the suggestion with respect to the co-operative 

functioning of multi-party committees and certainly an idea 

that will be discussed in the future.  And I believe the House 

Leader wants to send us home to our families here quite 

quickly, so I will thank you for the . . . and other members on 

your side for the very positive engagement we've participated 

in tonight and thank my officials for their participation as well. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:32 p.m. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


