




















































Hansard: August 27, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3183 

 August 27, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Research Council 

Vote 35 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask the minister to introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I'd 

like to introduce the two officials from the Saskatchewan 

Research Council.  To my left is Jim Hutch.  Jim is the 

president of SRC (Saskatchewan Research Council).  And to 

my immediate right is George MacKay.  He's the 

vice-president of operations. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Chairman and Mr. Minister, and I welcome the officials in our 

midst this evening as well.  And I guess I could be pleased to 

inform them that they are not going to be unduly pressed for 

time today because one thing that I've noticed that most of my 

colleagues and I have done is prepared questions ahead of time 

and presented them to the organization, institutions, and 

departments.  And that is a valuable, I think, tool that we are 

using here. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I just want to say to you, without overdoing 

it, that your officials in this department . . . or in the 

Saskatchewan Research Council have answered those 

questions extremely well, and in many occasions have even 

made the written offer that if the question is not complete or if 

there's anything else that they can do, they would be only too 

pleased to assist.  And I find that kind of co-operativeness very, 

very gratifying and also stimulates the discussion tonight. 

 

I know a little bit about the organization.  I've been indirectly 

involved while Mr. Meiklejohn was the minister.  And I know 

that with Mr. Hutch I was in Alberta.  I'm not quite sure what 

year that was.  It could be as long ago as 1988.  But anyway, I 

made a trip to Alberta for the memorandum of understanding 

that we made with the Alberta ARC, the Alberta Research 

Council. 

 

And it was my understanding at that time that one of the 

objectives of that memorandum of understanding was to 

instead of kind of fighting for the constituency, that we would 

have centres of excellence, recognizing that Alberta had certain 

things going for that in terms of perhaps expertise, equipment, 

and Saskatchewan had its own field. 

 

Now I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if . . . I know we're going a 

little ways back, but could you give me an update of where that 

memorandum of understanding is today?  Has it been followed 

up?  Is it existing today?  And perhaps any further advances 

along that line that have been made in the interim. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to tell the hon. 

member that that MOU (memorandum of 

understanding) that you're talking about seems to be working 

very well.  And these gentlemen were going to give me a whole 

long list of things that they were co-operating in, but I'll just 

give you a few . . . just a few examples.  And totalled, I guess 

there are 17 different areas that they're working together. 

 

One of the ones that . . . particularly the equipment design 

engineers work for the Alberta . . . yes, we do the work for the 

Alberta customers.  And then we take our customers for the 

electronics testing centre to Alberta.  And what the officials are 

telling me here is that we could certainly not afford to have all 

the duplication between the two provinces because neither one 

of them would have enough work for one of the different 

fields. 

 

For instance, in Saskatchewan we do all the oil slurry work.  

Alberta brings its work over to us and we share a materials 

engineer work and so on.  But in total there are 17 different 

areas that we share with the Alberta Research Council, and if 

the member wants a list I'm sure that the officials would be 

happy to supply him with a complete list. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I do have a passing interest in that and I 

would appreciate if he could bring me up to date on it.  And 

could you bring me up to date on one particular thing that was 

starting at the time, and that's the . . . not the biosphere but the 

biomass experiments that we have in the SRC as opposed to the 

electronics which I am familiar with and the mechanical that 

you've made reference to.  Is there any experimentation along 

the biochemistry and biomass as such? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the researchers here have 

just given me the SRC news, and apparently there's a 

description of . . . and I don't know if you get this copy or not, 

but I will read it to you anyway. 

 

A very interesting project that is being carried on by a Dr. 

Krystyna Sosulski -- I'm not too good with these Ukrainian 

names -- but she's doing some work and I'll just read it out of 

here and I'm sure that will help the member across. 

 

 . . . a food science expert, has been working on developing an 

alternate extraction process for canola oil. 

 

And the objective here is to get more oil out of every canola 

seed. 

 

And I suppose if you can even squeeze a little bit more out of 

each seed it's going to be beneficial in the long run.  So that's 

one of the major projects that they're doing in the biochemistry, 

biomass area.  Are you familiar . . . Do you get this copy? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you for that, Mr. Member, because 

obviously that is a very useful tool that we can use the SRC for 

and the canola extraction to be competitive and so on. We have 

to use every advantage that we have.  And I view the canola 

industry as an up-and-coming industry simply because of the 

market potential that we have. 



3184 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

The market potential being in the highly industrialized United 

States and as you may be aware the United States food testing 

or drug testing -- I forget the exact terminology for it -- came 

up with the conclusion that one of the best cooking oils 

possible for the human race was coming out of canola oil. 

 

And this is of course with the consciousness of many of our 

food processing companies and certainly the average, common 

housewife is looking for something that is going to be of low 

saturated oils and so on and canola fits the bill.  So any kind of 

research along that line that facilitates matters is certainly 

something I would think we would want to pursue. 

 

I have one other question, it's off of that.  But as you may be 

well aware a few years ago it looked as if PAMI (Prairie 

Agricultural Machinery Institute) might be heading for the 

dustbin.  Of course that was staved off and it is still existing 

today.  I've been wondering if you could give me an update as 

to . . . I understand you have a contractual arrangement with 

PAMI to do certain services.  Could you bring me up to date on 

that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  We have a few 

things I would like to say about PAMI.  PAMI is, I'm sure to 

the member's delight, alive and well.  And George MacKay, 

who is sitting over here to my right, is in charge of this 

program.  And he's given me some information here of the kind 

of work that PAMI does. 

 

It's a management contract that SRC has with PAMI.  We don't 

have any ownership.  It's just a contract that we have.  And as I 

said, we're doing very, very well.  And the work is basically 

focussed on economic development.  And the co-operation that 

exists between the manufacturers of farm machinery and 

implements, PAMI, and the farmers is designed to produce new 

and innovative types of machinery and farming concepts, and 

is also designed, the whole process is designed, to reduce farm 

input costs.  And as we know in agriculture today, that's a 

pretty significant thing.  If we could reduce the input costs that 

the farmer has to have, it would certainly enhance his economic 

viability. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, could you give me an example 

of how PAMI would work with the Saskatchewan Research 

Council.  You say you have a management contract, 

management services contract.  Let's take, for example, PAMI 

going together with some other partners to form WESTEST for 

vibration intensity and experiments like that.  What would be 

the role of the SRC and PAMI in doing this kind of testing for 

certain manufacturers?  Just so that we have a concept of how 

this organization actually works with industry. 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the role SRC plays in the 

PAMI organization.  First of all I'd like to say that the 

engineers of the two organizations complement each other.  We 

do not duplicate expertise in the engineering field either in 

SRC or in PAMI so there's a complementary relationship 

between the engineers.  SRC basically provides the leadership 

and direction for PAMI.  We don't  

necessarily do their work, all their work for them, but we 

provide the leadership and the direction. 

 

And specifically in relation to WESTEST -- and you mentioned 

this particular organization, and it is one example of one of the 

ways in which they co-operate, again with another province in 

this case -- PAMI here assists the manufacturing in the 

equipment, as you already mentioned some of the testing that 

they do.  It has an exclusive contract with WESTEST -- PAMI 

has this exclusive contract with WESTEST -- to provide a 

leading edge in engineering to service in the fields of vibration 

analysis and in sound intensity.  These are the two areas that 

they're basically concentrating on. 

 

But the relationship between SRC and PAMI is one in which 

they sort of co-exist together.  They don't conflict with each 

other; they don't compete with each other.  If they have 

expertise that's fine, we don't interfere in their expertise, but 

they certainly call on the expertise of the SRC engineers. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  I want 

to get into one other topic and that is the funding of your 

organization.  My understanding of it is that like many 

organizations that we do have around us today, the SRC is also 

always looking for funds.  You're living in a competitive 

environment in terms of research. 

 

Could you give me an idea, a balance between the funding that 

actually comes from private enterprise, from private business, 

as opposed to funding that comes from let's say the publicly 

funded dollar.  Give me a breakdown on that, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I will give you two sets of 

information here to the hon. member.  First of all, I'll give it to 

you in percentage terms, and we're just looking up the exact 

numbers here so we'll give those to you in a minute here.  Just 

hang on a minute. 

 

Grants from the provincial government, 28.4 per cent.  Those 

are direct grants from the Consolidated Fund.  Industry 

contracts, 51.2; provincial government contracts, 11.4; and 

federal government contracts, 9 per cent.  So in essence I guess 

we say there's 72 per cent of the total funding of SRC comes 

from contracts and 28 per cent, in round figures, comes from 

government funding. 

 

If you would like, I would send a copy of this over.  There's a 

comparison here with '85-86, and if you'd like, I would send a 

copy over. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Please do that, Mr. Minister. 

 

You kind of led right into what I was going to be asking next.  I 

know that we have the SRC, the Saskatchewan Research 

Council, and not too far from your premises is the National 

Research Council, or at least it was until a few years ago when 

most of it moved to Ottawa. 

 

Is that your competitor?  How do you view the NRC (National 

Research Council) and the SRC, or are your constituents of a 

different type that there is little conflict? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the difference 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3185 

between the NRC and the SRC is that the NRC is basically in 

biotechnology, both in the basic and also in the advanced 

research of the biotechnology field, and there's no conflict here 

with the SRC.  The SRC is basically an applied technology so 

that the two complement each other rather than compete with 

each other. 

 

And as you mentioned, they are close together and it wouldn't 

make a lot of sense for two organizations that almost share the 

same building would be competing with each other on 

industries that are probably fairly limited in this province.  So 

there's a complementary relationship between the two. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Just to follow on that, Mr. Minister.  You 

mentioned the basic research.  What proportion of the SRC's 

would be basic research? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- I'm told that the SRC does no basic 

research.  We do all applied research. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I know that your 

organization is big business.  I know that you've got a couple 

hundred people working for you from scientists to technicians 

and so on, and you've also got many thousands -- well a couple 

of thousand anyway -- of clients that you are working together 

with. 

 

I'm just going to make one general closing comment here, Mr. 

Minister, and that is that I feel that your organization of the 

Saskatchewan Research Council is a very, very important part 

in so far as Saskatchewan is concerned, in so far as 

Saskatchewan's place in new technologies are concerned.  My 

little knowledge about the SRC seems to be hinging around the 

fact that there's always a great deal of concern what's going to 

happen next year, what's going to happen next month, in terms 

of keeping those contracts coming and so on. 

 

My encouragement or my recommendation would be, is that 

first of all, too many of us don't even know that there is such a 

thing as Saskatchewan Research but maybe that's the common 

man on the street.  Perhaps those that really count do know 

because of the expertise and so on and the facilities that the 

SRC is able to offer.  The business men and so on, I think, 

probably are quite aware of that and as far as I'm concerned, 

the opposition is going to continue to recognize the value of the 

SRC to the people of Saskatchewan.  I would just encourage 

you, your officials, to continue on in their good work.  Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- I'll thank the member very much, Mr. 

Chairman, for those comments.  I'd just like to make a final 

comment on the future of SRC.  When I became minister in 

charge of SRC, I knew very little about the organization.  And 

I've had some fairly good discussions with Jim and his staff, 

and also with the board members, and I visited their place 

several times in the first 10 months of my tenure here.  And I'm 

impressed with the work they do and I think that there are a lot 

of things in Saskatchewan that the SRC could do that we're 

probably doing in other agencies in government, and other 

agencies that the government is responsible for, and thus we 

could enhance the stature of SRC.  And I share your sentiments 

here that we need to strengthen this organization; we need to 

enhance their position within 

our society. 

 

And one of the things I find very encouraging is that Jim and 

George have launched out on a five-year plan.  They're going 

to plan five years in advance.  And at our next board meeting I 

will have my first look at this five-year plan and hopefully this 

will give some direction for the SRC in the future. 

 

And I'm sure the organization looks forward to working with 

other agencies in government and also a lot of agencies out in 

the private sector.  So I thank you for your comment. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 35 agreed to. 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Research Council 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 35 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 35 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Saskatchewan Research Council 

Vote 66 

 

Item 12 agreed to. 

 

Vote 66 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Research Council 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 35 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 35 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like 

to thank the officials for attending this afternoon . . . this 

evening.  And I would like to also thank the opposition for 

co-operating and asking the questions.  And it's great that we 

are finished fairly early because the officials would like to 

catch a plane for Saskatoon at 8:15.  So thanks again. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Yes, Mr Minister, 

I was aware of that.  And I also want to thank the officials for 

so readily supplying us with the answers.  And I wish them 

well in their five-year endeavour, five-year planning that you're 

doing.  And I just want to say to Jim and George that I look 

forward five years from now sitting beside you and 

commending you on a job as well done.  So thank you very 

much. 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair would like to thank the hon. member 

for Rosthern and the hon. minister and the officials for their 

participation in the estimates. 



3186 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

(1930) 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 

 

The Chair: -- I'll begin by asking the hon. minister to 

introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With 

me to today I have Wayne Phillips who is the vice-president of 

the finance and administration; Al Veroba who is 

vice-president of operations; and Wayne Dybvig who is 

vice-president of water management. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think we got 

started on that before our break, and I understand, Mr. 

Minister, that you are going to send over the answers to the 

global questions.  I think we confirmed that, did we? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Those answers were delivered to 

your caucus office over the supper hour. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well thank you very much.  I suppose even if 

I'd known it, I wouldn't had a lot of time to look at them.  And I 

thank you very much for that.  That's good service. 

 

I'm going to run down . . . we're on page 82.  The next item, 

item number 2, it's talking about flood control and drainage.  

Could you tell us where that's taking place, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I have a schedule of the projects 

and it will be in your material as well.  But it's . . . just to run 

through them very quickly, it's Crooked Hill Creek, lower 

Lanigan Creek, Canora-Tiny, St. Gregor south, Tiny east, 

Fosston, Ranch creek, Muddy Lake.  That's the list of the 

projects, I believe. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, we have received the package and could I ask you for 

one more commitment?  If we find some holes, could we ask 

them to be filled later? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes.  We certainly will do that.  

And my officials have informed me there were a couple of 

questions that may not have been completed and we'll get that 

information to you. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Then I think if we 

went to item no. 3, and we're talking about payment to the 

corporation for irrigation programs.  Could you tell us where 

those irrigation programs are taking place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That monies is made up of funds 

that go for demonstration projects, for research and 

development and research and demonstration on farms 

basically across the province, administered through the 

Saskatchewan Irrigation and Development Centre. 
 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Maybe what I could 

ask you to do is send me a list of where these drainage 

programs are and also where the irrigation programs are, and 

then it'll save me trying to list them --  

at some time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes we can do that.  There's a list.  

I could give you a list of where the capital projects are, which 

is maybe what you're interested in.  I think we can go through . 

. . Some of the capital projects are at Riverhurst, Luck Lake, 

Brownlee north, Thunder Creek, Vanguard weir, Pike Lake, 

Disley west, and some other smaller ones. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, that would be my 

next question.  And if you'll just send those lists over I would 

appreciate that. 

 

I have another question.  We're talking, in item 5, payment to 

Sask Water for grants for irrigation development.  Could you 

explain to me the difference between item 5 and item 3.  

They're both talking about irrigation programs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Item 3 is the technical and 

economic support.  Item 5 is grants to farmers, paid directly to 

the farmers for irrigation. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, could 

you also then list . . . give us a list of those farmers that 

received those . . . the help in that program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We will supply that.  We don't 

have the details with us. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  With that 

commitment from you, and I thank you for that, I'll allow one 

or two of the other colleagues to ask a few questions. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I have a question about the plugs on the 

Qu'Appelle River system.  Have you put any money aside for 

developing any of the concrete permanent structures that would 

make it legal for weirs to be built along the system, so that 

farmers could back-flood their . . . I know that farmers were 

denied access to that opportunity by putting dirt in there and 

blocking the water to have flood in the spring.  And I was 

wondering whether you had gone ahead and done any building 

or developing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the engineering for 

those projects is done.  In order to complete those projects it 

would be done on a shared basis.  The farmers would have to 

raise money.  They've been in discussion and have not yet 

come forward with proposals.  We have no money in our 

budget for grants this year but at some time when they get a 

proposal together it would probably . . . we would put money in 

the budget and provide grants to help them. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Yes I think that those are probably good 

projects to do.  They probably would be an asset to those 

farmers there. 

 

Another question I have is the Battle Creek reservoir 

construction.  Is that going ahead?  How far advanced are you 

on that and could you give us an update on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That project is still on schedule to 

be completed in '93.  The environmental impact study is just 

coming in on it, so barring problems 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3187 

with that it's still on schedule for completion in '93. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- When do you expect contracts to be let on 

that, providing the environmental stuff is all a go, and have you 

got an idea about when that would start? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I'm informed that there may well 

be tenders for access roads let yet this fall, but the main tenders 

would probably be sometime next winter. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well that sounds encouraging.  I hope that 

you keep going with that.  I have a question as it relates to the 

Alameda dam.  In the news we had a significant announcement 

that said that two of the people had had their settlement reached 

with regard to the reservoir there.  And I was wondering 

whether you could provide to us the cost of the land in relation 

to that agreement that you reached. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The agreement has not been 

reached yet.  We have a tentative agreement with the Tetzlaffs 

there.  That is not finalized and we will be taking that, I think, 

maybe as early as next week to the public in that area to get 

reaction from it because it involves some possible changes to 

our water management plan or small changes to it, and we want 

to get a bit of public feedback before we finalize that 

agreement.  The agreement basically would allow us to 

purchase some of the land and they would maintain some that 

wouldn't be flooded for a period of time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On the irrigation project on the Thunder 

Creek, have Ducks Unlimited provided all of the funding that 

they are supposed to and have you completed the project?  I 

know that there was a hold-out on one of the individuals for 

expropriation purposes.  I believe the last I heard that the 

individual had completed arrangements but I'd like to know for 

sure whether that's all been done. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I'm informed that this is a split 

project.  A portion of the work that we are doing with tenders, 

that's going to be finished this year yet.  And the work the 

Ducks Unlimited . . . their payments are up to date on it and 

they have the agreement between the individual is with Ducks 

Unlimited and I'm informed that they have reached an 

agreement with the individual. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On the transfer of funds from the . . . I'll start 

a little different.  On the debt that was transferred from Sask 

Water to the Consolidated Fund, could I have a breakdown of 

the volume of dollars that was transferred in that for the 

irrigation projects and also for the Rafferty dam.  Can you 

provide me . . . and the Alameda . . . Can you provide me the 

breakdown on the irrigation projects, the various ones that the 

funds were transferred, the remaining amount of money that 

the debt was, and could I have that please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The breakdown was that on 

irrigation projects there was $38,191 and the Souris Basin 

Development, the whole project is $141,266,000, and we don't 

have a breakdown between Rafferty and Alameda.  That was 

the total that went into the project. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Was that 38,000 or 38 million? 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That was 38 million, pardon me. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Do you have a breakdown of where the 38 

million is, whether it's Luck Lake, Riverhurst, Thunder Creek?  

Could you provide that for me? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We don't have a breakdown with 

us.  We will get it for you.  It's about just roughly split between, 

the bulk of it between Riverhurst and Luck Lake and then there 

was a few smaller projects.  But we can get that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Sask Water, through the Canadian provincial 

agreement, I believe is using some of that money to build the 

Battle Creek reservoir.  Is there any money left over in that 

agreement that the Sask Water has to . . . or still has an 

opportunity to use? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- None of the provincial money that 

was under that agreement was used in Battle Creek.  The Battle 

Creek is a federal-provincial agreement which has expired.  In 

fact, I think we got an extension to get the money from Battle 

Creek to finish it up. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 

Administration) are using their money from that agreement to 

construct them.  Is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, their share is 2.5 million, ours 

is 1.4 million.  So that's correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Their share is point five? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Two point five, pardon me.  I'm 

mumbling, I guess. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I think the province was setting up an 

agreement with the federal government to do other economic 

development either last summer or early this fall or '91 in the 

fall.  Have you worked out an agreement for economic 

development that allows a partial investment by the province of 

Saskatchewan for economic development in water-related 

issues and then accessing funding from the federal 

government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, that agreement has been 

signed.  It's a $40 million agreement -- 50/50 split.  We're just 

organizing the management committee of that now. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Forty million total, or 20 and 20? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Forty million total, yes. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is that 20 million that is in that agreement, are 

you able to determine what the 40 will be used for, or are you 

going to be able to determine what the 20 is going to be used 

for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That $40 million will be managed 

by a joint committee.  So there will be joint decisions as to 

where it gets spent. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- What kind of projects are eligible for 



3188 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That includes any water-based 

economic development project.  So it, I think, is fairly 

far-ranging.  I believe it would include even things like 

processing plants for irrigated products and so on. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I know that there's one hog operation that uses 

effluent to irrigate and also has regular irrigation.  Is that also a 

project . . . or projects like that -- are they able to access that 

money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, they definitely would be 

eligible for that money. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I think that . . . wasn't it the town of Elbow 

had some proposals to deal with a lagoon and allow that 

effluent to be used in an irrigation project?  Are those eligible, 

and what's happening with that project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, that type of agreement would 

be eligible.  And we're still talking with the Elbow people.  

There's some fairly serious concerns about the suitability of the 

soil that they were looking at for irrigation purposes.  So it may 

not in the end proceed.  But it certainly would be eligible. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I know that there are people interested in 

potatoes in the Riverhurst-Lucky Lake area.  I know that 

because I have constituents of mine who are involved with 

those people from the United States. 

 

Are you progressing in a reasonable fashion in that area?  Is 

there room for the economic development side, not on the 

irrigation part but on the economic potential to build a potato 

sorting plant?  And I know it's for seed potatoes too.  Would 

you be able to give us a little detail on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's correct.  We have had some 

interest from potato farm growers from Idaho in setting up a 

sorting plant here.  We're presently doing a market study which 

looks promising and I think it certainly is . . . has potential. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would that kind of an operation be able to 

utilize some of this funding for economic development?  And 

I'm not here to pick on whether they're Canadian or whatever, 

and I don't want to make too big a point of that.  But we need 

economic development and I'd like to just generally encourage 

you in that direction. 

 

There was also some discussion from Ontario in a company 

called KenAgra, I believe, at one time.  And they were very 

interested in also setting up some alfalfa plants in that area.  

Have you had any discussion with them recently, and if so, 

would you be able to tell us about it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We don't have any proposals from 

that particular company but there are a couple of very good 

proposals for alfalfa plants in the area, and I think particularly 

in the area of alfalfa cubes, which seems to be a growing 

market there and would be high quality from that area.  And 

there certainly are a couple of proposals that look promising. 

Mr. Martens: -- I guess one of the things that is going to be a 

significant problem in that area is land control and land 

development.  Have you been in discussion with the Farm 

Ownership Board on how to deal with that when that problem 

arises? 

 

For example, if there's money prepared to be invested from 

outside, they would have to have approval through the Farm 

Ownership Board.  And I know that it was a concern earlier to 

these people because they wanted to have ownership of some 

of that land, and I know that they did have some . . . There are 

restrictions on people outside of Saskatchewan owning that 

land, and I was wondering if you had done any investigating on 

that part. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We have been in discussion with 

the Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Board and the Department 

of Justice and the Department of Agriculture in looking at 

alternative ways to come to solutions to that particular 

problem. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- One of the things that I think you maybe need 

to do, Mr. Minister, is lift some of the restrictions in the Farm 

Ownership Board so that some of this economic development 

can take place more than just on a plan-by-plan basis.  So I 

would encourage you to do that. 

 

The Lloydminster irrigation project, is there room for more 

irrigation development from the effluent that they use there, 

and water that is attached to that?  Is there more available use 

or is it limited to what it's at right now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Basically the officials inform me 

that the system basically is at capacity, that the effluent there 

would not support any further development. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Going on to the Melfort situation and 

development of the water into the city of Melfort, do you have 

any other urban centres that are asking for the same sort of 

development and in the same fashion?  Do you have any other 

cities asking for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Actually we have many, as many 

as 15 or 20 that are potential possibilities that . . . are looking 

into, including large urban centres and some regional water 

supply systems. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I, too, want to encourage the minister in 

this kind of economic development.  I think that that's an 

important part of the process.  Sask Water manages the 

Diefenbaker Lake and I believe other lakes and gets a royalty 

from the water used for electrical development.  How much is 

that volume of dollars and could you give that to me today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, the revenue that we get from 

that varies considerable from year to year depending on the 

amount of water.  I think this year we're estimating it at 

something like 6.9 million.  I think last year it was something 

over 9 million that we got. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I just want to make an observation about, or 

maybe ask a question about, discussions that you're having 

with Saskatoon on its sewage proposal.  If there is 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3189 

one, what they're doing with it. 

 

I think that there is excellent opportunity there for some 

effluent irrigation in some parts.  I think the city needs to have 

that kind of an encouragement in order to develop and I'm not 

just sure which is the best way to move that effluent.  But it 

definitely would have some value in some of the sandy areas 

around the city and I think it's . . . I don't know whether you've 

had any discussions.  We'll start the question that way.  Have 

you had them and what are you doing about them? 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I'd like leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(2000) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It's a pleasure for 

me tonight to introduce to the Assembly some members of my 

family.  It's been a long session and one sort of has to bring the 

mountain to Mohammed once in a while. 

 

Tonight I have in the gallery my two sons plus my nephew, and 

they're up with the guide.  The youngest one is Eric and the 

next one is Andrew, and my nephew, Scott Acton, all from 

Moose Jaw and visiting the Assembly tonight.  And I'd just like 

all members to help me welcome them here tonight. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair joins the member for Thunder Creek 

in welcoming the distinguished guests this evening. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The 

potential is there, I think, for irrigation with effluent at 

Saskatoon.  We have done some soil investigation there and we 

are of course dealing with the city, and they may or may not 

want us to be involved in a project.  But they have a water 

treatment problem there and one possible solution is effluent 

irrigation, and we have done some soil investigation and I 

guess that's about as far as it's gotten. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I live along 

a water route that has been used for moving effluent from 

urban centres and I really . . . I don't appreciate those kinds of 

things happening, whether they're a dike or a ditch or whether 

it's a natural water flow.  And last year the city of Swift 

Current, because of the tremendous amount of rain, had to 

dump some and there was a very, very significant upheaval 

because of that. 

I know that this is one of the environmental things that I really 

have a strong view on and one of the things that should be 

addressed as we go along.  And sometimes it's been suggested 

that an environmental charge be placed on some of these urban 

centres so that they realize the value . . . that they're 

depreciating the water facility that they're using for disposing 

of their effluent. 

 

And I think that this is something that should seriously be 

considered because now there is no cost for what they're doing 

and yet there is a cost in an environmental sense, and I believe 

that it's time to have some of these people realize that the free 

ride is over.  And in order to do that I think we need to have 

some of these urban centres and the people in the urban centres 

realize that this is not a never-ending thing. 

 

The reason I say that is more than just for those people in 

Saskatchewan because I know that the rivers just pass through 

our system here in Saskatchewan, and we've got Edmonton, 

we've got Calgary, we've got Red Deer, Medicine Hat, 

Lethbridge, all of these rivers, it just keeps on trucking through. 

 

And I think we have to have some . . . show an example.  And I 

think that this would be a good way to do it is to begin to place 

an environmental charge on the use of the facility.  Then they 

would begin to recognize that an alternative use was of more 

significance than they had thought in the first place.  And that 

might encourage them to deliver the water to an alternate 

source, their effluent to an alternate source so that they could 

use it for development. 

 

And so I would say that with that I want to encourage you in 

that direction and if there's any assistance that the opposition 

can be in dealing with that we'd like to help. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly that point is well taken.  I 

think we're well past the time when we can continue to pollute 

our waters.  I think Saskatchewan has a good environmental 

record in many areas and I'm sure my colleague, the Minister 

of Environment, is listening carefully to this and hopefully we 

will come up with something. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, my colleague brought up the Rafferty-Alameda 

project and I'd like to ask you some questions concerning the 

Alameda dam.  You mention that you have a settlement almost 

in place with the Tetzlaff brothers that . . . well it's not finalized 

yet.  You may perhaps not want to talk too much about any 

financial arrangements you have made. 

 

But there was one comment that you made in your statement 

about that that I do have some concerns about.  And you 

mentioned that water may not be saved for some period of time 

behind, and that flooding would not take place for some period 

of time behind the dam.  I'm just wondering if you could 

elaborate on that somewhat please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I might go 

back to the original of water management plan at the 



3190 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

whole Souris basin.  The Souris basin, the original plan it calls 

for filling up the Rafferty dam first.  We need water there to 

cool Shand and for recreation and so on.  And we have to let 50 

per cent of the water go each year to the States.  That's the legal 

requirement.  And we can most efficiently do that by letting it 

go from the Alameda. 

 

So if we have normal sort of run-offs over the next decade or 

so, it would be unlikely that we would have high levels in the 

Alameda reservoir in any case.  And so that there may be, if the 

reservoir is not full, then there's land that will be flooded some 

day but would not be flooded immediately and could be 

available for use. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, Mr. Minister.  I don't have a 

problem, if the land isn't flooded through natural causes, 

through natural reasons, for any farmer along the entire basin 

from using that land for either hay land or for pasturing or 

whatever.  But if, Mr. Minister . . . and we have seen over the 

last years dry spells, dry times in the north end of the Souris 

basin on the Rafferty side of it, where very little water is 

actually coming down through the system. 

 

So there was, even at that 50 per cent for U.S. (United States) 

there was very little water there.  And yet on the Moose 

Mountain Creek, which is what the Alameda dam is on, there 

was a vast amount of water through there last year.  Now under 

those circumstances, would water be saved at the Alameda dam 

site?  Even just to keep our 50 per cent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Actually we stored very little water 

in the Alameda this year and we just barely met our 

apportionment to the States so that gives you some idea of the 

volume that normally flows through there.  I guess just to bring 

you a little bit up to date on the situation there, we were 

beginning to expropriate on the Tetzlaffs.  They have a court 

injunction against the expropriation.  And our alternatives are, 

as the lawyers assure us, that we may or may not win the law 

case. 

 

In any circumstance it wouldn't be settled until at least next 

year and we can't move a wheel at Alameda until we can settle, 

so that we can get the land to relocate the railroad. 

 

And our alternative is to . . . If we sign this agreement with the 

Tetzlaffs, it would allow us then to begin construction again 

this fall.  So it may in the long run have some impact on our 

water management plan.  In normal circumstances it likely 

won't.  And you know, those are the alternatives.  And those 

are the alternatives that I want to put to the local people for 

reaction before I get into too much details of what the 

agreement is. 

 

I made a commitment to the local people who were in here last 

week that I would show them the agreement before I go public 

with it, so I don't want to get into any more than what I told 

them about it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay. Well thank you, Madam . . . Mr. 

Minister.  I'm so used to saying Madam Minister because up till 

this point I've been dealing with the women in your caucus, or 

in your cabinet. 

On the issue of the Alameda dam, there are some concerns that 

the local citizens do have with any settlement that you may 

arrive at with the Tetzlaff brothers.  And one of the issues that 

they have a concern with, and a serious concern -- while it 

wouldn't impact on the dam at all -- is whether or not they 

would receive court costs. 

 

The feeling in the area is that the brothers held up the dam for 

their own reason.  And I can't disagree with their particular 

reason for doing so, because it is their land, and in my own 

opinion they have the right to defend it and fight for it as they 

wish.  But there's people in the area do have a concern that they 

may be compensated for their court costs for the whole time 

period that they have held this project up.  And the people in 

the area do have a concern about that, Mr. Minister, and I'd just 

like to point that out to you. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you achieve an agreement with the Tetzlaff 

brothers, would construction start this winter?  And when 

would it be completed in that case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Actually just on the basis of the 

tentative agreement, just sort of an act of good faith, they have 

let us start work on the low level outlet, so actually 

construction has already begun. 

 

And I don't know -- there's a rail relocation to do and building 

up of the dam -- whether it would be possible to complete this 

fall or not. I'm not sure.  But certainly once we get the go-ahead 

to construct, we're going to move ahead as quickly as we can to 

complete the project. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, I can understand the 

Tetzlaff brothers being in court and with the problems there.  

But what's the problem with the railroad circumstances? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The railroad has to be relocated 

because it's running, I think, almost right in the dam.  And we 

need the Tetzlaff land to relocate the railroad, and that's where 

the hold-up has been. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister.  I would 

encourage you to do all you can to get this project completed 

and as quickly as possible.  I found it surprising though when 

you said that there was very little water available after the 

run-off to more than meet the U.S. commitment.  I realize that 

with the rains last summer, they filled the Nickel reservoir at 

Weyburn; they filled the causeway at Mainprize Park and that 

took a significant amount of water. 

 

But on the north end of the Moose Mountain watershed, there 

was 36 inches of rain last year.  There was a reasonable amount 

of snow, probably an average year.  And I'm surprised that that 

would not have amounted to a more significant run-off than 

what you seem to be indicating. 

 

What's the average flows through the Moose Mountain creek 

and what was the flows last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The run-off this year was close to 

normal, but it filled reservoirs that have been depleted 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3191 

in previous years including water that we . . . none went down 

the Souris because we saved it all behind the 606 causeway and 

the Moose Mountain reservoir and so on were filled up. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what was the state of 

the Moose Mountain reservoir July 1 or some time in the 

summer last year?  Do you have any figures on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- It would have been less than half 

full at that time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- And what would the normal 

circumstances be at the comparable time of the year some other 

year? 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Normally it would probably be 

about 85 per cent full. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Again I would 

like to encourage you to complete the dam as quickly as 

possible.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I would like to ask the minister to send those 

lists over that you indicated that you would.  And I want to 

thank your officials, and I want to say this too to your officials 

and to the Water Corporation.  Of all of the places that I 

enjoyed working, Water Corporation was probably the most 

pleasurable experience that I've had in government.  And I 

want to compliment them on their work and the role.  And I 

believe in the things that they're doing and I just want to 

encourage them to press on. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 50 agreed to. 

 

(2015) 

 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 140 

 

Item 1 -- Statutory. 

 

Vote 140 -- Statutory. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 50 

 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 50 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  I certainly 

would like to thank my officials and I concur with the member 

from Morse, it is a very pleasant place indeed to work. 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair would like to thank the opposition 

critics and the hon. minister for your participation, as well as 

the officials, in these estimates. 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- With leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you, and through you to members of the 

Legislative Assembly, some friends that I've recently made as a 

result of a connection I had at the Saskatchewan Horticultural 

Association annual meeting which was held in Saskatoon on 

Monday.  I had the privilege of being able to attend that 

function on behalf of the Premier, and I looked up this evening 

and I recognized in the gallery a couple of the people who had 

been at the function.  We have with us tonight the Grainger 

family, Beth and Walter Grainger, with their children Robert, 

Nicole, and Danita from Lipton.  Beth was judging the floral 

displays at the Horticultural Association, and she is from the 

Fort Qu'Appelle Horticultural Association. 

 

They also have with them a special guest to the Assembly, 

Tobe Reinshagen from Essen, Germany, and he had been in 

Saskatchewan four years ago on a visit with the Grainger 

family and is back to visit them for three weeks this summer.  

So I'd like the members of the Assembly to give the Graingers 

and Tobe a very warm Saskatchewan welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair joins with the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland-University in welcoming the guests to the 

Assembly this evening. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Women's Secretariat 

Vote 41 

 

The Chair: -- I'll ask the hon. minister to introduce her 

officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  To my left is 

Marianne Weston who's the executive co-ordinator for the 

Women's Secretariat, and immediately behind me, Joan 

Pederson, the director of Women's Secretariat. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, first of 

all I would like to thank the Government House Leader for 

coming and suggesting a few questions we could use in the 

House tonight.  None the less, Mr. Chairman, and Madam 

Minister, it's been a while since we've had a chance to really 

discuss some of the women's issues and certainly the Madam 

Minister would be quite familiar with this portfolio or part of 

her portfolio, having been a critic for women's issues a number 

of years ago when the Women's Secretariat was established 

back in 1984. 



3192 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

And I think, just thinking back, the establishment of the 

Women's Secretariat was to just bring a little closer to the 

forefront maybe some of the issues that many women at the 

time felt were not being addressed or, if they were, just felt 

weren't really out in public view.  And I know the Madam 

Minister, as the critic, certainly brought it to the attention of the 

government of the day her feelings about Women's Secretariat. 

 

What I'm wondering right now is what her . . . now that she is 

the minister, minister responsible and in light of the constraints 

and the budget cut-backs that the government has been 

exercising, I'm just wondering if the minister just could lay out 

. . . first of all just give us a bit of an overview of what she 

perceives the role of the Women's Secretariat will be; if indeed 

it will continue to exist as a separate entity or if it will just 

become part of another department; or whether or not it will 

just continue as well to remain largely an internal department. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The Women's Secretariat is a separate, 

independent entity, Mr. Chair. It is not associated with the 

Department of Labour as it was when we formed government.  

We have an independent executive co-ordinator. It's not the 

deputy of Labour any longer who is the executive co-ordinator 

of the Women's Secretariat. 

 

So we have moved it to a more independent agency.  We have 

also increased the funding for the Women's Secretariat by 84 

per cent in this budget, and that is shown in the blue book.  

There have been a number of improvements made in the whole 

area with respect to women's issues, Mr. Chair. 

 

For example, we have had some increased funding for the 

employment equity unit in 1992-93 to assist in ensuring that 

women, persons of native ancestry, and persons with a 

disability are represented more fairly in the public service.  We 

also had, as a result of efforts from the Women's Secretariat 

and the Department of Health, increased funding for breast 

cancer screening in 1992-93. 

 

There have been, I should point out, as a result of efforts made 

by the Women's Secretariat and other female cabinet ministers 

in government, 40 per cent of government appointments to 

boards, agencies, and commissions are women in our 

government. 

 

I think it's important to note as well that in 1992-93 there's been 

increased funding to the maintenance enforcement office which 

is going to be helpful for women in the province.  And on 

November 27, 1991, Saskatchewan joined the 

federal-provincial territorial governments in supporting a 

framework for a national strategy on violence against women. 

 

We've seen some consolidation of employment and training 

programs which will address the specific needs of single 

parents on social assistance, most of whom are women -- some 

95 per cent, I believe, Mr. Chair -- and these are coming as a 

result of the kind of role that the Women's Secretariat plays 

which is to co-ordinate and integrate policies throughout 

government to enhance the 

role of women in society and in government. 

 

We have seen a child tax reduction for low income families 

increase by 25 per cent as of July 1.  We have seen funding for 

child hunger programs increased by 35 per cent, and an 

increase in funding of some 21 per cent in grants to child care 

centres.  This has occurred as a result of the Women's 

Secretariat working in co-operation with other government 

departments and trying to integrate the women's concerns into 

the mainstream of all planning. 

 

And that's the role of the Women's Secretariat, is to integrate 

women's concerns into the mainstream of government 

planning.  And I must say, I think we've met with very 

substantial success in the last nine months. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Madam Minister, for filling us in on a 

number of areas where the Women's Secretariat has certainly 

taken an active role.  Yes I think many women across this 

province -- specifically in that plus-50 age bracket -- I think 

appreciate the fact the breast cancer screening program . . . 

certainly the fact that it's been expanded to other centres. As 

the minister is quite well aware, when it was first introduced, it 

was a pilot project, just to see its acceptability.  As the 

government realized certainly it was something that was very 

worthwhile and then the new government has taken that 

program and expanded it.  I think it is appropriate. 

 

You talked about the maintenance enforcement office.  A 

question I have regarding that, Madam Minister, and in light of 

a couple of concerns that have been raised with me and both 

the concerns that have been raised of late, come from 

individuals who have moved to this province. And actually 

women have left situations where it appears to have been some 

abusive situations, but have moved to the province and are 

having some difficulty regarding the maintenance that was 

agreed to prior to their . . . or in their divorce settlements. 

 

I'm just wondering, Madam Minister, what policy we do have.  

Do we have reciprocal agreements with neighbouring 

provinces?  I know that we have agreements with a number of 

the states in the United States of America regarding 

maintenance enforcement.  Maybe the minister could indicate 

what or suggest . . . make some suggestions as to how these 

women could be accommodated as well in following through 

on the maintenance cost that should be coming towards them. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There are agreements with other 

provinces with respect to the enforcement of maintenance 

orders and there were amendments to this Act in this session to 

streamline and improve garnishment procedures to get money 

to recipients more quickly. 

 

So my suggestion is, in a situation where there are women who 

are looking to enforce maintenance orders, that they should get 

in touch with the enforcement of maintenance orders registry or 

system with the Department of Justice and that the Department 

of Justice will assist them through the process of enforcing 

these orders in other jurisdictions if necessary. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam Minister, 

would you happen to have a phone number or a 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3193 

number that I could pass on for their information or that I could 

contact? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Okay, the Justice contact would be 

787-7872, and the name there is Lisa Ann Wood. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- That's 787-7872? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- That's right, 787-7872. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Madam Minister, having this office 

available and contact, I think one of the problems that has been 

raised, from my understanding, is the two women that have 

contacted me recently have I believe looked at the maintenance 

enforcement but it has still cost them some money trying to get 

a lawyer. 

 

And it appears, from what they're telling me, that the 

maintenance enforcement office really hasn't been able to do 

much.  And I would suggest then, Madam Minister, that maybe 

some more work has to be done regarding maintenance 

enforcement because I think we all agree that we're looking for 

fairness and we're looking for individuals to be treated fairly 

and each and every one of us to carry our responsibility. 

 

So I would ask the minister maybe just . . . whether you want to 

pass it on yourself as a person responsible for women's issues 

to maybe check with the Justice department as well and the 

Justice minister in following up how we can indeed follow 

through regarding the enforcement notices, Madam Minister. 

 

(2030) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I would like to point out to the member 

opposite that as of March 31, 1992 there was more than $35 

million collected by the maintenance enforcement office, and 

in this same period, 3.19 million was deposited to the 

Consolidated Fund for social assistance clients. 

 

I would suggest that if the member opposite has the names of a 

couple of women who have individual situations that haven't 

been dealt with to the satisfaction of those people, that he 

provide those names to the Minister of Justice or to myself as 

acting minister if the Minister of Justice is not here, and we can 

take a look at the situation to see if there's anything further. 

 

Obviously in some situations where the person against whom 

the order is levied cannot be reached, it gets difficult to attach 

the money.  So there isn't a solution in every single case.  But 

there is a substantial amount of money being collected in this 

fashion and it's much more successful than the old method 

which was that the woman was entirely on her own. 

 

So there has been improvements and the government is 

working to improve the program as much as possible.  If there's 

anyone falling between the cracks, give us their names, we'll 

see what we can do. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, I have a question dealing with maintenance orders 

also.  I've run into the problem with a few 

constituents that have a problem tracking their ex-husband to 

get enforcement of those maintenance orders  And I think some 

method needs to be brought into play to make it easier to track 

them either through unemployment insurance or through health 

care cards or something along that line, Madam Minister, 

because what happens, particularly in cases where people are 

involved in construction, the construction industries, they're at 

a job for a short period of time -- one month, two months, three 

months -- and then they move on again and it's very difficult to 

keep those maintenance orders in place at each location. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Yes there is definitely difficulty in 

tracing people because they deliberately attempt to avoid 

having to pay maintenance.  There were amendments, as you 

recall, that were brought forward that attempted to get at that 

problem by providing the director of the maintenance 

enforcement office with the authority to demand information, 

for example, regarding a respondent's income or financial 

status or some information with respect to the respondent. 

 

So the government has brought forward amendments to try and 

get at that problem.  But there is a situation where individuals 

do try to flee the enforcement of maintenance orders, and I'm 

not sure that we can solve all those problems.  I think this is 

something that we have to live with and deal with as best we 

can and try to be one step ahead of them. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I think perhaps if it's 

possible for all of the provinces across Canada and the federal 

government to work together that that would, through perhaps 

the income tax system, would aid in that tracking. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you for your suggestion.  I'll take 

it to the attention of the Minister of Justice. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, I think another program that has 

worked very well over the past number of years is a program 

that is certainly helping young mothers complete their 

education, specifically get their high school education and then 

go on to university. 

 

And I found it interesting driving down College Avenue today 

to see a number of young people just getting ready to cross the 

street going to school, to see a young mother I would say in her 

. . .  possibly in the age of 15 to 16 with a little carriage with a 

baby in it.  And I think it's very appropriate over the past 

number of years that we have encouraged these young mothers 

to complete their education.  And I'm not sure what role the 

Women's Secretariat has had, but would certainly encourage 

them to continue on. 

 

Another area though of concern is the fact . . . you talk about 

21 per cent increase in child care.  One of the major concerns 

that I have run into, Madam Minister, is the fact that there are 

individuals -- women, home-makers -- who have chosen, rather 

than to continue on with the job, to get out of the work-force 

for a while and spend the time in their home raising their 

children. 

 

And certainly . . . a couple for instance that I've sat down 



3194 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

with a couple times, and where the husband happens to be a 

teacher, and then taken a fair bit of . . . I guess some abuse and 

anger on the part of his wife for the fact that she's watching 

individuals, friends of theirs, and taking, walking their children 

down the street to a care home . . . not a care home, pardon me, 

a child care centre while she's staying at home.  And yet they 

don't have any ability to be recognized for the fact that she is 

intentionally taking the time to raise her family. 

 

And I think one thing that could be looked at, and I would 

suggest that you look at, Madam Minister -- and I think it goes 

beyond the provincial realm, certainly enters into the federal 

realm -- of some kind of a tax credit that would recognize 

women and acknowledge the fact of their role they play in 

society when they choose to stay at home and raise their 

families and be a home-maker for a while. 

 

In light of the fact that we seem to always throw money into 

child care programs or day care centres, but we forget about the 

women who choose to stay in the home, and I think it would be 

appropriate that we look at some system to recognize this. 

 

And if it's child care or credit of some kind that would give 

them . . . that gives that home just a little more to work with.  

Because if she was out working and took the child to a day care 

centre, then they would have that extra money, certainly, 

coming into the home. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I thank you very much for your 

suggestion.  I guess what I would like to say is that women . . . 

it's many single mothers, for example, who access child care 

centres.  And it is also families of lower income who absolutely 

must access child care centres because of course they can't 

afford to have baby-sitters come into their home or access more 

expensive services. 

 

I think the woman who stays at home and raises her children is 

definitely performing a very valuable function for the sake of 

her children.  It's wonderful that she is able to stay at home and 

look after her children, unlike many women who do have to go 

to work in order to put food on the table.  And the government, 

of course, must provide for those children who are being taken 

out of their home because their mother has to go to work in 

order to support the family in one form or another.  And what 

we are doing when we fund child care centres is funding the 

children.  I think that is really important to note.  We are 

funding children because we have to provide adequate care for 

children while their mothers are working.  It's absolutely 

crucial. 

 

And I want to point out that it's many single mothers who 

access child care centres, as well as low income families.  And 

I want to say this, that I think when a woman stays in the home 

and looks after her children, she is performing a very, very 

valuable service.  But I also must point out that she is lucky to 

be able to have the opportunity to stay at home because there's 

many women who don't have that opportunity.  And society has 

an obligation to provide for those children. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I thank you, Madam Minister.  But as I've 

indicated before, I trust we would certainly recognize or 

take the time to recognize those individuals who choose to 

fulfil that role until their children are, say, later in their teens 

before they go back into the work-force. 

 

Coming to a few questions regarding the Estimates and some 

of the figures we have here, Madam Minister, I'm just looking 

at footnote no. 1 mentioned on page . . . vote 41.  We see an 

asterisk there that refers us down to the bottom of the page.  

This is on page 88 under Women's Secretariat in the 

Saskatchewan Estimates 1992/93.  And it says: 

 

 Portions of this subvote were included in the votes Family 

Foundation and Social Services in 1991-92.  The 1991-92 

Estimates (Financial Report) have been reallocated on a 

comparative basis to the subvote for 1992-93. 

 

I'm wondering if the minister would indicate how much money 

was taken from the Social Services budget and put into the 

budget for the Women's Secretariat. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you.  I can't give you the specific 

amount on that, but I can provide you with that answer.  There 

were four positions transferred from the Family Foundation 

and Social Services.  It's my understanding, but I will want to 

clarify it for you, that one of the policy analyst positions came 

from Social Services, the other three coming from the Family 

Foundation.  But I will want to get an accurate figure on that 

for you. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what the minister is saying then . . . And the 

next question I had was dealing with the budget for the Family 

Foundation, the minister would be aware that it was 9.6 for the 

'91-92 year.  And I was just wondering how much was 

allocated to the Women's Secretariat for '92-93.  You 

mentioned there were some funds and allocation of some 

positions to the Women's Secretariat.  How much was 

allocated? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- When the four PYs (person-year) were 

transferred from the Family Foundation, it came to 301,500 

that was transferred in.  And I am advised by my officials that 

what occurred is there was a position transferred from Social 

Services to Family Foundation, and then four PYs were 

transferred over from the Family Foundation to the Women's 

Secretariat.  And that amount is in total 301,500. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Also, Madam Minister, under subvote 2 we see a 

small 2 which says:  "A portion of this subvote . . . " and going 

down to the bottom of the page it indicates: 

 

 A portion of this subvote includes expenditures related to 

accommodation costs. 

 

I'm wondering what you mean by accommodation costs and 

how these accommodation costs reflect or accommodation 

charges reflect the change in the government's accounting 

policy for the '92-93 year. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The accommodation cost is the amount 

that's paid to SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation) for rent.  And in 1991-92 it was a total of 52,000: 

for approved capital expenditures, zero; photo services, records 

management and mail 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3195 

services -- accommodation, 35 -- 17,000 for mail services; for a 

total of 52. 

 

With the increase in PYs over to the Women's Secretariat that 

became: for accommodation, 38,489; and for mail services, 

17,000 -- same as before but an increase in accommodation.  

So it's as a result, the increase in accommodation which is the 

SPMC payment, is as a result of a transfer of four PYs from 

Family Foundation to Women's Secretariat. 

 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam Minister, 

according to the '91-92 Estimates presented by the previous 

government, the '91-92 budget allocation for Women's 

Secretariat was 487,400.  However, we looked at the Estimates 

today and according to the '92-93 Estimates, that figure has 

changed to 728,900, '91-92 in this book this year. 

 

I'm wondering if the minister can explain why these two 

numbers are different and how this accounting adjustment was 

made and why it was made. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- They had to reflect the change from the 

Family Foundation.  In other words, the money with respect to 

the four PYs in Family Foundation were automatically put into 

the Women's Secretariat for '91-92 because it had to be shown 

somewhere in the blue book because the Family Foundation 

wasn't going to be shown in the blue book with those four PYs. 

 

So the bottom line was adjusted for '91-92, is what occurred, 

and that's why you see the increase over what showed in the 

blue book for that period originally. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying, that what the blue book 

showed in '91-92, the Estimates, 487,400, you would add the 

301,500 -- 301,500.  It would be something like $60,000 more.  

Where's that additional $60,000?  If you were to add those two 

figures, that'd be 60,000 higher than the 728, if I gather it right. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- What we'll have to do is provide you with 

a more detailed breakdown.  When the monies were transferred 

from the Family Foundation, there was an adjustment on the 

transfer in of the money that we received, which accounts for 

what you're referring to.  In other words, although we were 

receiving the four PYs, we didn't receive the full amount for 

that because there was a participation in the budget reduction 

that was taking place across government. 

 

Now what we will have to do for you, and I don't have the 

exact figures on that, is I can send over a more detailed analysis 

of exactly how that worked out. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam Minister, 

also we see according to the '91-92 Estimates published back in 

. . . I believe March of last year, the Women's Secretariat was 

allocated seven person-years and 314,040 for personal services.  

But this year's Estimates we find an allocation of 11 

person-years, and that's probably picking up the four we talked 

about, and 537,200 for personal services.  Now I'm not sure if 

that 

would make up that funding allocation.  There again, you may 

have to probably . . . the number you'll be sending over will 

probably indicate the difference there because I don't think it's 

going to quite add up, that 301,500. 

 

I'm also wondering if this is additional person-years 

representing new hirings or just the shift of personnel.  I would 

take it that it indicates a shift of personnel from the Family 

Foundation to Women's Secretariat. 

 

Another question, while I'm on my feet, and I'll ask -- you can 

take note of and maybe answer at the same time.  I'm 

wondering if you'd provide the House with the names and 

qualifications for the management level employees of the 

Women's Secretariat as well as the names and qualifications of 

any persons hired or contracted by Women's Secretariat since 

November 1, '91. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- You're quite right that there was a shift of 

personnel over from the Family Foundation.  And yes, we will 

undertake to forward over to you the names and qualifications 

of the staff of the Women's Secretariat at the management 

level. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- A couple more questions, Madam Minister, 

before we vote on the Women's Secretariat.  And I'll give them 

both to you, Madam Minister, and then you can respond if you 

don't have the information right handy. 

 

Would the minister indicate whether any funding has been 

approved by Women's Secretariat to be paid to groups and 

organizations outside government since November 1, '91.  And 

if so, would the minister provide a list of those organizations, 

the projects and funding that was approved in each case, and 

the criteria for awarding such funding. 

 

And secondly, I'm asking the minister to provide a list of all 

publications produced by Women's Secretariat since November 

1, '91, if any have been produced. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The Women's Secretariat does not have a 

granting capacity, so there has been no money paid out under 

grants at all.  With respect to the publication, there was an 

annual report that was put out and no other publications. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Item 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 41 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Women's Secretariat 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 41 

 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 41 agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister like to thank her officials? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Yes, I would 



3196 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

like to thank the opposition for their co-operation, and also 

Marianne Weston and Joan Pederson, my officials, for the help 

they gave us tonight. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to also thank the 

minister and her officials, and thank them for responding to our 

questions.  We look forward to receiving any replies.  And I'm 

not sure if co-operation is most conducive, but it certainly does 

help at times. 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Finance 

Vote 18 

 

The Chair: -- First of all I will ask the Hon. Minister of 

Finance to introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would 

be pleased to introduce the officials who are here to assist us.  

Mr. John Wright to my . . . seated beside me here, the deputy 

minister of Finance; Mr. Bill Jones, the associate deputy 

minister of Finance in charge of treasury and debt management 

division, behind Mr. Wright; Gerry Kraus, Provincial 

Comptroller, to my far right; Len Rog, assistant deputy 

minister, revenue, pensions, and administration, on my left; 

Bill Van Sickle, executive director of administration who is 

behind me.  And at the back there are Brian Smith who is the 

executive director of the Public Employees Benefit Agency and 

Joanne Brockman who is the manager of fiscal policy, 

economic and fiscal policy branch, budget analysis division. 

 

The Chair: -- Thank you to the minister for introducing the 

officials. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister I have a 

question relating to fuel taxation.  And I was going to suggest 

as I stood up here that the amount of times your deputy 

minister has been in here, you might become a well-known 

fixture in this Assembly 

 

But the question that arises, Mr. Minister, and I would like to 

bring to your attention, I'd like your department to take a 

serious look at, is the fact that there are numbers, especially 

small farmers, smaller operators, say in that three-quarter to a 

section or five quarters of land, some who still have older 

combines and most of their trucks are run on unleaded fuel, 

gasoline rather than diesel.  And a concern that was raised 

yesterday, recently, and it was brought to my attention -- I 

believe one constituent of mine even contacted your office -- is 

the fact that fuel, farm fuel bought in bulk, a few years back at 

least, you used to get maybe a discount of 1 or 2 cents a litre or 

a gallon on that fuel over the pumps because of the fact that 

you took such a quantity and volume at a time. 
 

And what has happened, Mr. Minister, is that now with all the 

taxes, producers are paying more money at the farm gate rather 

than being able to purchase it at the pumps.  And for 

individuals with your new taxation policy and your refund 

policy, a number of these individuals are going to find that 

because of the fact that they're using gasoline-related 

machinery rather than diesel-related machinery, they're going 

to find that the limitations 

regarding refunds, they'll use it up before they hardly get 

through harvest which creates more of a problem for these 

individuals. 

 

And I'm wondering if the department can take a look at this in 

light of the fact that it appears the price of bulk fuels is higher 

than at the pumps.  And certainly it's not easy to run to the 

pumps all the time to fill up your harvesting equipment. 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I thank you.  The member raises a 

very important point that we have actually been giving some 

considerable thought to.  This is out of the initial 

implementation of this system.  We have the $900 cap.  It's 

based on a 1,000-acre operation, so some will use more and 

some will use less.  But indeed we are quite prepared to, over 

time as we get experienced with this thing, review whether we 

can find a better system to do it; review the levels, because 

there is no desire to, I guess for lack of a better word, punish 

someone who may be operating yet even today on major . . . 

mainly with gasoline as opposed to diesel.  And that is under 

review and as we get some experience whether we can find 

some way to make some adjustments, we certainly . . . I would 

be most happy to do that. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, I thank you, Mr. Minister.  I would just like 

to ask the minister as well, if as the department is reviewing 

this and if the department does find a way of making some 

changes, especially in light of the . . . a lot of conditions that 

many farmers are facing this fall, I'm wondering if the 

department would certainly as well take a look at making . . . 

maybe making them retroactive say to September 1 or 

whatever to accommodate some of the individuals who may be 

caught with the problem they're facing, especially if some 

changes are made.  And as I indicated, Mr. Minister, I think 

even department officials will recognize the fact that a little bit 

of arithmetic tells you that if you fuel up at the pumps, you can 

certainly apply for the GST (goods and services tax) refund, 

and it still saves you some money there, and the limitation that 

we have there. 

 

So I would appreciate the fact that you're looking into it and if 

anything can be done to accommodate . . . I don't know how 

many, if it will be a lot of operators, but it's certainly the 

smaller operator that gets hit the hardest. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well that's one of the important 

points, the latter point, the member from Moosomin mentions 

is how many operators.  And when we get experience with this, 

we'll get a better reading as to the numbers that are involved.  

And I'm really . . . we're really quite open to when we might be 

able to do it if we'd be able to do it, depending on the 

information that we gather with the experience that we're going 

to get. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I want to ask -- Mr. 

Chairman, Mr. Minister -- I want to ask you about the debt load 

that was assumed in the current . . . as of March 31.  And it 

deals with the $715 million, I believe it is . . . can't . . . I think 

it's page 44 or 46 . . . 44 and 45, two things there.  The 184 

million that the Sask Water Corporation wrote off.  In our 

discussions with the auditor in Crown 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3197 

Corporations, he was not sure why you would take and write 

off the debt and then also write off the assets.  I'm not sure why 

you would.  Would you be able to give us an explanation of 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I recall the member from Morse 

raised that the last time we were here.  And I've had my 

officials check with the Provincial Auditor and he explains to 

us that he is not questioning the write-down of the 184 million; 

that is not at question.  He had some concern about the asset 

write-down.  And what's happening is that he is in 

conversation, or in discussions with the private auditors who 

have done the audit, to see how they can resolve this. 

 

I'm told by my deputy that Finance is acting as an intermediary 

in this case so that we can get the whole thing cleared up.  But 

I'm pleased to be able to report to the member that since he 

raised it, we have taken some action.  We have got the 

Provincial Auditor and the private sector auditor looking into 

this jointly to see how best to resolve the disagreement that 

seems to be there. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well the decision I guess is the reason that I'm 

asking you about . . . I'm not asking you whether the auditor 

thinks that it's the right or wrong thing to do; I'm asking you 

why you did it. 

 

Sask Water or you and Department of Finance made the 

decision to take the 184 million and say that goes into the 

Consolidated Fund as a part of debt.  I don't have a problem 

with that.  But to say that their assets in irrigation and in 

Rafferty and Alameda are zero in value, I guess that's where we 

have a concern and we need to know why you did that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It's not a matter of something that 

the government did or the Department of Finance did.  This is 

simply a dispute or an issue that is between the two auditors -- 

the Provincial Auditor and what the auditor who audits the 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation indicated in the report that 

they provided and in the financial statements therein. 

 

And as I've indicated to the member opposite, that is a matter 

that is being discussed between the two auditors, and the 

Department of Finance is assisting as an intermediary.  And we 

will bring this thing to a conclusion as soon as the two have 

had an opportunity to work it out. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Does the minister have any other precedent 

where a capital project was written to . . . the asset value was 

written to zero? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm told that in the best 

understanding that we have here, that there is no other such 

precedent, that there is obviously a question here -- and it's a 

valid question -- and therefore that's why we have intervened or 

have offered to assist as best we can between the Provincial 

Auditor and the auditor who does the audit for the Sask Water 

Corporation to resolve the question and bring an answer. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's been at least a month 

since I raised it the first time, and maybe even more than that.  

It's significant enough that I believe that if 

you're going to write off the debt and then write off the assets, 

the assets and the debt write-off shouldn't be 184 million.  It 

should be a combination of the two.  If you're going to write off 

the debt and the assets, that's the way I would see it.  And I 

want to know why you did it, why it doesn't show in here if 

that's what you did.  And I think it's bizarre, to say the least. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Now if you look at the information 

that Finance provides, there is no write down of assets shown 

here because there has been no writing down of the assets here.  

What is at issue here is a recommendation of the auditor of the 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation.  Now Finance is doing what 

it is the responsibility of Finance to do because it was raised by 

the member opposite and has been raised by the Provincial 

Auditor who is not necessarily at this point in time disagreeing; 

he is simply questioning it to get a clarification. 

 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation was here an hour and a half 

ago, or this evening, and I wish I had thought of reminding the 

member to ask the question then because it's really something 

that they would have to answer.  But more importantly at this 

point in thing, the auditor who does the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation has made that recommendation.  Provincial 

Auditor is wanting to question why that recommendation was 

there.  The Department of Finance, at our instructions, has got 

the two auditors discussing this issue in order that they can 

come to a conclusion.  And when that is, it will be reported in 

either the Provincial Auditor or the Water Corporation's next 

report, or both. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The decision to write off the 184 million, who 

made that decision? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It would be the management of the 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation but it would be 

recommended and supported by their auditor. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, who is on the board of directors 

of the Sask Water Corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well the minister in charge of the 

Crop Insurance, the Rural Affairs, the Minister of Agriculture, 

I think is on it, but I don't have on hand all of the members who 

are on that board. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, your executive branch of 

government made a decision through the board of directors of 

Sask Water Corporation to write down the debt in Sask Water.  

Is that not a fact? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Ultimately the board would 

approve the annual report but it would do so on the basis of a 

recommendation from the Water Corporation as recommended 

by the auditor. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, you're not even close to 

answering the question.  Who made the decision?  Can I have 

the minutes of the meeting of the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation that made the decision to write down the $184 

million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We certainly don't have that 



3198 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

information here.  I will endeavour to speak to the minister.  I 

wish the member had thought of asking the minister when he 

was doing his Estimates here and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 

. thank you, Mr. Chairman, I shall speak to the minister.  We're 

not . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well as soon as the member 

from Arm River is finished I will endeavour to answer the 

question, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I can't provide you the minutes, I'm not the minister in charge, 

nor would my staff have the minutes but I will endeavour to get 

them for you when I speak to the minister in charge. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, you are in charge of the . . . 

maybe you're not in charge of the Finance.  Maybe we're 

making a discovery here.  Maybe you're not in charge of the 

Department of Finance. 

 

Department of Finance, you said, was going to control the 

issues of all of the expenditures and all of the debt load and I 

want to know from you who made the decision to take the 184 

million and put it into the Consolidated Fund?  Who made that 

decision? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Clearly, the process is this, the 

process, Mr. Chairman, is this.  The process is that the 

management of the corporation, on the advice of the auditor, 

would make the decision and make a recommendation; the 

members of the board would be presented with the report, 

annual report, and the members of the board would approve, 

disapprove or ask the management to take another look at it.  

So ultimately the decision . . . the approval would be by the 

board on the recommendation of the management as 

recommended and supported by their auditor. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I asked this very same 

question in Crown Corporations.  I never got an answer from 

the Sask Water Corporation either.  Somebody's got to give an 

answer for it.  Who made the decision to do it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think I just made . . . I don't know 

how much more clear . . . I don't know how more clear I can 

be.  The management, on the recommendation of their auditor.  

We'll make a recommendation to the board.  They first of all 

make that decision.  The board has to approve that.  And that's 

basically the final authority for the approval of any annual 

report. 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Who made the decision to write off the $875 

million in the CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan)? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to 

answer that question.  In the case of the Crown Investments 

Corporation, it is simply a transfer of the debt from the Crown 

Management Board to the Consolidated Fund.  That is a 

decision that would have been made with the Department of 

Finance and the Crown Management Board.  And it was done 

on the basis of recommendations that were provided first of all 

by the Gass Commission, and then a study done by Ernst & 

Young, who were engaged to take a look at the financial 

situation of the 

Crown Management Board.  And on the basis of their 

recommendation, that transfer of the debt was then carried out. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the decision was made on 

$184 million by Sask Water board.  Your executive branch of 

government is a part . . . all of them are members of Executive 

Council.  And they made the decision to do it.  It was a cabinet 

decision to make that $184 million available as a debt in the 

Consolidated Fund.  Is that how that happened? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Maybe I can help here by 

answering it this way.  We're really talking about two separate 

things here.  In the case of the transfer of the debt, because this 

is money that is no longer able to be paid because either the 

assets . . . or there is no revenue-generating capacity that is 

sufficiently in either of these agencies, whether it's the CIC or 

the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, to generate the revenue 

to pay that debt, so that debt is transferred to the Consolidated 

Fund. 

 

Now when it comes to the writing off of the asset in the various 

Crown corporations, that is something that is done on their 

books, and it's a decision that that particular, whichever one it 

might be, Crown corporation does in their books.  And they 

would do it on the advice of the auditor, whoever their auditor 

might be, because obviously that's the way it has to be done.  

The board of each of them would then approve this at a certain 

board meeting when the annual report is provided. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I think you've said it about three 

times, that you're blaming the auditors of Sask Water 

Corporation, that they are the ones that made the decision to 

advise the board of directors to do that.  That's what you've said 

at least three times already. 

 

I want to point out that you are the board of the directors of 

Sask Water Corporation.  It isn't even an independent body that 

is a group of individuals outside of executive branch of 

government.  It's you who made the decision on the 184 million 

and the write-off, the assets of 197 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Clearly it is a decision of the 

Minister of Finance, the Treasury Board, to write off the debt.  

That decision was made because, on all the recommendations 

that came to us, there were not either assets or 

revenue-generating capacity to pay that debt. 

 

The decision to write off any assets was not something that we 

would be doing; it's each individual Crown corporation who 

would be making that consideration independent of this other 

transaction which is transferring the debt which they cannot 

service. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The debt that they couldn't service was $184 

million.  The value of the assets moving that to zero was a 

decision by executive branch of government, because the 

executive branch of government sits as the board of directors 

on Sask Water Corporation. 

 

So I'm saying to you, sir, that the executive branch of 

government made the decision to write off the $197 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3199 

million, and that's what the auditor has a problem . . . he doesn't 

have a problem with the decision of the auditor who did the 

independent analysis of the books for Sask Water Corporation.  

He has a problem with you making that decision to write off 

the debt on $197 million in Sask Water.  That's where the 

problem is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well I don't know how much more 

helpful I can be.  I have indicated to the member opposite that 

there is an attempt being made in deliberations between the 

Provincial Auditor and the auditor of the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation to get a clarification of this question that the 

Provincial Auditor has asked of the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation. 

 

I've instructed the Department of Finance to assist in that.  

They have begun the process.  When it is worked through we'll 

be able to provide the answer because the two auditors will 

have to straighten that one out.  And when they do and we have 

an answer, we'll be able to report it, the board will have to 

report it in their annual report because they'll have to make a 

correction.  And obviously it's a correction that'll have to be 

made in the Public Accounts Committee and the Crown 

Corporations. 

 

But we have to leave them now to work it out.  The issue has 

been raised and there is a question, and they're going to have to 

come to some kind of a conclusion. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I still maintain that 

because the board of directors are members of the executive 

branch of government, that you are responsible for that 

decision.  You made that decision.  The members of the 

executive branch of government who sit on that board made the 

decision to write off the assets.  The auditor didn't do it.  He 

just made a note of it. 

 

And so the dispute isn't between the auditors.  The dispute is 

between the auditors and the function of the board of directors.  

And that's the point I want to make. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think maybe we're getting some 

place.  Yes, it will be ultimately a decision of the board, as I 

have said before, of the Saskatchewan Water Corporation.  It 

would not be a decision of the Department of Finance to write 

off the assets.  All the Department of Finance is doing, in light 

of the earlier discussion which we had, is trying to assist in 

getting the thing resolved. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, the executive branch of 

government have four, I believe four members, on the board of 

directors of Sask Water Corporation.  Those four members 

made a decision to have Sask Water write off the assets of 

$197 million.  I want to know why. 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, and I guess the 

Provincial Auditor is asking that question too.  And I can't 

speak for the board; neither can the Department of Finance 

speak for the board.  But because the Provincial Auditor has 

raised it, there is an attempt being made -- and it's more than an 

attempt, it'll come to a conclusion -- to get it clarified.  And I 

don't know what more I can do to assist the member in that 

because I am not the minister of the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation. 

But other than trying to resolve the question that is before us, 

which is something that is happening, I don't think I can be of 

further assistance on the issue. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well the decision to do the 184 million 

write-off and the $875 million in CIC and the 715 in Sask 

Property Management, who made those decisions? 

 

Who made the decision to write off the 875 million?  Who 

made the decision to write off 184 million?  Who made the 

decision to write off the 715 Sask Property Management 

Corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- There is not a write-off.  All that's 

happened here is that there has been a transfer of the debt, from 

the Crown . . . for example, from the Crown Management 

Board to the Consolidated Fund.  Because there's no ability for 

the Crown Management Board to pay off that debt and 

therefore it has to be paid off through the Consolidated Fund.  

And it's simply a transfer of the debt.  It's not written off. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Who made the decision? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The executive government will 

have made that decision on the recommendation of the Crown 

Management Board and the Treasury Board in putting together 

the final tables and the numbers in the budget. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Right.  Then the same answer applies, very 

likely, to the $197 million and I'm asking you why. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Okay, now once again we're talking 

about two different things.  On the one hand we're talking 

about the transfer of the debt which is right before us on page 

45 in the budget speech.  That's the transfer of the debt.  That'll 

be a decision of the executive branch of government in the 

finalization of the budget, on the recommendation of the 

Department of Finance and the Crown Management Board. 

 

The writing off of the assets is something that will be done by 

the corporation and not the Department of Finance, involving 

their auditor, involving their accountants, and recommending to 

the board of whatever Crown corporations it might be -- in this 

case it could be the Saskatchewan Water Corporation or the 

Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan or any one of 

the others.  But they're two different things we're talking about.  

They're not related. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Yes, they are sort of related.  They're related 

in the fact, Mr. Minister, they're related in the fact that the 

executive branch of government sits on the board of directors 

of Sask Water Corporation to make the decisions.  That's how 

they're related. 

 

The same cabinet ministers that sit on the board of directors sit 

on the cabinet . . . around the cabinet table.  That decision was 

made by someone in cabinet of $197 million.  And you said 

earlier it was different than it's normally been done.  Your 

officials can't recall that it's been done before. 

 

And I need to know why you did it.  That's what I would 



3200 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

like to know. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm sorry, but there . . . once again, 

I think the member does not understand.  The decision or the 

approval of the annual report of the Saskatchewan Crown . . . 

of the Saskatchewan Water Corporation wouldn't go to cabinet.  

It's not a cabinet decision on the annual report or the 

write-down of any assets.  That would be a decision of that 

particular board and not a decision of the cabinet.  True, there 

are some ministers who are on the board of the Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation.  There are ministers who are on the board 

of the Crown Management Board but it's not the cabinet as 

such.  It's a group of ministers who are appointed to look after a 

particular corporation.  So it would not be a decision of the 

cabinet; it would not come to the cabinet table. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you got 11 members of 

cabinet. You have four of them made the decision to write off 

$197 million.  Now when you make that decision, you mean to 

say that these four people decided on their own one day in 

Moose Jaw that they were going to write off $197 million and 

they never told you?  Is that what you're telling me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Let me try to be helpful some more.  

None of the officials that are here would have been in involved 

in any writing down of the assets.  Nor would the Minister of 

Finance.  Because it is not something that would be decided or 

involved with Finance officials.  The officials that would have 

dealt with that and recommended to their board would have 

been the officials of the Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 

 

And so you would have, when we're talking about the writing 

down of assets, not the cabinet, not the Department of Finance, 

but the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, who were here 

earlier tonight.  And had the member asked the questions then, 

I'm sure he would have been able to find the answers.  And I 

fail to understand why the member did not avail himself of the 

opportunity to ask the Water Corporation when they were here 

so that they could provide him with the answers. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, on 

page 47 of your 1992-93 Estimates on the bottom of the page 

in the footnotes you've got: 

 

 Interest on the Public Debt for 1992-93 includes: interest on 

$875.0 million of debt transferred from Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Would you briefly describe what that debt was? 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think I understand the member's 

question.  It is all of the items to which the debt that has been 

transferred is associated with.  Is that what you're looking for? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Interest on the 875 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, you want to know what 

the 875 million came from.  Okay, the 875 million came from . 

. . 361 million Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, which is 

non-recoverable loss because of the privatization transaction; 

dividends -- Crown Management borrowed funds to pay 

dividends when it had not enough revenues to pay dividends 

which was a decision that was made in the '80s -- $312 million; 

SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation),non-recoverable loss from operations $36 million; 

Sask Forest Products non-recoverable loss on operations $24 

million; Saskatchewan Diversification Corporation 

non-recoverable loss on operations $14 million; Agdevco 

(Agricultural Development Corporation of Saskatchewan), 

once again same thing, non-recoverable loss on operations 6 

million; GigaText, that project, non-recoverable loss on 

operations $4 million.  All of that adds up to $875 million for 

which there is no capacity for repayment, and therefore it's a 

transfer of that debt from the Crown Management Board to the 

Consolidated Fund. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well two questions, Mr. Minister.  In the event 

that there were some capacity for repayment, what difference 

would that make to that figure?  And secondly you must have 

made some assumptions with respect to each one of these that 

it was permanently in a situation where it would be unable to 

recover any of the debt. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you for the question.  It's a 

good question.  If there had been the capacity for repayment of 

any or all of that debt, it would not have been had to be 

transferred to the Consolidated Fund.  It would have remained 

in the Crown Management Board.  It would have been paid 

back to the Crown Management Board by whatever incomes or 

revenues may have been generated because of wherever that 

debt was put into place. 

 

How was the decision made on the identification of this debt 

which is unpayable?  It was done by Ernst & Young in the 

report that was commissioned, report April 1992, I know the 

members have got it opposite.  It's been a public report in 

which Ernst & Young has taken a look at the financial situation 

of the Crown Management Board and recommended that these 

items are debt that is not recoverable and therefore recommend 

it be transferred as we have done. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- To your knowledge are Ernst & Young 

members of the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm quite sure they are.  I don't 

think there's any doubt about that. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, then in the handbook, in the 

manual for the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants it 

gives three criteria and areas of range with respect to 

write-downs, and then it goes on to talk about the accounting 

treatment. And on page 3290.07 and 3290.08 it says: 

 

 This Section identifies three areas of this range by a general 

description as follows: 

 

 (a) likely . . . 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3201 

 (b) unlikely . . . 

 

 (c) not determinable . . . 

 

And it goes on to say: 

 

 . . . The treatment of contingent losses in financial statements 

depends upon the likelihood that a future event will confirm 

that an asset had been impaired or liability incurred as at the 

financial statement date. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, in the event that these assets that you are 

talking about were in a situation where there was not 

permanent impairment, what would the difference be with 

respect to how you would treat them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all let me 

respond to the question about permanent impairment or lack of 

permanent impairment.  In the opinion of Ernst & Young, there 

was permanent impairment in these particular situations.  If 

there was not, there would not be a write-down of debt in any 

kind of a circumstance, if there was some possibilities of this 

being repaid and it was reasonable. But in the opinion of Ernst 

& Young that was not the case.  And so what has happened 

here . . . The debt doesn't disappear.  I mean one should not . . . 

and I don't want to make the wrong statement to members of 

the House.  This debt has not disappeared. 

 

This debt has simply been transferred from the Crown 

Management Board because there's no ability in the Crown 

Management Board, with the projects involved, for that debt to 

be paid, and it's simply been transferred to the Consolidated 

Fund, because in the end the Consolidated Fund is responsible. 

 

Now this year in the budget, I believe we are providing in the 

budget some $39 million for the Crown Management Board 

because of a shortfall that will be there from their revenue and 

their expenditures. 

 

So in the end the Consolidated Fund ultimately is responsible, 

because there is no capacity here for this debt to be repaid to 

the Crown Management Board, but has to be repaid by the 

Consolidated Fund. 

 

We did what all of the accountants said we should do, and we 

transferred it to where it belongs, and that's the Consolidated 

Fund. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, we have letters on file, and I'm 

sure that you might, where accountants have said that you 

made this decision; that there was not permanent impairment in 

terms of the assets in the Crown corporations, like Potash and 

like Cameco, and that in fact you made the decision to say that 

this was a permanent impairment. And you've made that 

decision.  All my colleagues are trying to do here tonight is say 

that was an executive decision by you and your cabinet 

colleagues so you could do what is known as take advantage of 

the big-bath theory. 

 

Could the minister describe what, if any . . . He might not want 

to but I could afterwards.  But are there any reasons 

why you might want to transfer this debt the way you did, in a 

permanent way, to leaving it where it was, saying that there 

was some probability that it might recover or the assets might 

improve, or share values might go up?  Can you think of any 

reason why you might have handled it the way you did as 

opposed to leaving it where it was, if in fact there was at least 

reasonable professional advice saying perhaps share values 

could go up in potash; share values could go up in uranium; 

and all of a sudden you might not have a permanent 

impairment; you have in fact an asset that is growing in value?  

Can you think of any reason why you might want to treat it the 

way you've treated it as opposed to leaving it where it was, if in 

fact there was no permanent impairment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Clearly if there wasn't permanent 

impairment, then this would not have had to happen.  But in the 

opinion of Ernst & Young, in the opinion of the Gass 

Commission, there was permanent impairment.  And in their 

recommendation, it was recommended that the transfer be 

made.  And we took that advice.  That's why we engaged 

independent experts to be able to give us that kind of 

information.  And on the basis of the recommendation, the 

judgement was made that that should be done. 

 

If you look at any statement by chartered accountants . . . and 

Ernst & Young, in the annual report of the Crown Investments 

Corporation, state very clearly that that is the position that has 

to be done, and in their judgement that that was the appropriate 

accounting procedure to put into place, so that some things that 

are not necessarily intentionally hidden, but may be hidden 

because they're not accounted for appropriately, are put where 

they belong so that the public or the legislature or whoever 

would care to take a look at it would be able to tell exactly 

where the debt is owed. 

 

There was, in these cases, permanent impairment.  There was 

no capacity in any of these cases for appropriate revenues to 

pay that debt, other than through the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, how would you handle the 

situation in say a couple of years from now, if the value of 

those assets that you permanently wrote off improve?  How 

would you record that?  Say for example the Cameco shares, 

for example, went up by 100 per cent.  How would you record 

that?  Or any . . . the Potash Corporation shares went up to a 

large degree.  And I think you're still shareholders in Cameco 

and shareholders in the Potash Corporation.  What would 

happen if they doubled in value?  How would you record that 

once you've written them off as of no value? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I just took a little 

while just to make sure that it was clear what I thought was the 

answer here.  There is no Cameco share component in any of 

this transfer of the debt.  I gave the member from Estevan a 

complete breakdown of all of the items for which debt has been 

transferred and it doesn't involve the Cameco shares. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Are you saying, then, that you have 

permanently written off the potash shares and you have not 

written off the Cameco shares anywhere in this 



3202 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

budget?  I'm under the impression, if I recall, you wrote off the 

Cameco shares.  You said there was a net loss, and I think it 

was over $100 million.  You're saying here PCS (Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) privatization loss was $361 

million. 

 

What I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, is in the Potash 

Corporation and in the Cameco situation, what happens if the 

share values increase in both of those?  And we can take them 

one at a time or we can get into this.  And then I can go back 

through to the Property Management Corporation on health 

care assets, whether it's buildings or hospitals or others, and I 

can certainly go back into, Mr. Minister, land bank, why you 

chose not to have that as a permanent impairment when the 

value has dropped way over half.  And certainly Cameco and 

potash shares haven't but you've written them off, but you 

didn't write land off as an asset. 

 

So I want to know, Mr. Minister, on the case of potash and the 

case of Cameco and the case of farm land, how you treated 

them and how you would treat them if in fact the price of land 

doubles, the price of Cameco shares doubles, and the price of 

potash shares goes up by 100 per cent. 

 

How would you treat them once you've decided to take this big 

bath as they call it -- it's a bit of a joke in the accounting 

profession -- the big-bath theory so you could have this huge 

debt all of a sudden come along and then you might happen to 

get lucky later.  I want to know how you're going to handle 

that. 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, dealing with 

the transfer of the debt, the 875 million.  First of all, no 

Cameco component is involved here.  Secondly, on the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan, the $361 million is money that's 

gone.  There are no shares related to that.  It was during the 

sale and the privatization where the loss was taken.  There is 

nothing which can back it up -- no asset, no shares of any kind, 

nothing.  It is just simply a loss which is backed up by nothing 

other than the Consolidated Fund, so the transfer of the debt 

has been made. 

 

The $312 million that was borrowed by CMB (Crown 

Management Board of Saskatchewan) so that CMB could pay a 

dividend to the treasury even though it did not have the 

revenue, money that was borrowed to pay a dividend, borrowed 

on nothing . . . I mean there was no asset there, just simply 

borrowed money.  It's a loan to pay a dividend to the treasury 

which the treasury owes.  There is nothing that can evaluate or 

inflate in value because there is nothing there other than the 

loan. 

 

SEDCO is a . . .  for example in SEDCO, straight loss of places 

where money have been lent by SEDCO, but either places have 

gone bankrupt or are no longer able to pay their payments.  

There's just straight losses for which there is no capacity to 

earn any income.  That's the way every one of these transfers of 

debt is defined.  And so therefore there is no opportunity for 

some future increase in assets or increase in value or some 

future revenue.  There just is not that opportunity for all of this 

debt 

transfer that has taken place here. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I have here your speech, budget 

speech night.  And you go through this paper loss to 

accumulate some debt all in one year.  And you make the 

assumption that all of the debts that have accumulated over the 

years have no capacity of ever having any repayment, and I 

read to you the speech that you said: 

 

 In 1991, the Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan (CIC) lost over 600 million, including: 

 

 -- losses due to the sale of Cameco shares of $166 million; 

 

You said that.  Now are you treating that as a permanent 

impairment, a permanent loss, is that what you mean?  And 

regardless of the value of the shares of Cameco that is not . . . 

will ever be recoverable, is that what you're saying?  And the 

same applies to, you're saying . . . and maybe you could 

explain, why you make the decision that the PCS loss was 

associated with the fact that there was a sale.  There was a 

value on the books and then there was a sale.  You said that 

there was a gap.  The book value was something, then the 

market value was something else, and you said that there was a 

gap, and you've obviously made the decision that that could 

never be recovered regardless of the value of your shares in the 

Potash Corporation.  So is that both Cameco and in the Potash 

Corporation, is that the situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all, let me 

deal with each of these two items that the member from 

Estevan raises.  In the case of the Potash Corporation, it is an 

outright loss.  There is no shares.  The shares were sold.  In the 

process of selling those shares, a loss of $361 million was 

taken.  So there's nothing there that can be used to pay back the 

amount of the $361 million. 

 

In the case of Cameco, here's what happened.  The Cameco 

shares had a value.  What happened under the previous 

administration that a decision was made to sell a certain 

number of those shares but at less than what those shares had 

been valued, considerably less, causing a loss of $166 million. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- What happens if the shares go up? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well it doesn't do the Crown 

Management Board or the government any good; we no longer 

own the shares.  They were sold.  Somebody else owns them. 

So therefore a loss was taken on those shares.  Now there are 

some shares that the government still owns, but they are not the 

shares on which the loss was taken.  If they increase in value 

they will provide a different value but they've got nothing to do 

with the loss that was taken in the sale of the initial shares.  

Clearly there was a loss and it has to be recorded as a loss.  

Would the member suggest it should not be recorded as a loss? 

 

But it was recorded as a loss because it was $166 million, a 

loss because the shares were sold for $166 million less than 

their value. 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3203 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, the chartered accountants' 

association says if it's not a permanent impairment then you 

can't record it as a permanent impairment and write it off.  And 

you've done this conveniently to give yourself the big bath. 

 

The chartered accountants will tell you, Mr. Minister, that what 

you've done is unprofessional.  You can't take an accrual 

accounting method, take everything forward that you thought 

might ever be written off, take the big bath and say we have 

800-and-some million dollars in debt, and then on a cash basis 

from then on treat it as if you have a new method. 

 

You can't do that because if in fact the Cameco shares improve 

that's not permanent impairment, and in fact, Mr. Minister, you 

have improved your value.  The same if you had four sections 

of land and you sold one section to help stabilize your whole 

investment, and the other three sections double in market value, 

initially you have taken a hit, but you've improved your whole 

picture so that in fact the entire farm can be profitable. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, do you understand the difference between 

permanent impairment and not.  If you do, would you please 

explain to this House how you will account for the fact that if 

your shares in Cameco go up, or your shares in the Potash 

Corporation increase, double, how will you record it when in 

fact there hasn't been permanent impairment.  How will you 

record it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we're dealing with 

two different issues and I think the member knows that.  First 

of all we're dealing with the $166 million loss on the shares 

that were sold.  Let me put it in terms that everybody can 

understand. 

 

If the member from Estevan had a share worth $100 and he 

decided to sell it at $50, he would have taken a loss of $50.  

Nobody can question that.  If you have a share that's worth $50 

valued, and you decide to sell it at . . . or $100 valued and you 

decided to sell it at 50, you lose 50.  When the Cameco shares 

which were sold were lost, they were sold at value less than 

they were valued and therefore $166 million loss was taken on 

those shares that were sold.  That's the way it's recorded. 

 

Now there are some other shares that remain, and they have a 

book value.  If the value of those shares increases, there will be 

a gain; if the value of those shares decreases, there will be a 

loss.  But they have got nothing to do with the shares that were 

sold and on which a loss was taken. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, clearly you don't understand how 

public companies are operated.  No you don't.  You're not only 

philosophically against it you don't understand it.  Companies 

will offer shares to get some equity into their corporation, and 

they may do it at a rate that's favourable to the market so that in 

fact people will invest in that company and the company does 

extremely well, and the share values go up.  And you have to 

be able to record that. 

 

What we're asking you, Mr. Minister, what happens if the rest 

of the shares increases in value substantially?  How will you 

record that?  How will you record that?  Could you 

just simply tell us how you would record that net profit and that 

huge gain, if that happens. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- According to general accounting 

principles, commonly called GAAP (generally accepted 

accounting principles), you do not write up assets.  You might 

have to write them down.  That's what the people here, the 

comptroller, who should know, advises me.  So you do not 

write up the assets.  If there is a gain of that kind, they remain 

at the same value in the books. 

 

Now I could be corrected, but if you sell them, if you sell the 

assets when they've increased in value, you will make a gain.  

If you sell them when they have gone, you will take a loss.  

And because some Cameco shares were sold when they were 

down from their book value, $166 million loss was taken.  The 

member from Estevan will think -- obviously he must have -- 

that that's a smart move.  I think it was a wrong move. 

 

It lost the people of Saskatchewan $166 million which they 

cannot recover, because those shares that were sold are gone.  

Now the shares remaining, which are separate and removed 

from those shares that are sold, might increase in value; they 

might decrease in value.  But their book valuation would 

remain the same.  And you would only take a loss or a gain if 

you sold them.  Hopefully, this government wouldn't sell them 

when you're going to take a loss because there's no purpose to 

doing that.  I don't understand what the benefit would be.  

Clearly, taking another $166 million loss would not be a 

benefit to anybody. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I want to use your example, just 

for the people who are watching television tonight.  If you had 

10 shares in a company -- 10 shares.  And they're worth $100 a 

piece.  If you sold one of them for $50 because you privatized 

the company . . . started opening it up.  And as a result, the nine 

shares went to $110.  You lost 50, but on the other nine you 

made $40.  You're going to be up $40 net for that company, 

and as an equity injection, and people are interested in 

investing in it.  And you're saying, on your accounting method, 

you just recognized you took the $50 hit, but you won't 

recognize that the rest of the corporation has gone up to the 

tune of $90. 

 

So we know why you did it, Mr. Minister, but we're just getting 

you to admit what you did.  You took these theoretical losses 

which were not permanent and you accumulated them all 

together.  The accountants don't even recommend it because 

they say it's non-permanent.  It's not permanent impairment.  

And then you're telling us now that you can only record the 

losses.  You can't record the gains. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, what a political, financial sham you have 

here.  What you have done is accumulated things that you think 

might be a debt, even though you know in the neighbourhood 

of the Potash Corporation, and in Cameco, you have 160 

million plus 360 million.  You have 500 . . . $600 million that 

you could have improvements in, and you've recorded as a 

permanent loss. 



3204 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

Now guess what's going to happen.  As Cameco does well, the 

Potash Corporation does well, it improves in value.  All of a 

sudden, through your good management, you're going to say, 

oh, we've got a net benefit.  Well imagine, imagine. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I would like to know why you didn't 

include land bank in this list of write-downs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all, this debt 

we're talking about has not been written down.  It's a debt that's 

transferred to the Consolidated Fund.  The same thing has 

happened with the land bank.  The assets and liabilities of the 

land bank were in the Heritage Fund.  The Heritage Fund is 

gone.  The Gass Commission said we should do away with 

these special funds.  And the Heritage Fund in their opinion 

was not serving a useful purpose so those assets and the debt is 

transferred now to the Consolidated Fund in the same way as 

this has been done. 

 

(2200) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  So the debt in 

land bank is no longer having interest paid on it from those 

agencies, the departments that have the asset.  Lands branch 

has the asset or does the Consolidated Fund have the asset? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Let me refer the member to the 

budget because I can direct him to the information which will, I 

think, help understand it. 

 

On page 58 you will find that there is an item in the first 

grouping under assets:  1, 2, 3, 4 -- fifth item down, 

"Investment in Agricultural Land" -- $130 million.  That's the 

asset that's there.  It's recorded as the asset. 

 

Further down, under liabilities and accumulated debt, there is 

an item of debt for the Consolidated Fund, operations -- $8.1 

million . . . or billion dollars.  The $184 million debt is 

recorded there because it's part of the debt. 

 

If you turn to page 61, two pages over, that is all explained in 

the footnote -- the second footnote which is provided there -- 

and I refer the member to the footnote.  And I'll just read it for 

the record.  And it deals more than just the land bank, so I'll go 

through the whole thing: 

 

 Effective March 31, 1992 debt was transferred to the 

Consolidated Fund from CIC ($875.0 million), Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation, ($715.0 million) and 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation ($183.7 million).  Also 

during 1992-93, former Saskatchewan Heritage Fund debt 

(184.4 million) will be assumed by the Consolidated Fund. 

 

And that refers to the land bank debt. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How much land was purchased by land bank? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We don't have that detail here, but I 

can get it for the member, but my people tell me we don't have 

it at hand. 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, it was about 1.2 million acres.  

But let's just for round figures call it a million.  If that land is 

worth $100 an acre, how much . . . that would be $100 million.  

If it's worth $120 an acre, it's worth $120 million.  If it's worth 

$160 an acre, it's worth 160 million.  Right?  So what's the 

value of an asset in relation to this.  It would be worth about 

$250 an acre on a million acres, is the net value to the 

Consolidated Fund at $250 million.  Is that accurate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The land that has not been sold but 

is still in the ownership of the province, has been valued at 

cost, and as you will see on page 59, that evaluation is 

$130.507 million. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, now we're starting to get to the 

point of what we're driving at here.  The total impairment by 

the province of Saskatchewan is $130 million.  That's not what 

the assets are.  The assets are at least double that.  Mr. Minister, 

the assets are at least double that.  They're not $130 an acre; 

they're $260 an acre, which is actually doubled. 

 

Now when you go to sell it, unless you make stupid deals like 

you did over there on the west side of the province selling . . . 

buying these assets for $71 million from a former NDP (New 

Democratic Party) candidate, you're going to have a serious 

problem then.  But you don't have total impairment in this item, 

nor did you have in Cameco, nor did you have in the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan.  And that's the point we want to 

make. 

 

Now you deliberately make a point of doing one and not the 

other. 

 

Now let's take another one here that we haven't been able to 

find, and that is the beef stabilization debt.  How much was 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, once again that's a 

question that was asked in the Estimates of the Department of 

Agriculture and the Minister of Agriculture did answer that 

question and Hansard will show that.  And he tells me that . . . 

what was it, Mr. Minister? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I believe it's about a hundred million 

dollars. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The minister says, in his 

recollection, it's about a hundred million dollars. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, why wasn't that recorded in 

page 4 as a permanent impairment on the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Because, Mr. Chairman, the 

province would have borrowed on their behalf and therefore it 

would have been included in the general provincial debt, the 

whole debt. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Pardon me, Mr. Minister, I'm sorry, I didn't 

get that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Because the province would have 

borrowed that money on behalf of the stabilization 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3205 

plan and therefore it would become part of the overall debt of 

the province, and it's recorded in the overall debt. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Now we have an example of total impairment, 

Mr. Minister.  Absolute, non-recoverable, and that's the point 

we want to make.  What you've decided to take as a write-down 

in assets is not totally unrecoverable by the province. 

 

In your land, for example, and it's the best example that you've 

got, the original cost was roughly $180 million.  You've got 

$130 million of debt left and that $130 million is about on a 

million acres of land.  And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly what 

we're talking about; the value of that asset is still there and it's 

worth twice as much at least. 

 

There is no, there is no total impairment, and you didn't put it 

in and it shouldn't have been in there.  It was recorded 

accurately.  But what we're saying is your Potash Corporation 

wasn't recorded accurately.  Neither were your losses in 

Cameco.  And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly what we're talking 

about.  It's exactly.  The difference between beef stabilization 

and the decision to cut that and use it as a loss, which didn't 

even appear on your total losses, and the land bank, is the 

contrast that we're making with the debt that you carried 

forward in the statements that you made on the $875 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I guess there's two 

ways, maybe there's more than two ways, but there are two 

ways that are obvious in which you can deal with transferring 

of debt or the write-down of debt.  And you can either do it on 

the basis of the advice of the auditors, the best advice you can 

get, the best advice that's available, or you can do it on some 

other reason that is not supported by the auditors.  That's what 

we have auditors for. 

 

All of the transfers of debt that have taken place, or any 

write-downs that may have taken place have been done on the 

basis of the recommendation of the auditors.  And those are the 

only reasons in which in any case that has been done.  Where 

there are no assets to generate revenues to pay a debt, for 

example in the Crown Management Board, it has been 

transferred to the Consolidated Fund because it is an obligation 

of the Consolidated Fund. 

 

And that is done because the auditors have said that that's the 

way it has to be done.  It is done in keeping with general 

accounting principles which we are applying in our 

bookkeeping and our auditing and in all of our accounting in 

the government so that we have one system that is nationally 

recognized and recommended for governments or any other 

corporations to be using. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, that 

is pure unadulterated crap and you know it.  Excuse my. . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order, order.  I think that of all the 

adjectives that we have in the English language, I think that the 

member should use something that's a little bit more suitable 

for this House than the words that he's used.  And I ask the 

member to keep that in mind. 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'll rephrase it -- 

mush.  If the shoe fits, wear it. 

 

On one hand, Mr. Minister, we have this excuse on $100 

million on the beef stabilization fund because that was already 

borrowed money.  Everybody in this province knows that most 

of the money that . . . for the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan was borrowed money.  And yet that money 

didn't show up anywhere.  All of a sudden that was a pure, 

bona fide asset that you can now put a figure on and take a 

write-down on and call it a permanent impairment.  All 

borrowed.  All mush. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, what we have here is pure, unadulterated 

politics.  You have two opinions, two opinions from chartered 

accountants every bit as reputable as Ernst & Young on 

permanent impairment on Cameco.  Matter of fact it's two to 

one -- two to one on Cameco.  There is no permanent 

impairment.  The Institute of Chartered Accountants handbook 

gives the criteria that all of those firms operate under -- all of 

them operate under. 

 

Gass is talking about a different system that isn't in place in this 

province and isn't in place in anywhere in Canada today.  You 

can't hide behind this one, sir.  At the most you've got is 

divergent opinions amongst accounting firms.  Nothing else.  

All of them use the same handbook, so I'm told.  And when I 

went and obtained this particular piece of stuff, that's where it 

came from.  It was from the Institute of Chartered Accountants 

and the criteria that they use. 

 

Now tell me how borrowed money on the Potash Corporation 

can be treated differently than borrowed money on the beef 

stabilization fund.  Tell me how it's treated differently.  What if 

you paid way too much for it? 

 

(2215) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, let me take the 

member from Thunder Creek through this again.  Money was 

borrowed for the purchase of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan.  That's correct.  That money was borrowed to 

buy an asset.  That asset earned income -- very substantial 

income, I might add, during that period of time, paid dividends 

to the treasury, very substantial -- as well as paid the taxes and 

royalties that any other company would have paid. 

 

But money was borrowed to purchase an asset and there was an 

asset there.  When the Potash Corporation was privatized, the 

asset was sold and a loss was taken of $361 million on that 

asset.  There no longer is any asset, but the money that was 

borrowed to buy the asset . . . and therefore there is that loss of 

$361 million remains with us, but there is no longer any asset 

because it was sold in the privatization.  So it's now transferred 

to the Consolidated Fund because there is no Potash 

Corporation asset owned by the government that can handle 

that debt. 

 

In the case of the Cameco shares, we're dealing with two 

things.  We're dealing with the shares which are there still 

because the province still owns some shares in Cameco.  That's 

one.  They're also dealing with a separate item and 



3206 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

that is the shares that were sold at less than their book value 

and therefore a loss has to be recorded.  Now whether the 

shares that are still there may increase in value or decrease in 

value has no impact on the fact that a loss was taken on the 

shares that were sold.  Because they were sold at a loss and it 

has to be recorded as a loss.  If the shares that are still there and 

owned by the province increase in value, they will stay at the 

same book value unless they are sold, according to the general 

accounting principles.  And if they're sold, you would have to 

show the capital gain, and it would be recorded.  But that will 

not take away from the fact that a loss of $166 million was 

taken on the shares that were sold about a year ago.  That loss 

is still there. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you still 

haven't explained to me how you can borrow a whole raft of 

money to buy the Potash Corporation.  And I remember in the 

years after the Potash Corporation was formed, you took 

dividends every year.  You weren't paying off.  You were 

taking the dividend out.  I'm told that you never even paid the 

interest on the money that you borrowed.  So you've got a 

company that's all borrowed money that you're assigning a 

value to because you were stripping the money out of it as fast 

as it came in.  And then somebody goes and sells some shares 

in it and you're saying, oh no, no; that was all free and clear.  

You were taking dividends on that every year.  You weren't 

leaving that money in there.  You'd borrowed all the money 

originally. 

 

I mean, Mr. Minister, you had a nice little shell game going, 

but the simple fact is, on one hand you want to class it as 

bought and paid for totally while you were stripping dividends 

out of it every year, and you never covered it off.  If that was 

the case, you should have never taken a dividend or anything 

out of that company for years and years and years.  You would 

have had to free and clear it totally before you ever took 

anything out of it.  You didn't do that. 

 

Mr. Minister, there isn't a publicly traded company out there 

that doesn't get opinions every day on share offerings, and they 

may take a loss in a given year for a capital gain two or three 

years down the road.  And I can envision lots of circumstances 

where, in about three years, in about three years time there just 

might be this opportunity to have a capital gain because we 

need a little cash to grease the skids for the next election.  Well 

what have we got here?  We've got about 20 per cent of the 

Cameco company that looks pretty ripe.  Why don't we just sell 

that off and we'll come up with a little hard, cold cash.  Or 

we've still got 11 per cent of the Potash Corporation and we 

need a little hard, cold cash.  It's election time.  And I don't 

suppose there'll be any of these great, big inhibitions by the 

Finance minister at that time when we need a little hard, cold 

cash.  Then it'll be simply good business sense, won't it?  It 

would be good business sense to take a capital gain.  And that's 

the point, Mr. Minister, that we object to. 

 

You have two accounting firms, who subscribe to the Canadian 

Institute of Chartered Accountants, who use the same 

handbook that Ernst & Young does, who say there was no 

permanent impairment.  Somehow you got Ernst & Young to 

come up with that report.  I don't know how. 

Well you've got other ones that said opposite, you've got other 

ones that said opposite and the deputy minister has those letters 

on file because Cameco Corporation were forced to bring them 

forward. But you've made the decision to take the write-down. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I think it's only appropriate that what you 

tell this committee tonight is that you made a political decision.  

As you told the member from Morse, the board of directors of 

the Water Corporation were all cabinet ministers.  The board of 

directors of CIC are all cabinet ministers.  Treasury Board is all 

cabinet ministers.  In every situation, you have had cabinet 

ministers on the board and you have collectively made the 

political decision to take these write-downs now to clear the 

way for capital gains in the future.  And you know it and 

everybody else knows it. 

 

And if the shares of Cameco Corporation are 23 or $24 in 1995 

and the decision is made to sell some of them, you will record a 

capital gain.  And no one, Mr. Minister, can dispute that you 

will have a capital gain and that those shares are stronger today 

because some of them were sold to the private sector than if 

they had remained in the hands of strictly a public company or 

of a government-owned company.  And you know it as well as 

I do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the Potash 

Corporation -- let's just use that as an example for sort of a 

working model -- is not any different than any business.  It's 

bigger than most businesses but it's not any different.  It had a 

debt. Money was borrowed to buy assets.  The Potash 

Corporation made profits. Profits are only profits after all 

expenses, including the servicing of the debt.  So the Potash 

Corporation was servicing the debt and at the same time 

making very substantial profits which then were paid as 

dividends, some kept in the Potash Corporation for its working 

capital and paid dividends to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

who were shareholders in the Potash Corporation. 

 

So all of the things that the member refers to were being 

accomplished.  There was debt, money was made, the debt was 

serviced, and after all expenses were paid including the 

servicing of the debt, the Potash Corporation still made 

substantial profits so that it could pay a dividend.  When the 

Potash Corporation was sold at less than its value, a loss was 

taken, a $361 million loss was taken.  There are no more assets 

to pay for that loss. 

 

That was not a decision we made.  It's a decision the former 

government made for whatever the reasons.  So it's a loss that 

now has to be recorded in the Consolidated Fund because it is a 

liability to the taxpayer of Saskatchewan.  Now I don't know 

how much more clear one could put that.  It seems to me very 

straightforward to me.  Why it's not straightforward to the 

members opposite I don't understand. 

 

But that's the way I understand it, that's the way all the 

accountants understand it, that's the way the auditors 

understand it because that's the way they recommended the 

government handle the debt that was there.  On their 

recommendation we implemented the transactions that 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3207 

are before us here today. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- If you had the Potash Corporation or any 

company, other public company, and you had 10 shares, and 

you wanted some equity in that company, and the shares were 

valued at, say the book value is $100 a share, and you had 10 

of them.  But you needed some equity because prices were 

going down and you wanted an infusion of capital to make it 

more profitable.  So you took a share and you put it out into the 

market at $50.  You'd lose $50 on that one share, and you have 

nine left. 

 

Now as a result of that transaction people were investing in it 

and encouraged by the Potash Corporation, and the shares went 

from say the hundred to $110.  You have nine shares left and 

those nine shares left are worth $110, $10 more, so they're $90 

benefit.  You lost 50 and you made 90 so you end up with a net 

position of $40 a share. 

 

Now under your accounting, what you say is that the $50 is 

permanent and no matter what happens the company can't do 

better.  That's what you say and the public doesn't buy that; we 

don't agree with that.  And that's precisely what you've said. 

 

Now I will use the example of farm land.  You bought a bunch 

of land bank land at let's say, on average, 500 bucks an acre.  

You jammed the price up, you paid too much.  In fact, you 

speculated in the market and you paid the top for the farm land, 

500 bucks an acre.  Now the land goes down to $200 an acre, 

drops $300 an acre.  Now some of it's sold back to farmers.  

Are you going to take that as a permanent impairment on what 

you have because some of it was sold back to the farmers at 

half price or a third?  You didn't record that.  All you've got is 

the interest on it. 

 

Now you never paid any of the principle off on the Potash 

Corporation -- none of it.  You borrowed all this money -- 4 or 

$500 million.  You bought the Potash Corporation.  In good 

times you collect some dividends on it.  Never paid it off.  The 

market price goes down.  We put it into the public sector so it 

can be traded, so you can have some equity. 

 

And the same thing happens in the land bank.  We inherited all 

this stuff from you.  You bought land at twice its market value.  

Then it went down from 500 to $200 an acre, but because it 

was yours and land bank, you didn't record it in here. 

 

Now the permanent impairment, if it applies, applies to all the 

land bank land the same as it would apply to the Potash 

Corporation, the same as it would apply to Cameco. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you tried to be a capitalist in going into the 

market, borrow money from Americans to buy the potash 

mines that Americans owned.  And you paid way too much.  

And you paid way too much for farm land.  You know it and I 

know it.  You got a market value on the Potash Corporation 

that was way out of line.  You bought it at the peak.  And you 

just admitted that when you bought it you had a possibility to 

have dividends. 

 

Well when you bought farm land at $500 an acre, 

obviously you knew it wasn't going to stay there.  Well maybe 

it didn't matter to you because it was politically a philosophy, 

that you're going to buy it at twice the market value.  In fact, 

you went in and you competed with farmers, drove the price of 

land up.  And when people were worried about 22 per cent 

interest rates, you said, well don't worry, I'll buy your land.  

And you bought the land, and you paid way too much, and 

forced farmers to pay way too much.  And then you have all 

these assets on your books at way above market value. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, you are trying to tell us that 

you've got permanent impairment in the Potash Corporation 

that you paid way too much for, and you don't have permanent 

impairment in the land bank, and the land you paid way too 

much for. 

 

How are you going to record the difference in the asset values 

and the benefit in the Potash or Cameco shares when they go 

up, compared to farm land and land bank when it goes up? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- This is a very peculiar logic we're 

hearing here, Mr. Chairman.  In the case of the Potash 

Corporation, there is no permanent impairment.  There is 

nothing there.  Clearly, when the member opposite sold the 

Potash Corporation, he sold it at $18 a share -- bargain 

basement.  Today those shares are worth $26.  But the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan took a loss of $361 million because 

of the bargain basement sale for which the taxpayer of 

Saskatchewan is liable -- the $361 million.  It's got nothing to 

do with permanent impairment.  It's got everything to do with 

the fact that all of the assets are sold at a loss.  Nothing to do 

whether it was borrowed or not.  The fact of the matter is that 

the Potash Corporation was making substantial profits; it was 

paying a dividend; it had a very valuable asset which were 

owned by the people of Saskatchewan.  An asset which the 

member from Estevan decided to sell at $18 a share, which 

today are worth $26 a share; and took a loss of $361 million, 

which the taxpayer now is liable for, and has no asset to 

support it with. 

 

That's the story of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan.  

And, Mr. Chairman, there is no other alternative but to transfer 

it to the Consolidated Fund because it is owed by the 

Consolidated Fund and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

(2230) 

 

Now the member says, if you had 10 shares at $100 each and 

you sold one of those shares for $50, somehow the member 

from Estevan seems to try to conclude that when you sold a 

hundred dollar share for $50, you didn't make a loss . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . well you said that.  Well yes, okay, 

so you took a loss.  Now the other shares over time may 

increase in value.  No denying that.  But that does not take 

away from the fact that the one share you sold at $50, you took 

a loss on it.  And you have to record it, because you lost.  You 

took a loss.  When the Cameco shares were sold, there was a 

loss of $166 million.  That's recorded.  It's right in the budget 

where it should be, rather than hidden somewhere. 

 

It's a permanent loss, because those shares you no longer 



3208 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

have.  You have some other shares which may increase in 

value, and you may gain on them if you sell them, but they 

have nothing to do with the shares already sold on which the 

$166 million loss was taken.  Because the government decided 

on the eve of an election -- quite an inappropriate time to do it 

-- to sell those shares at a loss for whatever reasons.  I'm going 

to get into that.  The member from Estevan may want to 

explain those reasons.  But they were sold at a loss.  Nobody 

can question that. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, the Canadian Institute of 

Chartered Accountants handbook clearly states: 

 

 The treatment of contingent losses in financial statements 

depends upon the likelihood that a future event will confirm 

that an asset had been impaired or liability incurred as at the 

financial statement date. 

 

Now what that says . . . and accountants tell us, that you have 

decided to take this big bath, even though you know market 

prices could go up in the future, and then you can record the 

profit. 

 

All we want you to admit here is that you have taken this loss 

in your first budget so that later you can say, well look at the 

loss that the previous administration had; but in 1995 when 

share values go up, look at the profit that your administration 

has.  And that's all it is.  We know it and you know it. 

 

And on top of that, you paid way too much for the Potash 

Corporation and you paid way too much for farm land -- land 

bank.  And as a result of that . . . and you put way too much 

value even in terms of the book value for Cameco to start with, 

SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation). 

 

So you were dealing with a fictitious number.  You paid too 

much.  When we put it out into the market, the market says it's 

worth this, and then you complain because it's traded.  And if it 

goes back up and you can make a lot of money, then you can 

record it as your big profit.  And that's all we want people to 

know.  You can make it profitable and it can come to you 

because now it's publicly traded. 

 

The second point I want to make, Mr. Minister, second point I 

want to make is, when companies go out into the market to get 

equity, they do so so it will improve their credit rating and the 

value of the company.  And I want the minister to respond to 

the fact that we have a large co-operative in the province of 

Saskatchewan that is doing an equity offering.  And I want to 

read to the minister why they're doing this equity offering and 

see if he would concur with this co-operative. 

 

This is a large co-operative, and it says: 

 

 Under the current ownership structure, this co-operative has 

only two means available to finance its operations: debt and 

earnings.  The directors and management of the company 

believe it would be unwise to increase our debt level 

substantially at this time.  Our credit ratings could be 

adversely affected. 

 While the company has improved its earnings lately, they 

aren't sufficient to finance capital requirements in time to 

respond to our rapidly changing industry.  The time for 

change is sooner rather than later. 

 

 Equity markets provide the necessary financial resources 

required.  Equity markets enable the people making the 

investment to take an equity of ownership and stake in the 

company  Equity stakeholders succeed when the company 

succeeds. 

 

 Most of the money available for investing in equity markets 

comes from pension funds and insurance companies.  The 

money in equity markets also comes from small investors.  

This also helps our credit rating. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, are you saying that a large co-operative in 

the province of Saskatchewan that wants to go out into the 

equity markets to improve its position by offering shares to 

replace debt with equity, is in a position where, if the shares 

they put out -- I'd say $10 a share -- go first to $8 a share and 

then to $12 a share, that you think they're going to take a 

permanent write-down when they put that into the market? 

 

Do you think any accounting firm is going to take the UGG 

(United Grain Growers Limited) co-op and consider that as a 

permanent write-down? If they put their shares on the market at 

$10 then they go to $8 and then they go back up to $15, do you 

think any accounting company anywhere is going to take UGG 

shares and say, oops, you've got a permanent write-down; the 

big-bath theory is in -- and that's the end of it? 

 

Of course not, Mr. Minister.  What they had to do was get into 

the equity market to start with, offer the shares so people knew 

what it was worth.  In the case of Potash, I think they're 23 

today; they were as low as 12.  When we put it on the market at 

18 and it dropped to 12, you said: oh, you guys don't know 

what you're doing; the market went down. 

 

And then when the market goes up, you say: oh, you don't 

know what you're doing because the market is above what you 

put it at.  What would you like to have -- the shares lower or 

the shares higher? 

 

You see the problem is, Mr. Minister, philosophically, you 

don't trust people investing in public companies.  That's the 

problem.  Because you cannot tell me or this Assembly or 

people in this province that there would be a permanent 

write-down of UGG if they put their shares out at $10 and they 

dropped to 8.  And that's what you're saying with respect to 

Cameco or anything else, is those share values will go up and 

they will go down. 

 

And that's why the Institute of Chartered Accountants say that 

there's no permanent impairment, you can't take the big-bath 

theory, and you're going to have to record the profits when they 

occur. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, would you just tell us clearly how you'll 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3209 

record the profits of a public company when the share values 

say, double.  Something that you have share values.  The share 

values double and the province of Saskatchewan on companies 

that you have share values in, whether it's oil or potash or 

uranium or Cameco -- how will you record that?  Admittedly, 

if you sold, how would you record it and what would it look 

like? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, according to all of 

the general accounting principles and practices, if you're 

holding some shares and they increase in value and you 

continue to hold them, you wouldn't record any increase.  If 

you sell them, you would increase the gain . . . you would 

record the gain.  But only if you sell them. 

 

But if you had 20 shares at $100 each and you sold 100 shares 

at $50, you no longer own those shares.  Your other . . . Or you 

sold 10 shares at $50, you would take a loss.  You no longer 

have those shares.  You took the loss.  You kept the other 10 

and they increase in value, you would obviously gain if you 

sold those shares, but you still took the loss on the other 10.  So 

there's no argument there.  And that's all that's being recorded 

in the budget.  It was a loss that we have to record. 

 

Now if in the case of Cameco the shares we own increase in 

value and the province decides to sell them, then you would 

record the gain.  But in the case of the Potash Corporation, the 

$361 million loss, there's nothing to sell because there's no 

more shares because they are gone; they're sold.  There's a 

small, minimal amount.  How much per cent?  Well it's a 

minimal amount because they were very rapidly disposed of.  

But they've got nothing to do with the loss taken on the share 

that were sold.  The loss still has to be recorded because it is a 

loss. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Chairman . . . or Mr. Minister, Potash 

dropped to as low as $12 a share.  Why didn't you take the 

write-down at 12? 

 

Mr. Minister, could I just get your attention for a minute?  All 

right.  Potash dropped to as low as $12 a share.  Why didn't you 

take the write-down at 12?  They went down to 12.  Why didn't 

you say, well gosh, the market went up and down, we wrote it 

off at the bottom.  Why didn't you pick the bottom? 

 

Well it went up and down.  The shares went to 18, down to 

$12, up to 23.  Okay, why didn't you pick $12?  Why?  Why 

didn't you pick $12, the bottom, rather than just the price you 

picked for this budget address? 

 

So you picked a number for this budget address.  Right?  You 

picked a number.  And the market moves up and the market 

moves down.  You picked a number.  Why didn't you . . . well 

you had to pick a number.  You had to pick the value of a 

share.  You said they should have been worth X, and they went 

down here, therefore we'll pick that number and there's a loss.  

Why didn't you pick $12 and really take a big hit?  Why didn't 

you do that?  Explain how you picked that number. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, in the case of the 

Potash Corporation, we didn't choose a number.  The former 

government picked a number when they sold them at $18.  

That determines the $361 million loss which 

the former government determined because they decided that 

they would sell them at $18.  It's got nothing to do with 

anything that was done this year.  We're simply recording a 

decision and the transaction that was carried out by the former 

administration.  Got nothing to do with picking . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well the member from Thunder Creek keeps 

talking about for political purposes. 

 

Well if the member from Thunder Creek is saying that Ernst & 

Young would make a public report with their credibility at 

stake for political purposes, then that's his opinion.  I don't 

share that opinion.  Ernst & Young will show me another 

report that was made by another accountant that says . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, I ask the member 

from Thunder Creek to show the House another accounting 

firm that has provided a report on the Crown Management 

Board, or the Potash Corporation shares which were sold, 

which contradicts what Ernst & Young is saying.  There is no 

such other report.  If there is, I would appreciate seeing it. 

 

I don't question the credibility of the work of Ernst & Young.  

It is a credible international or national firm with a reputation 

that is a good one, and they were engaged to do an independent 

analysis so that the government could take the appropriate 

decisions, and we did. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, you deny that a reputable 

international accounting firm signed a letter to the effect that 

the sale of Cameco shares did not offer permanent impairment 

-- and I would suggest to you a firm that is every bit as 

reputable as Ernst & Young.  Do you deny that that occurred? 

 

(2245) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, a determination was 

made when the Potash Corporation shares were sold that they 

would be sold at $18.  Now during the period since then, they 

may have dropped to 12. In fact, the member says they did, but 

they . . . during the term of the former government, they 

dropped maybe as low as $12.  Am I . . . did they drop that 

low?  They're now at $26 but that's not in any way related to 

the fact that the initial shares were sold at $18. 

 

(2245) 

 

So we're talking about two different things here, and the 

member should try to understand.  In the case of the Cameco 

shares, the Cameco shares were sold at . . . I don't know that we 

have that because we're not the Crown Management Board 

here.  But they were sold at less than what they were valued at.  

They were sold at less than they were valued at.  The member 

says 12.50, I'll take him at his word.  But because they were 

sold at less than they were valued at, there was a loss of $166 

million.  Now the shares that are still there are increased in 

value.  They're at 16, but they've increased in value.  And that's 

agreed; we don't have a disagreement here. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's not a permanent impairment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well on the shares that are there 

now I suspect there's not a permanent impairment 



3210 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

because they may increase in value.  But the shares that are 

sold are gone.  So all that we're doing . . . we're not talking 

about . . . when we talk about transferring of the debt, we're not 

talking about permanent impairment.  We're only talking of the 

transferring of the debt on the shares that have been sold and 

not the shares that are still there, which may or may not have 

an impairment.  But on the shares that are sold, they're gone.  

There is a loss.  We have to transfer that because there is no 

way we can recover the loss from those shares that are sold. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- The question I asked you is, do you deny that 

there is a letter on record from people every bit as credible, 

every bit as credible as your opinion, that says there is no 

permanent impairment with the Cameco Corporation by selling 

shares.  Do you deny that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the Department of 

Finance has no knowledge of such a letter.  If the member 

knows of such a letter then he should make it available to me.  

But as far as my officials in the Department of Finance are 

concerned -- and they inform me that the Department of 

Finance has no knowledge of that. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, at the time of those 

offerings were members of the Department of Finance who I 

recognize in the room tonight as being the same ones as were 

in the room then in those discussions; know full well that 

Cameco Corporation sought opinions on permanent 

impairment from international reputable firms and received 

such.  Your former boss and premier, Allan Blakeney, sits on 

the board of directors of Cameco Corporation now.  Don't tell 

me that you don't know anything about the company, my 

friend.  You can lead the people so far but you can't . . . you 

know, I mean we're getting it stretched a little far here, my 

friend, a little far down the road. 

 

Now they have such a letter on file and your officials know it.  

It was referred to quite often in the discussions by people I 

suggest as reputable as those that you hold up to this 

legislature.  Do you deny that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Kraus has referred me to . . . in 

the Ernst & Young they did indicate that if SMDC shares are to 

be held for the longer term than the Bunting Warburg Inc. 

report suggests, that the shares will increase in value and at 

least the current carrying value of 21.67 per share will be 

recovered.  I think that must be what the member is talking 

about. 

 

But we don't have such a report in the Department of Finance.  

I only refer to you a report that was . . . Ernst & Young did 

indicate to us.  Clearly that's what they're saying.  They refer to 

a Bunting Warburg Inc. report.  But I don't know how that 

relates to the shares that were sold and on which the loss was 

taken.  I don't understand how this applies in that particular 

case. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- How it applies, Mr. Minister, is that you can 

put together this non-permanent shell of debt and use it for 

your own political reasons in a budget and say, look at the debt 

we've inherited; it's not permanent but it's just there.  And the 

value of those shares could increase and we could have a huge 

asset and way bigger than this, but 

we won't record that. 

 

And that's just what you've said.  Because Warburg and others 

said this is not permanent impairment.  As the share values go 

up, the value of the total asset increases and the province all of 

a sudden has a big net gain. 

 

Because we have these shares now publicly traded, we can 

measure it, Mr. Minister.  And all the stuff and hocus-pocus 

you talked about about buying the Potash Corporation but 

never had the courage to put it on the market is now 

measurable.  It's now measurable. 

 

And all we're saying to you, and you've now admitted, is that 

oh yes, we'll record this short-term debt as something that's 

there, we have to pay off for ever, but we won't happen to 

remind anybody in the budget that the share values could go up 

and we could have a handsome profit overall some day.  Now 

isn't that fancy for this room and for the public in your first 

budget. 

 

That's what we're doing.  And accountants call that the big-bath 

theory.  And it's not fair, it's not professional, and it's not 

accurate because it's not permanent.  And you've just said so.  

And Warburg said so and others have said so.  Because once 

you put it on the market, then the people tell you what it's 

really worth because they buy it and sell it. 

 

You could nationalize all the companies you like and say the 

book value is X and you could pay way too much for it, borrow 

a whole bunch from New York bankers, and buy an asset that's 

a whole in the ground and say oh, it's worth all this, and you 

never have it valued. 

 

When we put some of it out into the market and the public tells 

us exactly what it's worth, then you say oh my goodness, look 

at what they did.  Well I'll tell you where the mistake was.  You 

paid way too much for it like you did your land bank -- way too 

much, way, way, way too much.  And the other thing is you 

never paid it back.  You never paid the Potash debt back and 

you never paid the land bank debt back, and then when we put 

it on the market . . . 

 

Why didn't you take this big write-down on a quarter section of 

land?  If we sold a couple of quarters out there to farmers in 

land bank at a half of what you paid for the land, why didn't 

you have a permanent impairment on all the rest of the land?  

Well the rest of it isn't sold either, my friend.  The shares are 

still held by the government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

That's exactly what he's doing.  What a sham.  He plays one 

game with one asset and another game with another asset.  

Well, well, well. 

 

All we're trying to point out, and I'm glad we finally got the 

attention of the Minister of Agriculture, because his land like 

anybody else's went up probably in the 1970s and '80s to a high 

price.  Land bank paid a lot for it.  Then it collapsed.  We sold 

some of it back to the farmers at a very low level and you 

should say well that's a permanent write-down.  Now all that 

land that's left owning by the government has been written off. 

 

But you didn't do that, but you're trying to do it in Cameco, and 

you're 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3211 

trying to do it in potash, and you're trying to do it to others.  

Well, Mr. Minister, the public sees through this.  This is a false 

accumulation, accrual accumulation of debt that is not a 

permanent impairment.  It can go up when the prices go up. 

 

So I'm glad you've had the courage, Mr. Minister, to admit, 

you've had the courage to admit tonight that it's not a 

permanent impairment and when the prices go up you could 

sell those shares that you have at higher prices and make a 

handsome profit.  Even a profit higher than the debt that you've 

written off.  And because it's now traded in the public sector 

and the prices can go up and down, we know the true value of 

it. 

 

Now it's not a fictitious value that you could tell the voters of 

Saskatchewan that you paid X for the Potash Corporation, and 

you did the right thing.  If you paid too much for farm land, 

which you did, and too much for the Potash Corporation which 

you did, we now know the mistake that you made.  And you 

made a serious, serious mistake and the market has told you 

that.  And now you've made an accounting mistake for your 

own political reasons -- it's not a mistake, it's intentional -- to 

have this sham, this sham you call a permanent debt when you 

now admit it's not permanent and you've got advice there from 

Warburg that said it's not permanent. 

 

You just said it.  You said the prices can go up, therefore the 

value can go up and if you sold it at a high value you'd make a 

profit.  So it's nice to know, Mr. Minister, that you finally 

acknowledge it's not permanent impairment, that the debt that 

you show here is not permanent, and three years from now if 

the prices go up you could have a handsome profit. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, we want you to know, well of course if you're 

going to sell it for a loss, you can sell it for a profit.  And that's 

what happens on markets.  That happens with farm land.  It 

happens with Cameco.  And it happens with potash. 

 

So, there you are, Mr. Minister.  The fact that you have now 

admitted that you can actually have a net profit on the Cameco 

shares is significant.  And that's all we've been asking you to 

do.  And that you record here a permanent loss of $166 million 

is not fair.  Because if you sell the shares, if they go to 25 or 

$50, you could have a $50 million net profit. 

 

So I just want the minister to confirm if Cameco shares go to 

$50 on the market, you could have a net profit that would more 

than offset the loss of $166 million that you've got here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- There's no doubt about that.  If the 

present Cameco shares that the province owns goes to $50, and 

if it was decided to sell them, you would get a gain -- a very 

substantial gain.  But the loss on the initial share of the Cameco 

shares is still a loss. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I just want to make the point so 

the public knows, and the accounting principles state, that's not 

a permanent impairment on the shares of Cameco.  Not at all.  

Because if you put some of them out into the market and then 

they start to trade, they can go to 12, they can go to 18, they 

can go up and down.  That's 

not a permanent impairment on the share structure, not for 

those that own it, not for those that have them.  And in fact you 

can make a handsome profit on those share values, which, 

obviously we believe you will. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, the same 

attitude that we had in December with this minister, the same 

attitude we've had in the Committee of Finance dealing with 

interim supply, is the same attitude that we've got with the 

minister today -- he doesn't answer questions. 

 

And I'm going to lay out a scenario, Mr. Minister and Mr. 

Chairman, about what I think happened in this whole process.  

We had a Premier going around the province from January 1 

and on and saying, one day I have $800 million worth of debt.  

The next day he says, I have $1.2 million worth of debt.  The 

next day he says, I have one and one-half billion dollars worth 

of debt.  The next day he says, I have $1.8 billion worth of 

debt. 

 

Where does all this floating money go?  And, Mr. Chairman, 

now we're beginning to find out.  One day he was . . . This is 

the process of decision making that he was going through.  He 

was deciding as he was talking to the public, should it be 1.8, 

1.5, 1.2, 800 million?  What should it be?  Pick a number. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, what we have seen here 

today over and over points to the fact that that is what was 

happening.  He was deciding as he was going along, because he 

hasn't got the capacity to lead this province anywhere, he was 

deciding on the basis of that, what he was going to do. 

 

And then he was weighing in the balance: if I take $1.5 billion 

worth of debt and put it in a pile and say that to the people who 

do the rating for the province of Saskatchewan, they'll say that 

that's too much.  If I go at $500 million, that's not enough.  I 

can't blame enough on the PC (Progressive Conservative) 

government former administration.  If I go at 1.2 that's still too 

much. 

 

And if you take and add up 875; if you put $100 million for the 

beef stabilization on there which is a total impairment, Mr. 

Minister, and you never put it on there; Sask Water of $197 

million, that is a total impairment according to what your Sask 

Water people say; you add $166 million Cameco; 64 from the 

upgrader; 50 from Meadow Lake pulp mill -- you've got $1.452 

billion worth of debt. 

 

(2300) 

 

It was always there, Mr. Minister, but what your Premier was 

doing, is he was deciding what is comfortable with the 

bond-rating agencies in New York; what is comfortable with 

politics; and we'll make a political decision at $875 million.  

That's exactly what you did. 

 

And that's exactly what this exercise has been, to explain to 

you so that you understand that the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan understand that Gass said you knew. 

 

The Premier was on the radio.  He was on the debate with 



3212 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

the member from Estevan.  He said $14.2 billion worth of debt.  

And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly the point we want to make -- 

you said it, you knew it.  And he was just deciding on where he 

was going to put the numbers so that he could be comfortable 

with the people of Saskatchewan so they would believe him. 

 

And then run off to New York.  And then when he found out 

when the bond ratings started to hit him in the lowering of the 

rate, then he said, oh we've got to go plug this hole.  So then he 

had to go down to New York and help plug the hole.  And he 

said this is the reason why; these are all old debts.  He had to 

put in a backfire in order to protect himself. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly what the process was.  This 

was not a decision based on a recommendation by an 

accountant.  It was a decision made on the basis of politics.  

Strictly, wholly, solely, on politics at where that number was.  

And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly what this decision is; and 

that's the point we want to make in our discussion here today. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, in 

fact didn't you do something the same when it came to 

hospitals?  It's my understanding, Mr. Minister, that the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation had financed 

health care facilities.  And you decided all of a sudden, you 

said, look we'll just take this as a permanent write-down, we're 

not going to help you with this, we're not going to make any of 

these payments, and all of a sudden you inherit yourself a nice 

little permanent debt. 

 

It was already there that we were dealing with in the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, so that in 

fact you can tell the hospital in Melfort or the hospital some 

place else that I'll tell you what, we won't help you any more, 

we'll just assume all of this debt and we'll stop this transaction.  

So what you have is on paper a nice little comfortable 

write-down that you can show people when you read your 

budget. 

 

Could you describe what you did in health care and the 

buildings there so that in fact everybody knows how you 

treated that debt so that you could top this up the way you 

have. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, debt is debt.  Debt 

doesn't change.  There was debt in the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation.  The debt has been transferred to the 

Consolidated Fund but it's still the same debt.  Nothing 

changed.  Now why did the transfer of the debt take place from 

the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation to the 

Consolidated Fund? 

 

Because the Provincial Auditor reported that that was an 

inappropriate way to record it, because there was only one way 

in which the money owed by the Property Management 

Corporation could be repaid.  It could only be repaid by grants 

from the Consolidated Fund, so therefore it's a liability of the 

Consolidated Fund. 

 

The Provincial Auditor, the Gass Commission, both said the 

debt in the Property Management Corporation belongs in the 

Consolidated Fund.  We took their advice 

and we put it in the Consolidated Fund but that doesn't change 

the debt.  It's still the same.  It's still $750 million.  It's just 

appropriately recorded on the recommendation of the 

Provincial Auditor. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, that's the point.  And Donald 

Gass on the radio -- and we have quotes here -- said that there 

was no difference in the debt between our administration and 

your administration when you took over.  And he said it was 

frankly because of accounting principles.  That's what it was, 

and you have used a different set of accounting principles to 

stack it up.  And he says the main debt was because of the 

pension liabilities. 

 

And now you have recorded the debt differently and you put it 

in the Consolidated Fund because of your accrual accounting of 

all those years.  Stacking them up so you'd have yourself a nice 

little picture and say, oh well we opened the books and we 

found the debt.  And you just admitted, Mr. Minister, there's no 

difference in the debt whether it was in the hospitals, the way 

they were financed by grants, or whether you said we'd put it in 

the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Now we've had two major admissions here tonight, Mr. 

Minister.  Number one, you're going to have capital gains on 

Cameco shares that could offset the losses you've recorded 

because it's not permanent, and you've said that.  And number 

two, there was no difference in the debt the way we had it and 

the way you do it except the way you record it.  And your 

increase in debt for the public consumption was just that -- for 

public consumption. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, the interesting part that my colleague raises 

here from Morse is that when you trucked all this down to New 

York and tried to explain it to them, they said, well, well, well.  

If that's the way you're going to record this and it is going to be 

permanent on the Consolidated Fund, I guess we'll have to rip 

your credit rating. 

 

And the truth is and the facts are, Mr. Chairman, the credit 

rating went down and down and down until you and the 

Premier ran down to New York again and said, hold it.  We're 

just playing a little accounting here.  There's no different debt 

than we ever had.  We're doing a little politics, frankly.  Hold 

it, it's going to be okay.  We're going to raise a bunch of taxes 

and we're going to get some money coming in.  And even 

though we campaigned on tax cuts, we'll raise taxes and we'll 

actually get . . . we'll kind of work to get some of the revenue 

coming in to offset this.  And that's what you've got here in 

your budget. 

 

So you've admitted both of those things.  And as my colleague 

from Morse points out, you got caught by the credit rating 

institutions and say, well look, if you want to deal with it this 

way, we'll take you seriously.  If that's the way you want to 

account for it then I think, Mr. Minister, you do have a problem 

because you promised tax cuts in the campaign and you can't 

afford tax cuts.  The debt's the same today as it was then.  But 

if you're going to have tax cuts, you're in big trouble.  And 

down went your credit rating. 

 

So then you brought in your budget with all the tax 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3213 

increases to kind of keep it from falling.  So as a result, the 

public can now see through it.  And you admitted tonight, 

there's no permanent impairment.  Actually, this debt could 

turn into a profit.  Number two, the debt's no different than 

when we had it because you said the debt was the same no 

matter where you put it.  Fair enough. 

 

But what really happened, and we're glad to see tonight, is you 

admit that what this is is a political document.  Your budget 

address was pure, unadulterated politics and that's why it's been 

called a sham from the member from Thunder Creek and 

others.  Because it's not accurate.  And we finally tonight got 

through to you so that you can tell the public that in fact you 

can have a net profit where you've recorded this so-called 

permanent impairment. 

 

And you also admitted, Mr. Minister, that as a direct result of 

your accounting changes, you've got a debt when the debt was 

exactly the same before.  So we appreciate the fact, Mr. 

Minister, that you'd made those two admissions tonight and 

we'll certainly have it in Hansard to record. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, there were a number of areas 

in the generic questions that went over to the minister that we 

find incomplete.  And I would like to bring them to the 

attention to the minister so that we can work on some of these 

things. 

 

First of all I have a couple of comments, Mr. Minister, and I'd 

like you to respond to them, dealing with the staff that you 

have here.  I noticed that every last one of them -- and I have a 

L. Lockert, L. Prudun, L. Thacyk, Padfield -- in less than a half 

a year all of your staff have gone up in salary range, some of 

them after only a few months.  I'm wondering why all of these 

jumps occurred so quickly in your personal staff. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Actually there were not increases in 

salary.  The increase in the amount they're paid because they 

took on different positions.  Example, there was a gentleman 

employed as my chief ministerial assistant, Mr. Kroll, who left 

on March . . . left about April . . . anyway he's . . . Here it is. He 

resigned May 31 and left to go to other employment outside the 

government.  And what happened is that Lois Thacyk then 

moved into that position and therefore began to get paid at that 

salary level.  And that same applies to all the rest of the staff.  

My minister's secretary also left and simply Ms. Prudun moved 

into that position and therefore took the salary level that that 

position pays.  Ms. Lockert took the position that Ms. Prudun 

was making.  They simply moved to different positions without 

an increase in salary other than the salary that is paid for those 

particular positions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- It was quite evident from the materials that 

you sent what happened, Mr. Minister.  I guess it's . . . at the 

end the day, what's happened is everybody's ended up with a 

different position that has a little more money attached to it . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, it's a different job. 

 

I've been a minister also, sir, and understand how those staffing 

things work.  But the point is that, you know, we were just out 

there nailing diabetics and chiropractic fees and we're doing all 

sorts of things, but you didn't hesitate, and that's . . . it's done 

creatively, so I just want to bring it 

to your attention, Mr. Minister, that it was noticed. 

 

In 1(b), I noticed that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well it's 

not my members, Mr. Minister, that are doing the yelling here.  

In 1(b), I noticed that on the terminations, you list the reason 

for most of them as personal.  Now knowing a few of these 

people myself, I'm told that they were told to resign and I 

wondered why you would not just indicate that.  So would you 

indicate for each person which of the resignations came at your 

request and for what reason you decided a resignation was 

necessary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- None of these were initiated or 

moved for personal reasons or other ways at the minister's 

request or at my request.  The only one in which there was a 

mutual agreement between the management of the department 

and the particular employee was one Mr. Barry Woulds where 

apparently it was decided that the approach that the 

government might want to take, Mr. Woulds might not fit into 

that.  But that's the only case and there was a mutual 

understanding and agreement that Mr. Woulds would leave and 

that arrangement was made.  But in no other circumstance in 

the department would that apply. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I only raise it with you, Minister, because all 

of your colleagues when responding, and I commend them for 

it . . . I mean even the Women's Secretariat was very 

forthcoming about these types of things. And if Barry Woulds 

was politically incompatible just say he was. In your response, 

just say he was politically incompatible and leave it at that.  I 

mean everybody else did it. I just expected you would do the 

same. 

 

Now in 1(g), in the secondments mentioned, was the 

department reimbursed by the seconding agency for the salaries 

of those employees?  It wasn't clear in your response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer is yes. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- And on question 2, I'd like you to confirm 

that the Department of Finance and any agencies that fall under 

your authority occupy no space other than three locations listed 

in response to question 2. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That is correct. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Item 13. All the other departments have 

indicated to us what credit card reimbursement payments have 

been made to what individual since November 1, '91.  Would 

you undertake to do the same. 

 

(2315) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the credit cards 

are in the name of the individual employees. 

 

We can provide information as to any reimbursements that 

were made on expenditures under the credit card that were 

incurred on behalf of the provincial government and therefore 

were paid as expenses.  But there will be other things that were 

incurred as personal expenses which the province would not 

pay for, but as far as the items that the province paid for, we 

can provide that. 



3214 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

Mr. Swenson: -- That, Mr. Minister, was the policy that other 

departments adopted, and we received the information that 

what people do on their own time is their business. 

 

In item 15 I was a little curious as to your . . . you now have 49 

lap-top computers, evidently for travelling, for people to work 

on while you're travelling.  You've purchased an additional 

seven in the intervening time and in looking at some of the 

responses from other departments, you've got more than 

Education and Economic Development.  In fact you've got 

more than, lots of times four other departments put together.  

And I'm just wondering, Mr. Minister, why your department 

has this need to have so many. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Because of the nature of some of 

the work that's done there.  There's a fairly good number of 

people in the department who are called auditors who are on 

the road and do auditing.  This is a very useful, in fact 

necessary tool in today's work and therefore the Department of 

Finance will have a larger number of these kinds of pieces of 

equipment because of the nature of the work that people like 

the auditors do. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I can appreciate that, minister.  I used to have 

a department that did a lot of auditing also, with Energy and 

Mines. They have people on the go all the time and I did take a 

look and you've got them beat all hollow too.  So I'm hoping 

these things aren't going home a lot, that there isn't a lot of 

personal use going on. 

 

I was disappointed in question 17 when asked . . . and all other 

departments were very forthcoming about audio-visual 

equipment and related stuff.  And the answer I got back from 

your department was yes, you have some equipment.  Well I'd 

like to know what you have.  I mean other departments, there 

was no problem.  We've never had a problem with . . . I mean 

that's a very poor answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No problem.  The department 

responded according to what they thought the question was, but 

if you want any other details please let us know what it is and 

we'll get it for you. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Now, Mr. Minister, in regard to question 24, 

the answer . . . I want you to confirm for the committee, Mr. 

Minister, that in your own office you receive no news 

monitoring service of any kind.  In other words, Mr. Minister, 

there are no news clippings or reading transcripts, any of that 

type of thing that help the minister do his job?  There's no 

clipping services at all -- nothing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- As we said in the response, neither 

in the department nor in my office do we engage a clipping 

service. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well maybe I've found a new area for you to 

find a few more shekels, because in looking through the 

responses from other departments, I find that most of your 

colleagues do engage in that type of thing.  They admit that 

they need and they use media monitoring services.  So I guess 

you can discuss that. 

Question 26.  You say that the travel agency was given on the 

basis of a presentation.  Can you give us a list of what other 

agencies were invited to make a presentation, how the 

invitation was made, and why that opportunity was not 

advertised. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- This firm made a presentation.  It is 

being used, has been used on a temporary basis.  No other firm 

made a presentation.  That's something that's under review all 

the time, but at the present time that's the firm being used 

because that's the firm that made a presentation as to the kind 

of services they could provide to the department.  No other 

firm made a presentation. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Who personally asked that firm to make a 

presentation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm told no one asked them.  It was 

unsolicited.  They approached the department.  They did not 

approach my office. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well just so I clearly understand it, this firm, 

out of all the firms around, just thought that the Minister of 

Finance did a lot of flying and his officials did a lot of flying, 

so I'll pack my bag and I'll walk up the steps to the legislature 

and I'll make my pitch.  Is this what you're telling me, that the 

guy just walked through the door and . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well I know the member sounds a 

little cynical, but that's exactly the case of what happened in 

this particular situation.  The firm made a presentation, made 

an offer, and it was looked at and the department decided that it 

was something that they should try, and they have indeed been 

trying it -- and I'm told getting very excellent service. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- What happened to the firm that you did 

business with last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I am informed that for a period of 

time both firms were utilized.  But over time, the people who 

make these arrangements found that the services provided by 

this firm of Lanigan Zimmer Travel was a superior service and 

therefore the department decided to stay with the one firm. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I . . . You can appreciate 

why I'm cynical and why anybody watching the proceedings 

tonight might be cynical, given your public protestations about 

no tendering previously and how you were going to have this 

open tendering policy and invitation to bid and all that sort of 

thing.  And I find it strange that that criteria is good enough for 

everybody else in government but it's not good enough for the 

guy that sets the rules, who is the Minister of Finance. 

 

And I think I'd like your commitment tonight that the travel 

services . . . the travel services, on a criteria . . . If your officials 

have a set criteria that they need a performance evaluation per 

se, so that you're comparing apples and apples and not apples 

and oranges, that according to the criteria that your department 

sets, that people be invited to an open tender situation for travel 

services for your department.  Public tender. 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3215 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the department has 

no contractual obligation to this firm or any other firm.  Other 

firms interested in making a submission would be looked at.  

But I want to just make one correction for the member 

opposite, in that the government is making progress on 

tendering many services that in the past were not tendered. 

 

For example, the whole question of advertising and 

communication services, all of those are now tendered and in 

fact have been . . . The policy of the government has been 

praised by all of the firms in the province of Saskatchewan, and 

have been in fact been praised by the editorial writers in the 

press in the province of Saskatchewan because of the direction 

in which we are going. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I appreciate the kudos, Mr. Minister.  But 

we're down to a very specific example here where I think you 

can set an example that the rest of the government obviously 

has to abide by.  You're the guy that controls the purse-strings.  

You set the criteria.  If the Minister of Finance is seen to be 

above-board and doing it open, and the taxpayer's getting the 

best bang for his buck, then there isn't a single minister, 

department, agency, or Crown that can do otherwise, because 

you've set the pattern that no one else can possibly break. 

 

You will have what you publicly said you wanted to achieve 

and that is an open policy that the taxpayer is getting his best 

bang for his buck.  And I said, you set the criteria but let 

everybody bid.  And I think it's appropriate that you're the guy 

that's going to set the pattern here and you can make that 

commitment to the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

may very well have a good point there and I'm prepared to take 

a look at it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- When will . . . how long will the looking take 

I guess is what I need to know. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- As soon as we get out of the House. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I can help with that or I can 

slow that down. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We'll find out how serious you are. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- No, we'll find out how serious you are.  I'd 

like you to make a commitment that before the month of 

September is out that you will have a policy, apples to apples, 

that you'll go to public tender on your travel. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the department will 

undertake an internal review of the policy and present to me 

some recommendations which I will consider and then the 

government will have to make a decision. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I appreciate that, Mr. Minister, but I'm not 

going to get another chance perhaps for six months or seven 

months to hold you accountable.  You are going to go off now 

and spend money because as soon as this budget passes you 

can do what you want. 

And I don't think it's appropriate that I should have to wait till 

next March or April when you bring down another budget to 

find out if you're tendering or not on your travel.  I mean there 

has to be some point here where we have a time line attached to 

it that you live up to your election promises. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the commitments of 

the government and the record of the government as we begin 

to change many of the policies of the former government where 

there was no tendering in anything, is that we are heading in 

that direction and we, in some areas, have already been able to 

implement that. 

 

We do it in consultation with the people who are involved.  We 

did it in the advertising.  We did it in consultation with the 

advertising industry and the printing industry, and this is the 

same process that will take place in this or any other. 

 

I've given to the member a commitment that the government 

will be undertaking that and I think it should not be simply a 

case of one department.  It should be a case of a policy which is 

developed for the government proper as a whole, and that will 

be undertaken. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's late at night so we'll . . 

. It's on the record and I guess we'll just have to go from there. 

 

I have one final question here.  In question 32, I believe it was, 

we asked you about manuals that were used in your 

department, policy manuals.  In other words, your indication 

from the response was that you have no policy on how to deal 

with the application of taxes, no policy on how to interact with 

business making various applications or reporting under 

various regulations. 

 

I don't believe that you just make this stuff up as you go along 

and I believe that your administrative policy isn't done on a 

guess and a golly here. 

 

We've already received, Mr. Minister, the PSC (Public Service 

Commission) manual and the financial administration manual 

but we would like a copy of the accounting and reporting 

manual. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No problem.  It's a fairly substantial 

document but we'll take the time and create the expense to 

reproduce it so that the member can inform himself about what 

the procedures and guidelines are. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I appreciate that, Mr. Minister.  I'm sure it 

will be interesting reading. 

 

Mr. Chairman, that concludes the written questions that I had.  

And if the minister can make the commitment that that stuff 

will all be sent over as quickly as possible, I think we can 

dispense with this. 

 

(2330) 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 



3216 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

Items 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 7 -- Statutory. 

 

Items 8 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 12 -- Statutory. 

 

Items 13 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Items 22 and 23 -- Statutory. 

 

Items 24 to 28 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Items 29 to 31 inclusive -- Statutory. 

 

Item 32 agreed to. 

 

Vote 18 agreed to. 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Finance -- Servicing the Public Debt -- Government Share 

Vote 12 

 

Items 1 to 3 inclusive -- Statutory. 

 

Vote 12 -- Statutory. 

 

Consolidated Fund Debt Redemption, 

Sinking Fund and Interest Payments 

Finance 

Vote 175 

Item 1 -- Statutory. 

 

Vote 175 -- Statutory. 

 

Vote 176 

Item 1 -- Statutory. 

 

Vote 176 -- Statutory. 
 

Vote 177 

Item 1 -- Statutory. 
 

Vote 177 -- Statutory. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Municipal Financing Corporation of Saskatchewan 
 

Nil vote. 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Finance 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 18 
 

Items 1 to 27 inclusive agreed to. 
 

Vote 18 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Finance 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 18 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

Vote 18 agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- That concludes Estimates for the Department of 

Finance and I would ask the minister at this point to thank his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  I want to 

thank the members of the opposition for their contribution and 

their questions, and I want to thank all of the officials who are 

here for their assistance in this.  Just an example of the kind of 

sacrifices that people make sometimes when they work for the 

government -- Mr. Wright informs me that tonight is his wife's 

birthday.  I'm sure she's going to forgive him.  If she is 

watching television, on behalf of all the members here, I'd like 

to wish her a happy birthday and send Mr. Wright home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to 

thank the minister and his officials on behalf of the opposition 

for their being here at this late hour and trying to provide us 

with some of the answers that are necessary.  And I go along 

with the minister in applauding people that sort of go that extra 

mile.  There's been a few things missed on this side of the 

House this summer too and we all feel the same way.  So thank 

you to the officials. 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan 

Vote 54 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I will take a moment to introduce 

these long-suffering public servants.  Seated beside me is 

David Hughes; seated behind me is Patti Beach. 

 

I'll anticipate the first question.  The list of questions which the 

member from Arm River and I really worked out in Public 

Service, we've taken the questions and I have the answers 

which I will ask our equally long-suffering page to take to you. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

notice that . . . and I don't have the generic set here with me for 

your particular . . . you have a lot of not applicables.  Are those 

not applicable for one specific reason or is it a number?  Can 

you just give a brief explanation. 

 

(2345) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The overall explanation is that this is 

not a department and therefore many of the questions which 

were asked really have no application to a Crown corporation.  

That's the primary reason why they weren't applicable.  Many 

of them related to whether or not I had any staff paid for and if 

so, did they have cars and so on. 

 

There is . . . all of my personal staff and all of my expenses are 

paid out of the line departments.  In fact, they're paid out of the 

department you just finished, Finance.  I gave the member from 

Arm River complete details of that in the 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3217 

estimates for SPMC.  So you have all that information.  But 

Crown Investments Corporation don't pay any expenses for any 

portion of my office and that's the primary reason for most of 

those because they relate to expenses of my staff. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, if 

there is, upon review of this some dispute, is it appropriate for 

one of us to get together and see if we can work something out 

in the way of a response? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- By all means, Mr. Chairman.  If there 

are any errors or omissions in that or if there's any additional 

information you want we'll supply it unless it is . . . the position 

I took with the member from Arm River is that we will supply 

any information which would be available to you under the 

freedom of information Act. 

 

If it's not permitted under the freedom of information Act we'll 

reserve the right not to give it to you.  But the position I took 

with the member from Arm River is if it's available under the 

freedom of information Act -- and virtually everything is -- 

then we'll undertake to give it to you.  And I give you the same 

undertaking.  If there's any information the members of this 

Assembly want, and it's not included in that material, I'll give it 

to you if it's available under the freedom of information Act. 

 

I don't think it's necessarily appropriate to ask members of this 

Assembly to go through the rather time . . . rather involving, 

time-consuming procedure under the freedom of information 

Act. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I agree, Mr. Chairman.  If that's the only 

criteria then we'll live with it. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 54 agreed to. 

 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan 

Vote 165 

 

Item 1 -- Statutory. 

 

Vote 165 -- Statutory. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I want to thank these two officials.  

They've had a long wait this evening.  They have done so quite 

cheerfully and I think they're quite happy to assist this 

democratic institution in its work, so they're by no means 

complaining.  I don't think that in any sense lessens our 

appreciation of their contribution this evening and I thank 

them. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also would like 

to thank the officials and have them know that there was a very 

detailed discussion about some parts of their organization in an 

earlier discussion this evening.  We were able to do it quite 

thoroughly, so I appreciate them staying for as long as they did 

tonight. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Gaming Commission 

Vote 142 

 

Item 1 

 

The Chair: -- I'll ask the minister to arrange to bring his 

officials in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's going to be a touch awkward.  

They are some distance.  What I have, I have the same list . . . I 

have the answers to the same list and I will again request the 

assistance of our long-suffering page here, give these to you.  

Give this to the member from Morse this time. 

 

I publicly give the member from Morse the same undertaking 

as I gave to the member from Thunder Creek a moment ago.  If 

there's any information which isn't in there, and which might be 

made available to you under the freedom of information Act, 

you've only to contact my office and we will supply it to you as 

soon as is reasonably possible. 

 

I do not believe it's appropriate to ask members of this 

Assembly to go through the procedure of the freedom of 

information Act.  I think you have a right to information as 

elected representatives upon request. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 142 agreed to. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I just have one question for an observation.  

In our dealing with the Department of Agriculture yesterday or 

the day before, we dealt with the Horse Racing Commission 

and we asked a number of questions.  What I want to know is 

who the board of directors are, the budget, and that sort of 

thing.  I don't know whether that comes under the purview of a 

vote, however I'd like to have the same kinds of information 

provided to me that you've provided here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

member from Morse, I'll provide that.  I don't actually have that 

information with me.  It's technically not part of this subvote.  

We'll certainly supply the names of the commissioners, the date 

they were appointed, and we'll answer the same questions that 

were provided on the previous two Estimates and give the same 

undertaking with respect to the Horse Racing Commission. 

 

If they have any questions relating to information which would 

be available under the freedom of information Act, we'll make 

it available to them as soon as we're able to do so.  The Horse 

Racing Commission does in fact report to myself. 

 

There are no officials to thank.  I'd just point out to the 

members of the Assembly that the officials were here until 

about 11 o'clock.  So I do want to thank them for having came 

here and made themselves available. 

 

I also want to thank the members opposite for the efficient and 

efficacious way that these Estimates were handled.  I recognize 

you really asked the member from . . . the Minister of Finance 

most of the questions. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I too want to have 

you extend to your officials our thanks for their 



3218 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

indulgence this evening. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:54 p.m. 

 


