




















































Hansard: July 13, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1451 

 July 13, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that the second report of 

the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures be now 

concurred in, and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. 

Britton. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I was 

almost . . . I thought for a minute that the Minister of Rural 

Development was going to enter the debate.  And I would sure 

welcome him, when I conclude my remarks, to take his place 

and enter the debate as well with many of the members that 

have done so to date, including I think there was one or two 

members on the government side of the House who did take the 

time to address the motion. 

 

Certainly we're waiting for them to take the time as well to 

stand in this Assembly and speak to the amendment that was 

brought forward by my colleague, the member from Wilkie, an 

amendment which, Mr. Speaker, would indeed allow the Rules 

Committee to continue to work. 

 

As I was indicating prior to the supper hour, prior to 5 o'clock, 

Mr. Speaker, I had a number of quotes that I had gone through 

and researched from the previous debate back in 1989.  I found 

it very interesting to read some of the comments made by the 

member from Saskatoon South at the time, and I just want to 

point out again and refresh the members of those in the 

Assembly. 

 

And I quote the member as he was commenting in this House 

and giving his reasons why the motion should be referred back 

to the committee and to allow the committee to operate, and 

speaking out on the fact that the opposition should indeed have 

the ability to have some form of bells, or a forum available to 

them to raise major concerns that they would feel at any time, 

regardless of who the opposition is, would be very important to 

the public to be aware of prior to any motion or any Bill being 

introduced and passed through this House. 

 

The member from Saskatoon South said, and I quote: I may 

point out that obstructive tactics are allowed by the rules. 

 

I don't know if the member, in making that quote, really felt 

that he was being obstructive in 1989.  I believe the member 

that I'm quoting, and members of this Assembly, felt they were 

utilizing the tools that were available to them in order to raise a 

matter of grave concern, or a matter which they felt was of 

grave concern to the general public and to the people of 

Saskatchewan at the time and of the day -- exactly the same 

thing that we did here.  Yes, it's obstructive. 

 

And then he talks about the minister of Rural Affairs speaking 

out, and invites the minister of Rural Affairs to 

take his place in the House and speak to the motion, suggesting 

that maybe the minister of Rural Affairs of that day didn't take 

the time to speak up in cabinet as he felt he should have. 

 

And the reasons he suggested that the minister of Rural Affairs 

of the day may not have spoken up, and the minister of Urban 

Affairs may have not taken the time to speak out on the 

concerns that they felt the public were bringing to issue, was 

because of the number of petitions that the opposition of the 

day presented to the House, petitions which indicated that 

people, yes, were against the bell-ringing process. 

 

But also in the period of debate that took place back in 1989, 

we are all aware of the fact that members on this side of the 

House, the former opposition, indicated that even though 

people who were against bell-ringing felt that bell-ringing is a 

necessary tool that the opposition has and must be given, to at 

least inform the general public and give the opposition the time 

guidelines and the time available to go and consult with the 

public regarding issues. 

 

And he says in his quote, he continues on, he said, but did the 

government, did cabinet, did the minister of Rural 

Development listen to his constituents?  Did the minister of 

Urban Affairs listen to their constituents?  And his observation 

and strong feeling was, no, they didn't listen. 

 

However, I think as I wind up my remarks a little later this 

evening, Mr. Speaker, that I will indicate that obviously the 

government of the day was listening, the government of the day 

was consulting.  The government of the day felt that it would 

be important, as the opposition laid out the points that they 

were bringing forward, that it wouldn't be that bad at all to send 

the motion back to the committee, back to the special Rules 

Committee, and asking the committee to come up with a 

process for change, asking the committee to come up with 

ideas, asking the committee to sit down and do some 

consultations, such as our motion does here today. 

 

The amendment to the motion even allows and asks the 

committee to hold public hearings and have the public's 

involvement so the public can be totally aware of what it means 

and what the bell-ringing question means.  The fact that it isn't 

to be used as an obstructive tactic, but it is a means, as I 

indicated earlier today, to call members to vote, but also to give 

an opposition, a very honest and forthcoming opposition, the 

ability to go and talk to their constituents. 

 

The member from Saskatoon South also went to quote a 

well-known Canadian, and I quote, Mr. Speaker, the member is 

quoting the Rt. Hon. Jeanne Sauvé, then Governor General of 

Canada: 

 

 She says . . . she goes on to say: 

 

 "However, (referring to the bells) their use must be regulated 

so as to safeguard the government's right to have the House 

consider its order of business, and the equally important right 

of the opposition to criticize, oppose, and even obstruct a 



1452 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

government measure (must be in place)." 

 

And the member from Saskatoon South indicated that that was 

from a quote on March 18, 1982, by the then Governor 

General, Rt. Hon. Jeanne Sauvé: 

 

 She said it must give the opposition the right to criticize and 

obstruct government business if we feel within our obligation 

that they are not abiding by the wishes of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it is imperative that even the 

opposition of today have the same abilities, be able to hinder 

government motions to the point that we can raise the concerns 

with the general public, with the electorate out there who will 

put their faith in us, and not just members on the opposition 

side of the House but all members of this Assembly.  We are 

all here elected to represent them. 

 

The member from Saskatoon South also talked about the 

member from Regina South, and he says: 

 

 . . . he wants to talk about bell-ringing, a very urgent and 

pressing problem. 

 

And he brought to the member from Regina South, brought to 

his attention, that it appeared that the member from Regina 

South wasn't interested in a number of the other concerns that 

were taking place in the province at that time.  Concerns in 

agriculture, concerns regarding the unemployed, the 

out-migration of citizens from this province, hospital waiting 

lists, the fact that even in 1989 the then opposition were 

already looking and calling for an election.  And that was some 

two years after an election but it would appear to me many 

people feel the same way right now, that they really didn't get 

the straight bill of goods prior to the October 22 election 1991.  

It would be appropriate to give them a chance to exercise their 

right to vote and to speak out on the issues and indeed send a 

message to the government.  I believe you would find many 

people out there right now, even though it's so short in a term, 

would feel that way. 

 

But as we address the motion before this Assembly, I think 

they would also feel very strongly and they would speak out 

very strongly suggesting that, what's wrong with this motion 

being sent back to committee?  Is the bell-ringing as urgent 

today as it was then?  Would it be just as appropriate as it was 

in 1989 to send the motion back to committee? 

 

The member from Saskatoon South talked about an olive 

branch. 

 

 I am simply saying to you, (and I quote) bring back that olive 

branch; (he said) let's submit this to a committee; let the 

committee address it; let them address other rules of this 

legislature, and let us then get on with the business of running 

this province.  Let us get on with the business of doing the 

Estimates.  Let us get on with the business of addressing the 

problems of agriculture and of education and of 

unemployment . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, this member kept bringing up the fact of 

other pressing and urgent issues which he felt back in 1989 

were important and it was important to move off of the 

bell-ringing question and for the question to go to committee.  

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, if it was as important then, it is just 

as important today to follow the same process of consensus, of 

negotiation, of consultation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member said we should send it to committee 

so that: 

 

 . . . we can . . . carry out the wishes of the people of this 

province.  If that is not done, if that is not done, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, then I think progress will not take place in this 

legislature. 

 

And most of us in this Assembly were here back in '86 and '87 

when some members of this Assembly talked about . . . the 

opposition members let the people of Saskatchewan know that 

they would make this province ungovernable.  And certainly 

we faced the period of time in the late '80s where there were a 

lot of obstructions placed before the government. 

 

And we just have to look back to the 1991 legislative session 

where there were filibuster after filibuster just by presenting 

petitions and reading names -- and in some cases fictitious 

names.  And I believe, yes, that's a form of filibuster and it 

gives the opposition a form of consulting the people and 

getting their input. But when you see names on a petition such 

as Daffy Duck or Donald Duck, Mr. Speaker . . . and talking 

about getting back to the motion and the amendment before us, 

we wonder if the opposition is using the tools that are before 

them properly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon South indicated that 

this should go to committee to allow the opposition to carry out 

the wishes of people..  And indeed the opposition of the day 

felt people really felt . . . or felt the people were saying, we 

must hinder the SaskEnergy Bill, we must stop this 

government.  We must stop the government from: 

 

 . . . unilaterally changing the rules and unilaterally passing 

privatization legislation against the wishes of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

As we stand here and as we ask that this motion be referred 

back to committee, we feel very strongly too that we must 

speak out, not only to inform the Saskatchewan public but to 

let the government know that just because they have a very 

large and overriding majority, that it doesn't give them the 

mandate . . . they weren't given the mandate just to unilaterally 

make changes across this province without, as they have 

indicated, consulting people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I was perusing some of the debate that took 

place in 1989, I found it very interesting that there was very 

little said by the member from Regina Elphinstone, the then 

Opposition House Leader, now the current House Leader.  And 

as we've indicated over the last period of hours and couple 

days, we are more than willing to move on with the business of 

this Assembly.  And I believe that since the ruling of the 

Speaker in this 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1453 

Assembly, calling the Assembly back to work and putting the 

process of rule changes in the hands of the committee, Her 

Majesty's Loyal Opposition showed the people of 

Saskatchewan that they were more than willing to work. 

 

And we just have to take a look at the number of Bills that 

were presented to this House over the past two weeks, prior to 

the introduction of the motion we are speaking to today.  A 

number of Bills were brought to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 

and a number of Bills passed first reading, they passed second 

reading, they moved into committee, and indeed passed the 

Assembly.  So I think the process is there for the government to 

work and for the opposition to work, all within the guidelines 

of the rules that are presently before us. 

 

And it certainly would be very fair, I believe, and it's the 

argument we present is there, that we can certainly refer this 

back to the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures and 

allow the House to proceed.  And I believe the member from 

Regina Elphinstone when he said this, and I quote, take this 

stupid motion out of here and we'll deal with the issues that 

people voted us to come here for, are appropriate today. 

 

We don't have to be debating the motion.  We don't have to be 

debating the amendment before this Assembly.  We can get on 

with the Estimates.  We can get on with Bills.  And there are 

many Bills in committee such as the amendment of 

enforcement of maintenance orders.  There are Bills regarding 

agriculture that's before this Assembly that this Assembly can 

get on with. 

 

(1915) 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, the contentious motion . . . or Bill that's 

before this Assembly, we would also suggest and throw out 

that olive branch to the government indicating that all they 

have to do is pull out the retroactive clauses out of their Bill, 

bring forward all the rest of the information within the Bill that 

addresses the agricultural questions before us and allow the 

House to proceed.  But don't introduce the Bill with the 

retroactive clause that is going to destroy the rights of farmers 

across this province to have their day in court. 

 

And I think that is only fair.  I believe it is only fair.  I believe 

people right across Canada, people from Tommy Douglas's 

day, people from John Diefenbaker's time, and the Lester 

Pearson's of this world, and many of the leaders across this 

nation, many premiers feel very strongly that we live in a great 

country.  We support a lot of values that, in many cases, people 

take for granted and we must never take away those values.  

We must never interfere with a person's right to speak and to 

defend themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that there will be many other 

arguments presented.  And I believe . . . My colleague says, 

we'll have a number of arguments as well to bring forward in 

this Assembly as to why we should vote on this amendment 

and we should indeed vote in favour of the amendment sending 

the motion back to committee. 

 

I think of the member from Regina Rosemont and I think of the 

debate and his entry to the debate, and I'm going to 

quote a couple of comments that he made during debate: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, that's what this debate is all about.  That's what 

this debate is all about.  There is absolutely no hesitation or 

doubt in my mind that that is what we are doing here tonight.  

We are defending the rights of citizens to participate in the 

democratic process, unlike the members opposite, who would 

deny citizens the right to participate in the democratic 

process. 

 

Very interesting that the member from Regina Rosemont in '89 

would consider it a democratic principle to stand and defend 

people's rights and freedoms and privileges.  And then today I 

would ask the member to stand in this place and indeed defend 

those rights and speak on this issue, not only speaking on the 

bell-ringing and the government's attempt to unilaterally 

enforce the rules and then push rules upon the opposition, but 

speak to the undemocratic principles that we see in the Bill and 

the reason for the bells in the first place. 

 

The member goes on and I continue.  I quote: 

 

 The argument I will now make for some period of time, Mr. 

Speaker, is this: is that this bell-ringing, this motion to limit 

bell-ringing, inhibits the citizenry of Saskatchewan to 

participate in the affairs of their government, and that far 

from having bell-ringing as an anti-democratic exercise, the 

only anti-democratic exercise that we see here in the last 

several weeks has been this government's attempt to silence 

the opposition and inhibit citizens from participating in the 

democratic process. 

 

What I find, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Rosemont 

found it ideologically wrong for the government of the day to 

indeed introduce a motion that he felt very strongly against and 

felt that he should have the opportunity and the ability to speak 

without being hindered on behalf of his constituents and indeed 

on behalf of all Saskatchewan. 

 

I quote again: 

 

 What he did, Mr. Speaker, was brought this motion forward 

which would limit, and I think I've outlined in rather broad 

terms, but also in terms which everybody in this province can 

understand . . . the functioning of us as members, and the 

functioning of the citizens of this province to engage in the 

democratic process. 

 

And that is all we ask for today, Mr. Speaker.  We ask for the 

same opportunities, the same abilities to speak, to stand up in 

our place to speak out on behalf of individuals, to speak out on 

behalf of the rights of individuals and to let people know that 

we may be only 10 members but we will indeed address any 

concern.  We will bring it before this Assembly.  We will make 

sure that the government hears about the concerns.  We will 

make sure ministers are aware of the concerns that people have. 

 

And certainly, as I indicated earlier today in my remarks, the 

Premier also, I believe, is a strong believer in the 



1454 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

consultative and the approach of sitting down and working 

together to come to consensus and to come to agreement.  And 

the Minister of Justice is shaking his head in the affirmative 

and I appreciate that.  I believe we've got his support.  But we 

would just ask him to indeed exercise his abilities to influence 

his cabinet colleagues in going, in allowing and suggesting that 

we follow the same process that took place in 1989, of sending 

this Bill back to special committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do need public hearings, and we've heard that 

on numerous occasions.  And I think the government's 

argument for the motion before us was based on the fact that 

they felt the public is unhappy with bell ringing.  They felt the 

public is unhappy with the process, and no one will disagree 

with that.  We not only need public hearings on the motion 

before us; we need public hearings on the Bills before us and 

certainly any Bills that would contain retroactively. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, we need it because it appears the 

ministers of the day haven't taken the time to really consult 

with people before bringing in legislation such as the 

legislation before this Assembly that has opened the door for 

the bell-ringing and the motion that we are now debating.  We 

wonder where government members have been; why they 

haven't been really consulting and seeking people's views. 

 

I would suggest if the only question out there is, do you believe 

in bell-ringing, that people would indicate, well no, of course 

not; I don't believe in bell-ringing.  I believe if the question was 

posed, do you believe that a government should unilaterally 

change the rules without consensus, I would almost suggest 

that, or I beg to suggest that people would say no, that this 

country, this province, has operated for years, for generations, 

on consensus.  Our communities have operated on consensus.  

Our health boards and our local governments have all operated 

on consensus. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there's no doubt that when people feel that 

their voice hasn't been heard, or when they feel that there's a 

strong issue, I guess one could argue, well they will have 

opportunity in due course to speak out on the issue at the polls.  

But I don't think it would be appropriate for us as opposition 

members to sit down right now and just say, well in four years 

time people are going to be able to speak to this government 

and just let things ride and let things roll and let the 

government have its way. 

 

It is very imperative that we on this side of the House take the 

time, whatever time is needed, to address the concerns out 

there, to raise the questions in committee, to raise the questions 

in Committee of the Whole and Committee of Finance, to raise 

the questions on motions, any questions that would bring to 

light the process of government, where the government is 

going, what plan they have, what they intend to do.  And as we 

are all aware, there are a number of concerns that are out there 

before committees right now. 

 

It also would be very appropriate to send it back to committee 

in light of the number of committees that are working in this 

Assembly.  And I believe the government of the day, and even 

suggested in opposition, that they 

would form committees to address a number of questions such 

as the ward system, or address the SaskPower question, or 

SaskTel, or even in view of the Crown Life movement here to 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Over the time and over the decades, Mr. Speaker, governments 

have, when given the opportunity, have taken the time to form 

committees to formulate and gather public opinion and to 

address the concerns, the issues, and the questions they have 

before them. 

 

I believe if it's important to have a committee addressing the 

store hour question, it would be very appropriate to indeed 

allow the special rules committee to have due diligence in the 

time to very carefully look at all the recommendations that 

have been put before it regarding hours, regarding speeches, 

regarding the closure debate, and regarding time limitations, 

regarding the bell-ringing. 

 

It would be very appropriate to give that committee not only 

the mandate but the time to sit down and very conscientiously 

and concisely address the issues that we would ask, this 

Assembly would ask of that committee to address.  Certainly 

the number one issue right now would be the bell-ringing, and 

it would be appropriate for this Assembly to give the 

committee some guidelines and maybe even set a time frame 

that wouldn't be necessarily a time frame, a period of time with 

a date on it that the committee could aim towards, but having a 

little bit of flexibility that as we see the committee starting to 

work cohesively and come up with some alternatives and 

grapple with the issues, that wouldn't put them in a box where 

they would be so cornered and boxed up that they wouldn't 

have the ability to move and appropriately address the issues. 

 

So I believe that it is very imperative that we allow the 

consultative process to work.  I think we have agreed to come 

to some sort of agreement in this regard and I believe that we 

should continue to allow the House leaders to sit down and 

continue to negotiate. 

 

And with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, it is very imperative that 

we take the time in this Assembly to lay out the guidelines, lay 

out the reasons for us standing in this Assembly and continuing 

to speak on the motion so that the House leaders and, if you 

will, the party leaders, can do some consulting, sit down and 

throw out some ideas.  And at the end of the day, supposedly, 

Mr. Speaker, we will come to a consensus that either addresses 

the question of bell-ringing that all can live with, that we can 

present to the House as a group and as a whole rather than the 

government unilaterally bringing it forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is imperative that we have that ability to 

speak, that we have the ability to let people know that their 

voice is being heard.  And we are all aware of the fact that if 

the opposition didn't speak out and if the opposition didn't 

exercise their rights to speak, that many people across this 

province would consider the opposition as being ineffective 

and indeed the question would come, well why did we vote for 

you, or why did we sent you to Regina to sit in the Legislative 

Assembly.  Didn't we send you there to speak on our behalf?  

Didn't we send you there to raise the concerns and the 

questions that we have that we don't have the same ability as 

you 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1455 

have?  We voted for you because we believed that you had the 

ability and you would effectively stand up and speak on our 

behalf.  So, Mr. Speaker, it is imperative that the opposition's 

credibility be paramount and protected as well. 

 

I would say, why rush the Bill before this Assembly?  Why 

rush the motion regarding the bells and changing the bells 

unilaterally?  The people of Saskatchewan know that this 

bell-ringing motion is directly tied to the legislation that is 

before this House that is presently sitting in limbo. 

 

I would ask the government to do the right thing.  I would ask 

the cabinet to do the right thing and allow this motion to go 

back to committee.  Do what the previous administration did.  

Refer the motion back to committee for further consideration 

and a further suspension period. 

 

As I've indicated, the debate in 1989 indicated that the 

government, or the opposition at that time, was very strongly 

against unilateral changes and proposed an amendment, such as 

ours, that would send this motion back to committee. 

 

It would appear that the government today who were then the 

opposition have short memories as they are now attempting to 

use their massive majority to ram this motion forward. 

 

When I look at the motion and the amendment, I again go back 

to the debate in 1989.  On June 12, 1989, and I believe this is 

some three weeks after the debate on the bell issue came to the 

floor and came to the forefront and hindered the, if you will, 

stopped the process of the legislature and the process of 

government, the then House leader, the member from Melfort, 

rose in this Assembly to speak to the Assembly.  And at that 

time the House leader, the member from Melfort, rose and said: 

 

 I would seek leave of the Assembly to move a motion 

respecting rule no. 33, and the use of the Special Committee 

on Rules and Procedures, and I would ask for leave to do 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1930) 

 

And I would just like to read into the record the motion that 

was brought forward by the Government House leader of the 

day.  The Government House leader . . . and this is what he 

said, and I quote: 

 

 That, by leave of the Assembly, that notwithstanding the 

usual practices of the Assembly, the adjourned debate on the 

motion of the member for Kindersley to amend rule 33 shall 

remain on the order paper, and further the subject matter of 

that motion is hereby referred to the Special Committee on 

Rules and Procedures. 

 

I find it very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that it seemed 

appropriate in that time and that period for the government to 

bring forward a motion after listening to all the arguments put 

forward by the opposition -- an opposition which was two and 

a half times the size of this opposition and did have the 

numbers to stall the debate.  And as we had some discussion 

just prior to the 

continuation of the debate tonight, a number of members 

indicated they thought . . . reflected back on the debate in this 

House and the number of hours that they had spent indeed 

debating this motion before this Assembly. 

 

But what I also find interesting, Mr. Speaker, and I would like 

to quote from the member from Regina Elphinstone, the then 

opposition House leader, the Government House Leader of 

today: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to comment on the 

agreement that has been reached this evening between the 

Government House Leader and our caucus. 

 

I think that is very interesting, and is telling, and it indicates 

that the government and the opposition of the day felt it was 

imperative to talk, to sit down and reach agreement.  And if 

you couldn't reach agreement, at least to allow the committee . . 

. or the motion to go back to committee.  And he says: 

 

 I want to say, before I take my place, a couple of things about 

how we came to the point where we're at in terms of 

bell-ringing, the motion that we dealt with for the past . . . 

better part of a month, and then tonight the agreement that 

has been concluded. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, I think it's important to know the way this issue 

started, with a Bill that was brought before the Assembly, a 

Bill that would have, in part, privatized SaskPower.  And for 

that reason the opposition rang the bells for 17 days. 

 

And as the member continued on in speaking to the motion to 

put the motion back to committee, he says: 

 

 On returning to this Assembly, a motion was put by the 

government that in order to avoid the bell-ringing, we 

believed, on SaskPower in the future, that a motion was 

rammed at this opposition and the people of the province that 

would have taken that tool away, had SaskPower Bills been 

reintroduced.  And we said from day one that we believed 

that this was not a proper way to change the rules of the 

Assembly; that it went against the history of the legislature; 

that never before had rules been changed in that manner. 

 

And I believe over the past period of time I have been laying 

out the same arguments and the reasons why we believe the 

same process should take place; why the government should 

listen to the opposition, why the government and the opposition 

should work together on a compromise, and part of that 

compromise should be allowing this motion to go back to 

committee. 

 

And then the minister goes . . . or the member goes on, and 

says: 

 

 I guess I'm very pleased with the two weeks that we've 

debated this motion, that members on this side of the House 

and some on the government side have debated it, have now 

have been proven worthwhile; that we have achieved our 

goal that 



1456 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

we set on day one -- that this should be solved in a committee 

of the Assembly. 

 

And I guess one just has to wonder will the same process take 

place?  Will we allow the same process to take place?  Will we 

give the House the opportunity and the ability?  Will the 

government indeed heed the arguments that have been 

presented by opposition members?  Will the government 

indeed consult with the opposition and work towards an 

agreement?  Or are we going to find that this government is 

going to go ahead and unilaterally change the rules, ramming 

them on us, pushing them on a small caucus, and then using the 

change in the rules to bring forward any legislation that they 

deem fit against the wishes of the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The member went on to say: 

 

 And to that end, I give the members of the opposition full 

credit and the members of the government side credit tonight 

for picking up on this option and recommendation that we 

had put to them on day one, that it go to a committee to 

report back to the Assembly. 

 

Will we be able at the end of the day to turn around and to 

compliment the government for having heeded public opinion, 

for having heeded the concerns raised by the opposition in this 

legislature?  Will we be able to give the Government House 

Leader a bouquet for the fact that he did take the time to 

consult with his colleagues and that after everyone sat down 

and consulted, that they listened to, and decided the motion 

brought forward by, the member from Wilkie was an 

appropriate motion, was an appropriate procedure, and that this 

motion brought forward by the member from Regina Churchill 

Downs should indeed go back to committee? 

 

The member from Regina Elphinstone continued: 

 

 And so I say to you that it's an important event, and that the 

opposition, I think, can take full credit for the fact that when 

we started the session we believed fully that SaskPower 

should not be privatized in this session.  And on that point the 

people of the province and the opposition, I think, have made 

their point, that that will not be privatized during this session. 

 

One has to question whether or not this opposition, in relating 

and laying forward all their arguments, will indeed have the 

same concerns raised, have the same opportunities raised, that 

indeed the government will pay heed and address the issue on 

the same basis regarding not only the bell-ringing, and not only 

the committee -- the fact that the committee should be allowed 

to proceed -- but in fact, the placing the Bill before the 

Assembly that instigated the bell-ringing process, and the 

debate now taking place, that it would be put on the back 

burner and allow the process of justice to go forward without 

hindrance in the courts. 

 

I continue on: 

 

 On the issue of the bell-ringing, we said that we should 

maintain that right during this session, and 

 to that end the people of the province have once again won 

this evening.  And so I congratulate the members of the 

opposition and the members of the government who I believe 

will be voting for this motion. 

 

 I want to say, (however) the disappointment for myself and 

for members of the opposition is that it took the better part of 

a month -- the better part of a month the government has held 

up the working of the Assembly, and that we could have had 

this agreement, I feel, many, many days ago.  In fact, it was a 

suggestion of the Leader of the Opposition when he rose in 

his place the day after the motion was introduced, that we 

refer it to a committee. 

 

And I believe I referred to that in my remarks the other day. 

 

 I think it could have been accepted at that time.  I'm 

disappointed in that sense.  But I want to say that the result 

tonight proves that the debate that we've been involved in for 

the past two weeks has been well worth while, and I'll be 

supporting the amendment. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, the motion was put to the floor and the 

bells rang.  Lo and behold, the bells rang.  Well we all know 

the bells will ring whenever there's a motion put to the floor.  

Whenever a vote is called for, the bells will ring, calling the 

members in to vote. 

 

And it's interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, when you look back 

at the amendment that took place in 1989, look back at the 

arguments presented by the opposition of the day, look back at 

the arguments presented by the government of the day 

regarding bell-ringing, regarding the motion, and regarding the 

fact that it would be appropriate to deal with the question of 

bell-ringing, number one, when this motion came forward to 

send the motion back to committee for debate, further 

discussion, and to reach a consensus and consultation, the 

opposition of the day had agreed not to ring the bells for a long 

period of time.  And I believe my colleagues and I have also 

indicated that this opposition will not hinder the process of 

government, will not ring the bells for a long period of time.  

But there will be the process of time when the bell-ringing 

question will come up and when the bells will ring to call 

members into this Assembly so that members can vote on the 

issues and the questions and the motions before it. 

 

And so when the bells ceased ringing, Mr. Speaker, back in 

June 12, 1989, it's interesting to note that of the members who 

were available, they all voted in favour of sending this motion 

back to committee, back to the committee on special rules and 

regulations.  All members in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker -- 

government members, opposition members -- all voted in 

favour of that motion. 

 

So I think it would be very appropriate for the government to 

join with this opposition caucus in agreeing with the 

amendment placed forward by my colleague from Wilkie, an 

amendment that says that the report not now be concurred in 

but that it indeed be referred back to the Special Committee on 

Rules and Procedures for further 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1457 

consideration of the time period over which a Bill may be 

suspended and for particular consideration of a process to 

trigger public hearings during such a suspension of a Bill. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, that would allow this House to proceed.  

And I think I can say that my colleagues and I would be more 

than willing to continue the process of government business, 

allowing the debate to continue on Estimates, allowing the 

debate to continue on second readings on Bills, allowing the 

debate to continue on Committee of the Whole.  Mr. Speaker, 

we're ready to work.  We're ready to get on with the process of 

allowing the House to proceed.  We're willing to get on with 

the process of allowing the government to bring their motions 

forward and their Bills forward. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I must indicate that we must and we will, 

over a period of time and over the time that this House is in 

session, as opposition members and as opposition members 

attempting to be as effective as we can, and indeed speaking 

out on behalf of our constituents, on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan, standing up for their rights and privileges, will 

indeed take the time on a number of occasions, and I think 

there will be a number of occasions in the days to come, when 

we must stand up and speak very strongly and bring out a 

number of concerns in a number of areas that people across this 

province feel very strongly about. 

 

And no doubt the constitution is going to be one area that 

people are going to want some input in.  And I think I can say 

that consensus is going to be hard to find.  But we must work 

towards that.  We must strive for that, Mr. Speaker.  And 

certainly as we look over the consensus that was built around 

the constitution, some members of this Assembly, and I 

indicated earlier, the Premier and I believe also the Minister of 

Justice as the constitutional critic for this province, probably at 

times were tearing their hair out as they looked at ways of how 

they could reach a consensus on the issue of the constitution.  

Well I think the same process is happening here in this 

province, that we must give the consensus . . . give the Rules 

Committee the ability to consult, to hold public hearings, to 

come up with recommendations that the people of 

Saskatchewan can work with and can agree on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it appropriate and I think it would be 

appropriate that this House would move on to further business 

and that the House would continue with other business in this 

Assembly and that we give all members of the Assembly 

tonight the ability to again vote on a motion that would move 

this House onto further business and allow the House to 

proceed.  And so therefore at this time, Mr. Speaker, I move 

that the Assembly proceed to adjourned debates, item no. 3. 

 

The division bells rang from 7:44 p.m. until 8:17 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Neudorf Toth 

Muirhead Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Martens Haverstock 

Britton  

-- 9 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Hamilton 

Wiens Johnson 

Tchorzewski Trew 

Teichrob Draper 

Shillington Sonntag 

Atkinson Flavel 

Kowalsky Roy 

MacKinnon Cline 

Penner Wormsbecker 

Cunningham Crofford 

Hagel Knezacek 

Bradley Keeping 

Lorje Kluz 

Murray Renaud 

--28 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

today and for the last few days we've been speaking on the 

motion by the member for Regina Churchill Downs, and that 

motion being: 

 

 That the Second Report of the Special Committee on Rules 

and Procedures now be concurred in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that motion was then amended by my colleague, 

the member from Wilkie, to read: 

 

 That the report not now be concurred in, but that it be 

referred back to the Special Committee on Rules and 

Procedures for further consideration of the time period over 

which a Bill may be suspended, and for particular 

consideration of a process to trigger public hearings during 

such a suspension of a Bill. 

 

We've been discussing this motion since Tuesday, July 7.  Mr. 

Speaker, there's been many good speeches given in that time, 

many good comments about the concerns that the members on 

this side of the House have about the original motion, and in 

support of the amendment from the member from Wilkie.  I 

find it strange, Mr. Speaker, that the government members 

seem unwilling to speak on this important issue.  Only two 

have spoken in favour of the motion -- the original motion, that 

is, Mr. Speaker -- but what of the other 53 government 

members?  Have they no opinion in the matter or are they 

being muzzled by their House leaders? 

 

Where are the members, Mr. Speaker, who spoke in 1989 when 

in opposition?  They spoke in opposition to the eliminating of 

the power to ring bells as a parliamentary tool.  Why have we 

not heard from the member from Saskatoon Riversdale?  He 

talked for approximately 30 minutes in 1989 on the matter; the 

member from Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain, who spoke for 

over an hour; the member from Moose Jaw Palliser, who talked 

for hours on end; the member from Cumberland; the member 

from Prince Albert Carlton, who did speak on the motion.  He 

spoke in favour though, Mr. Speaker, of ending the opposition's 

right to use bells as a parliamentary tool.  The member for 

Saskatoon Nutana; the member for Regina Rosemont, who also 

talked, Mr. 



1458 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

Speaker, for hours on end; the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow, Saskatoon Sutherland-University, and Regina 

Albert North. 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker, will not one of these members defend the 

action being taken by their government today?  Perhaps some 

of these members would rather speak against the motion.  

Perhaps they would feel more comfortable standing on this side 

of the House speaking against the government motion.  They 

had considerable experience in doing that, Mr. Speaker, two 

years ago -- three years ago.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, they could 

give the very same speeches today that they gave in 1989, and 

those points, Mr. Speaker, would be just as valid in this debate 

concerning the elimination of bell-ringing as they were in 

1989. 

 

The member for Regina Churchill Downs spoke for over an 

hour on July 7, 1989.  And I would like to quote from him, Mr. 

Speaker.  That should be July 7, 1989, Mr. Speaker.  Sorry 

about that.  And the member from Regina Churchill Downs 

stated: 

 

 Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to address a 

comment with respect to the remarks made by the minister.  

If indeed child care or families in poverty were a priority, one 

would have thought the Government House Leader would 

have called that today, not this silly motion. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if the motion was silly in 1989, it must 

surely still be silly today.  We have given the government two 

opportunities today to go back to government motions, to deal 

with the business of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1989 the government allowed the opposition to 

go to government business.  The entire debate in 1989 did not 

take place consecutively hour after hour, day after day, on the 

motion to eliminate bell-ringing. 

 

At that time it was interspersed with government business.  If 

the members felt it was so important to bring in a motion to 

extend sitting hours in this House, that it was so important that 

we go to government business at that point, why is it not so 

important today that we end this debate and go to government 

business?  The member from Moosomin moved that we go to 

government business.  The member for Arm River moved that 

we go to government business.  And in both cases today, Mr. 

Speaker, the members opposite in the government voted 

against that motion. 

 

In 1989, Mr. Speaker, when the House was debating this same 

type of motion, a similar motion to end bell-ringing, the House 

sat and discussed a similar motion as we are addressing today.  

It was discussed on May 11, 17, 18, 29, 31 and on June 1, 2, 5, 

7, 8, 9 and 12.  Even on those days, some government business 

was carried out.  The opposition carried out their filibuster with 

26 members, Mr. Speaker, in 1989.  And the government of 

1989 did not continuously jam the opposition with the same 

motion day after day after day. 

 

I'd like to quote again from the member for Regina Churchill 

Downs, from June 7, 1989.  And the member 

said: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, we have suggested to members opposite, to the 

Government House Leader and to the members of the 

cabinet, that there is no need for this legislation.  There is no 

pressing necessity for it.  The only reason that they are 

continue, obstinately and stubbornly, to insist that this matter 

be dealt with in advance of everything else is, I think, in part 

a pettiness, in part, Mr. Speaker, if you just had . . . in part, 

Mr. Speaker, they have a hidden agenda. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we feel exactly the same way, that the 

government opposite has a secret agenda.  But in this case, Mr. 

Speaker, it's not that secret.  The agenda they wish to put 

forward is the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) Bill.  

And the GRIP Bill, Mr. Speaker, is what precipitated this entire 

action that we've been carrying on for the last week. 

 

I'd like to quote again from the member for Regina Churchill 

Downs of June 7, 1989. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, we have suggested to members opposite that 

there is no need for this legislation.  We have suggested to 

members opposite, Mr. Speaker, that there is unlikely to be 

another bell-ringing incident unless (you) . . . bring back 

SPC. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there's only one, small item in there that 

needs to be changed to make it relevant to the debate today.  

Instead of having SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) as 

part of that quote, all you need to do is change it to GRIP. 

 

And we feel the same way that the member did in 1989.  Our 

amendment recommends that the motion go back to the Rules 

and Procedures Committee for reconsideration, and that a 

compromise and a consensus be developed by the committee, 

the Rules and Procedures Committee. 

 

When the Bill is back in committee, this will allow the 

legislature to proceed on with government business.  We want 

to proceed with government business, Mr. Speaker, yet is very 

obvious the government would rather play their power games.  

They even voted twice today, Mr. Speaker, not to allow 

government business to come to the floor of this House.  They 

would rather force this destructive legislation on the province. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is some legislation before this House that 

should be debated.  If the government members were willing, 

we are more than willing to proceed on with other matters.  

There is a motion by the Minister of Agriculture, amended by 

the member for Kindersley, dealing with drought conditions in 

Saskatchewan and the 1991-1992 GRIP programs.  While this 

motion is dated because it deals with drought in the south-west, 

and this drought, Mr. Speaker, has been somewhat alleviated in 

the past week or so, there is still a problem, and a major 

problem, Mr. Speaker, and that problem has now been shifted 

to the north areas of this province, the area north of 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1459 

the Yellowhead highway.  The drought is now in the 

Kelsey-Tisdale area, Nipawin, Shellbrook, Torch River, 

Melfort, Humboldt, Kinistino, Biggar, Wilkie, Turtleford, 

Meadow Lake, Redberry, Cut Knife-Lloyd constituencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, towns in these areas, the businesses in these 

towns, are also very concerned because they see the income of 

the area dropping because of the drought.  This amendment, 

Mr. Speaker, would allow us to take this legislation back to the 

Rules and Procedures Committee and to get on with the 

business of the House.  The farmers, the business people, all 

the people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, need to see the 

government getting on with the business that we should be 

dealing with, rather than dealing with, as the member for 

Regina Churchill Downs states it, this silly motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to accept this amendment and to allow this 

motion to return to the Committee on Rules and Procedures 

would allow us to move on to item 6 of adjourned debates.  

This is a motion by the member for Elphinstone, the 

Government House Leader, that An Act to amend The 

Community Bonds Act, be read a second time. 

 

The community bonds program is a very good program, 

introduced by the previous government.  And I'm sure that all 

members of the House are aware of community bonds and the 

benefits that derive from a community's participation.  To pass 

this amendment would allow the House to deal with second 

reading of this Act to Amend The Community Bonds Act. 

 

I was surprised that government members would not vote to go 

back to the order of the day and proceed with their Bills, 

motions, Committee of the Whole, or Committee of Finance.  

Why would government members not want to discuss 

community bonds?  A number of communities in my 

constituency wish to apply for community bonds.  I'm sure my 

constituents are not the only ones interested in seeing just what 

will be the final result of this amendment, the amendment to 

The Community Bonds Act.  They can then proceed with their 

plans for community bonds.  There are already many 

communities which have community bonds in place, and they 

would like to know how this Act will affect them. 

 

There are many other Bills that are in the same position, Mr. 

Speaker -- Bills that are waiting for the government, for the 

House to proceed with action on them.  All we have to do, Mr. 

Speaker, is take a look through what's called the blues, and we 

can see what is being held up in this House as we deal with the 

motion by the member from Regina Churchill Downs and the 

amendment by the member from Wilkie. 

 

Another Act which the government proclaimed with great 

fanfare that is being held up and which no action is being taken 

at the present time, Mr. Speaker, is Bill No. 48.  I have an 

interest in that Bill because it's in my critic area.  This is An 

Act to Provide a Charter of Environmental Rights and 

Responsibilities. 

 

If we could clear this motion and this amendment from the 

floor of the House to get back to government business, Mr. 

Speaker, we could deal with this Bill, Bill No. 48. 

When the Bill first came to the floor of the House and had 

second reading, the minister in charge for the Environment 

asked that a committee be set up, a public committee, a 

standing committee of the House of this legislature to go out 

and visit with the public to get the public's view on this Bill, on 

the environmental charter of rights and responsibilities, to see 

what should be in that Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this amendment that we have before the House 

today, that is what we are asking for: that Bills which are 

suspended on the floor of this legislature go out to the public in 

a committee for review, for public input.  This would give 

everyone involved the opportunities to have their say, to 

express their views and air their concerns.  It would also give 

the government, be it the government of today or the 

government of tomorrow, the opportunity to meld the public's 

input into their own philosophy to come up with a Bill that 

would represent the best for the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendment proposed by the member from 

Wilkie asked that the suspended Bill go back to the committee.  

Not the committee, excuse me . . . well the committee for rules 

and procedures, but also that the committee, through 

consensus, through compromise in that body, put together a 

process to send suspended Bills to public hearings.  That 

committee would sit and should sit at times outside of the seat 

of government to consider these Bills. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have a number of committees, standing 

committees and special committees of this legislature which 

already do that.  They're already in place.  Some of them are 

empowered to meet outside of the seat of government.  And 

those committees include: Agriculture, Communication, Crown 

Corporations, Education, Estimates, Municipal Law, 

Non-controversial Bills, Private Members' Bills, Privileges and 

Elections, Public Accounts,  Constitutional Affairs; and we 

have four special committees: Nominating, Continuing Select, 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures, which is where 

this motion that we are talking about today comes from, and 

Special Committee on Regulations. 

 

As I stated earlier, Mr. Speaker, some of these committees 

meet outside of the seat of government.  That means that they 

move from Regina and can tour the province.  And that is what 

we are asking in the amendment, the amendment made by the 

member from Wilkie, that the Rules and Procedures Committee 

do with any Bills that are suspended in the House. 

 

The Municipal Law Committee this past winter, Mr. Speaker, 

did meet out of session and away from the seat of power.  My 

seat mate, the member from Maple Creek, was part of that 

committee and they met in two or three different locations 

around the province outside of Regina.  Saskatoon was one of 

those locations they met at.  I believe Prince Albert was also 

one of those locations.  And that gave the people of those areas 

the opportunity to participate, to make their ideas and their 

views known, and allowed the government to include those 

comments and those ideas in the legislation that was being 

considered. 



1460 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, I mentioned Bill No. 48 that the Environment 

minister has presented.  She has asked that the same thing be 

done with that Bill, that a committee, a standing committee, be 

struck in this House; a permanent committee to review items 

concerning the environment -- Bills, and particularly Bill No. 

48, the charter of rights and responsibilities, the environmental 

charter of rights and responsibilities; that this committee be 

allowed to go outside of the seat of government and meet with 

the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we in the opposition believe the amendment by 

the member from Wilkie should pass and that either a new 

committee be struck to review Bills which are suspended . . . 

This would be a new committee set up by the Rules and 

Procedures Committee, as a body of this House.  It would have 

to have a motion on the floor of the House and be passed as 

other motions are, and as the motion to set up the Committee 

for Constitutional Affairs was set up and was passed and was 

agreed to by the members in the opposition.  In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, there are two members of the official opposition 

sitting on that committee, and the member from Greystone sits 

on that committee, so we're not opposed to that type of thing. 

 

We are prepared to work with the government on items such as 

that.  We would like to be able to work with the government on 

this particular motion, the bell-ringing.  We believe that there is 

some room for compromise there, that there is room to develop 

a consensus.  But to do that, this motion, this amendment, 

needs to be accepted to take the report back to the Rules and 

Procedures Committee, and there they can work on the 

consensus and the compromises. 

 

Perhaps though, Mr. Speaker, a new standing committee based 

on the rules and procedures is not the way to go.  Perhaps it 

would be better if once a Bill is suspended that it go to one of 

the committees that is already in operation.  An example is the 

GRIP Bill that we have before us that the government tried to 

introduce in the middle of June.  Rather than it come to the 

floor of the House, perhaps a draft copy of that Bill should be 

given to the committee for agriculture, which I believe has not 

sat since the 1930s.  It's on the books all the time as being in 

place; there are people named to that committee but it never 

sits. 

 

And maybe, Mr. Speaker, if the bell-ringing is to be eliminated 

. . . and we are not totally opposed to that, we are prepared to 

discuss that and to work on a compromise, but the motions that 

are suspended should be taken to a committee.  In the case of 

GRIP, to the Agriculture Committee.  The Agriculture 

Committee could take the draft Bill out around the province 

meeting in various central locations to give everyone the best 

possible access to have their input into the government's action.  

The government could then take that input and incorporate it 

into their Bill to provide a Bill that serves the needs and the 

desires of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to quote again from the member 

from Regina Churchill Downs.  Mr. Speaker . . . make sure I'm 

quoting the right . . . The member from Regina Churchill 

Downs stated that: 

 

 If (the) members opposite were a little less 

stubborn . . . (and this is quoted from June 7 in 1989).  If 

(the) members opposite were a little less stubborn, a little less 

intransigent, and a little more thoughtful and in touch; if they 

spent a little more time in their riding . . . 

 

We feel the same way as this statement from the member from 

Regina Churchill Downs states of June 7, 1989.  If the 

members were in touch with their farm communities, Mr. 

Speaker, they would realize that the Bill that they tried to 

present to this House was not what the farmers wanted. 

 

These comments are just as fair today as they were in 1989.  

Again to quote the member from Regina Churchill Downs, 

same day: 

 

 If this government did not have an agenda for privatization . . 

. Mr. Speaker, if members opposite didn't have that agenda, 

this wouldn't be on the agenda either. 

 

And again, as in other quotes, it's only a matter of changing one 

word to make those exact same quotes relevant today to the 

debate we're having to remove bell-ringing as a power held by 

the opposition.  All we have to do in this quote is change the 

word privatization to GRIP.  If it were not for GRIP, Mr. 

Speaker, the government today would not be trying to ram this 

report down the throats of the opposition and the throats of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Another quote, Mr. Speaker, from the same member, the 

member from Regina Churchill Downs: 

 

 Mr. Deputy Speaker, we oppose this for a number of reasons 

and I'm going to (say), as I say, going to summarize them and 

then take my seat.  We oppose this because it is out of 

keeping with the traditions of this House.  We think those 

traditions have served this Legislative Assembly very well 

and should be maintained. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the traditions of this House are just as valid, 

honourable, and are serving this Legislative Assembly just as 

well today as they were in 1989.  And as the member said, it 

should be maintained. 

 

(2045) 

 

We on this side of the House agree.  The traditions of this 

House have been developed over a long period of time, and 

they have been developed, Mr. Speaker, for a very good reason 

and to serve a very good purpose.  And part of the tradition that 

has been developed over centuries has been the ability of the 

opposition to hold up and to influence government business.  

One of the manners in which the opposition can hold up 

government business is by ringing the bells.  Another is in what 

I am participating in today, a filibuster.  Both of them have 

their uses and their purpose, Mr. Speaker.  Neither one of them 

is invalid. 

 

Part of what the opposition's duty is to do, Mr. Speaker, is to 

scrutinize the government's business, and this is what we are 

trying to do, both in the GRIP motion and on this report that 

was presented to the House.  We believe that 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1461 

the amendment made by the member from Wilkie will indeed 

aid the House in carrying out its business.  It will allow the 

government to move forward with their legislation, with their 

Bills and their motions, and it will allow the opposition to carry 

out their duty to scrutinize those affairs and to scrutinize the 

money that the government is spending. 

 

We agree that the government . . . that the opposition should 

have the ability to hold government Bills up to the light of day 

for public scrutiny.  Part of this scrutiny must include the 

ability to stall some legislation for an extended period of time, 

the ability by the opposition to hoist, or as the Associate 

Minister of Finance calls it, to heist a Bill -- hoist, suspend a 

Bill, take it to a public committee for review. 

 

This motion gives us the opportunity to seriously reconsider 

any of the rules of this legislation.  The House committee 

reviewed the rules during the past winter.  A number of 

changes were made.  We now operate under those changes, Mr. 

Speaker.  At the time those changes were discussed, 

bell-ringing was also part of the discussion.  But, Mr. Speaker, 

at that time no consensus could be arrived at, so no changes 

were made.  This was similar to 1989.  No consensus could be 

arrived at on the motion to limit bell-ringing, so no changes 

were made. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, only months after the Special Committee 

on Rules and Procedures brought forward their 

recommendation to the House on what rules we should change 

and how these new rules should operate in the House, only 

months later the government is now trying to unilaterally force 

a rule change on this House.  Consensus was good and needed 

prior to this report.  But now that the GRIP Bill has come 

before the House and has stalled, the government feels that it 

must force a rule change on the House to proceed with its 

agenda. 

 

I'd like to quote from the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview-Haultain of May 17, 1989.  And he says: 

 

 Let's be clear about one thing, too, Mr. Speaker.  We used a 

legitimate mechanism of this Assembly when we walked out.  

We used a legitimate tool that was available to us.  Members 

opposite seem to forget that they have walked out as well. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I couldn't have said that any better because 

it does seem to be the case that the members opposite or the 

members in government have indeed forgotten that they did 

walk out in 1989.  They walked out and then filibustered on a 

motion to eliminate bell-ringing.  Now the shoe is on the other 

foot.  And, Mr. Speaker, that foot is being squeezed tight. 

 

The member from Regina Albert North has some comments to 

make.  He was one of those speakers that did stand up in 1989 

and made many comments and gave a speech.  I wish he would 

take the opportunity to stand up and give us the benefit of his 

wisdom in this matter. 

 

There has only been two members -- two members -- from the 

government side of the House which have spoken on this issue.  

And I'm glad to see that the member from Regina Albert North 

wishes to speak on this motion. 

And I will be pleased to allow him to speak when I am done 

my own speech. 

 

The member for Regina Churchill Downs and the member for 

Prince Albert Carlton spoke in favour of bell-ringing in 1989.  

They stated that the opposition needed the tool of bell-ringing.  

Now in 1992 they speak in opposition to bell-ringing. 

 

I would like to again quote from the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview-Haultain: 

 

 I think in the phone show he was on, of 12 callers, 10 were 

upset with him that his government had gone too far on this 

issue. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the government members today have 

seemed to have forgotten that there were a number of phone 

shows carried out about the GRIP program, and most of the 

callers to that program were in opposition to what the 

government was proposing to do.  In fact there was very, very 

few members who spoke in favour of the government. 

 

They have also seemed to . . . It also seems they have forgotten 

the farmers that were on the lawn of this legislature this spring 

before seeding -- 500 farmers, Mr. Speaker -- and they were 

opposed to the GRIP legislation.  If this amendment is 

accepted, that we have proposed concerning this report, then 

those farmers will get a chance to sit, to attend a public hearing 

on the matter. 

 

This amendment will allow any Bill which is suspended by the 

House to go out to public hearings.  So the farmers that were 

on the lawn this spring, the farmers that attended the rallies 

around the province -- in Shaunavon and Paradise Hill and in 

Regina here -- will give them the opportunities to have their 

input into whatever program it is that the government is 

proposing to do, that the members of the opposition and that 

the members of the general public have a disagreement with. 

 

I'd like to quote again from the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview-Haultain from May 17, 1989: 

 

 Mr. Deputy Speaker, it must not be forgotten, as I said 

earlier, that 70 per cent of Saskatchewan residents, almost 70 

per cent -- 67 per cent surveyed by Angus Reid -- opposed 

the Saskatchewan government's plan to privatize SaskEnergy. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we didn't do a poll by Angus Reid but we 

did do a poll concerning the GRIP legislation.  And we had 

almost 80 per cent support.  And the majority of people 

surveyed, approximately two-thirds were from urban centres.  

Not the farmers, not the members of rural Saskatchewan who 

would know the issue and understand it, but the people from 

urban Saskatchewan, where they may not necessarily 

understand GRIP, Mr. Speaker, they do understand the idea of 

breaking a contract. 

 

While the government may wish to scoff at the numbers, and 

some of the members opposite are indeed doing so, it 



1462 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

is noticeable that there have been no government polls released 

to contradict the one that we did.  And one might ask why.  The 

public could wonder and conclude that the government has 

something to hide. 

 

I'd like to quote again from the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview-Haultain of May 17, 1989: 

 

 This rule change, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is very instrumental to 

the government in ramming its unpopular privatization plans 

down the throats of Saskatchewan people. 

 

 And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the proposed rule 

change will go a long way towards perhaps putting in the 

hands of the government the power to steamroll over the 

wishes and the will of not only the opposition but the people 

of Saskatchewan with respect to the privatization of 

SaskPower, and make no mistake about it, other 

publicly-owned assets will be next, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

 The members opposite will try to justify this heavy-handed 

unilateral change of the rules of the House by claiming that 

the opposition would use the tactic of the bells on any issue 

in the future and could, in fact, paralyse the government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think if we take a look at that, that is 

exactly what the government today is claiming that the 

opposition could and would do.  That the opposition would use 

this bell-ringing power to paralyse the government. 

 

We're into the middle of our second session, Mr. Speaker, and 

that power has been used once and only once.  In the history of 

this legislature, it's been used only twice for any extended 

periods of time, once by the government members and once by 

us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment harms, if it's not passed, the very 

basis for our democracy.  We have . . . The amendment would 

allow democracy to run its true course. 

 

At an election there are two things that happen.  A government 

is elected and an opposition is elected.  The government has 

their responsibilities, as does the opposition.  The opposition's 

duties are to hold the government accountable, to scrutinize 

their Bills and motions, to ensure that to the best of their ability 

the wishes, needs, and desires of the public of Saskatchewan 

are served. 

 

There's also a third level that plays a factor in government, and 

that's the courts.  And the courts are also there to hold not only 

the government but the general public, but certainly the 

government, accountable for their actions. 

 

In this particular case, the report by the Rules and Procedures 

Committee would force a change that would not allow the 

courts to hold the government accountable for their action.  

Presently the GRIP situation is before the courts.  And if the 

government presented the Bill, the GRIP 

legislation, it would have perhaps an influence on the court's 

decisions. 

 

By eliminating the bell-ringing, as this report would do so, it 

severely curtails the opposition's ability to hold the government 

accountable.  Therefore, the only thing left that would have the 

ability to hold the government accountable would be the courts.  

And as in the case of the GRIP legislation, they are eliminating 

that accountability factor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addressing the amendment, a number of points 

must be made.  First, the government says the reason it needs 

this Bill to end bell-ringing is that the opposition cannot be 

trusted not to veto everything they disagree with.  Well up to 

this point, Mr. Speaker, we've only done it once. 

 

The amendment proposes that the Rules Committee reconsider 

the length of the suspension and the possibility for public 

hearings.  And the point is this, Mr. Speaker, that if the 

government is worried about bell-ringing becoming routine, 

they should understand that in fact a three-day suspension is far 

more likely to become routine.  In fact I would say that if this 

rule change goes ahead, three-day suspensions will become the 

normal process, just as there is a two-day notice requirement. 

 

Now a Bill is presented to the House, notice is given that the 

Bill will be brought to the House two days hence.  That's a 

routine procedure.  If this report is accepted as presented, then 

the three-day suspension will also become a routine matter.  It 

will simply mean that the government will have to bring their 

legislation forward either three days earlier or take three days 

longer to get it through the House. 

 

The effect of this will be -- that the government's proposed -- is 

to insert another period of notice similar to the two-day notice 

that we already have.  Just as the opposition agreed to extend 

the time allowed for replies to written questions from two to 

five days, adding three days now, the government is saying it is 

equally willing to extend the notice of motions period from two 

days to five days, or an extra three days.  But, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, this is so trivial that you can well understand that it 

will become routine very, very quickly indeed. 

 

(2100) 

 

Let us just look at the order paper to compare what has 

happened.  What would have happened under a three-day 

suspension and what would happen under a longer suspension 

accompanied by a public hearing?  The whites of last Friday 

can be looked at as the record, which incidentally reflects a 

record of co-operation, co-operation with which the official 

opposition conducts itself.  Our conduct is exemplary, Mr. 

Speaker, but I will get into that in a little bit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Churchill Downs stated 

on July 7, '92, when he introduced the motion that: 

 

 We (meaning the NDP government) have no assurance . . . 

that this (meaning the bell-ringing) won't be used again and 

again. 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1463 

That's from Hansard of July 7, 1992, page 1276. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that similar argument is why the 

government says they must limit the suspension to three days.  

The member from Regina Churchill Downs said there is many 

pieces of legislation put forward in this House that we have not 

agreed with.  That's true. There were a number of Bills 

presented to this House, both in the session last fall and in this 

session, that we did not agree with.  But what did we do about 

them?  We did not ring the bells, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

that's my point. 

 

To do so, I'm going to refer to the whites of July 3.  I see 

recorded on the whites that on May 13, 1992, Bill No. 5, An 

Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act . . . Not to create any 

confusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm referring to the Votes and 

Proceedings dated July 3, 1992, which contain within them the 

notation of An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act as 

having received first reading on May 13, 1992.  On that day, 

Bill 1 passed first reading.  It passed without any incidents.  

Did we ring the bells?  No we did not.  Was there great rancour 

and shouting and movement about the Chamber?  No there was 

not.  This was introduced very swiftly, no problem, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now if there had been in place in this House the proposed 

three-day suspension rule, what would have happened?  Very 

probably that Bill would not have reached first reading at that 

stage.  Because we didn't have any forewarning what was in the 

Bill, no three-day suspension would have been declared.  By 

the same token, if there were instead a 60-day or a 30-day 

suspension period, it would have assuredly not have been used 

at that stage.  We would have . . . could have suspended the 

Bill at that point for the three days.  But if it had've been a 

60-day suspension -- as has been proposed at some point 

during this debate -- then it wouldn't have been used. 

 

Because like the ringing of the bells, a 60-day suspension is a 

very heavy hand for an opposition to use.  And it would only 

be used in the most dire of circumstances. 

 

Prolonged suspension is very serious, and the triggering of 

public hearings is a very big step, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Not 

quite as dramatic or as serious as ringing the bells for a long 

period, particularly since only one Bill is affected and does not 

stop the Assembly from operating, none the less it would be a 

serious thing to do and you can be assured, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that we would not have exercised the right to suspend 

on Bill 5. 

 

On May 21, 1991, Bill No. 5, An Act to amend The Wascana 

Centre Act, passed second reading.  By that time we did know 

what was in the Bill.  We had a chance to review the Bill and 

could have made a determination on what to do with it.  The 

official opposition did not stand in the way of this piece of 

legislation.  We may not have liked all that this Bill contained, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we certainly didn't walk out of the 

House and let the bells sound. 

 

We are responsible, therefore we act responsibly.  But now ask, 

if the three-day suspension were in place, what would have 

happened?  Well I suggest to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that on second reading of an important Bill, to the 

people of Saskatchewan, it is very likely indeed that we would 

have asked that the Bill be delayed from second reading for 

three days to give the public a chance to gather their thoughts 

on the Bill.  We most certainly would have used such a small 

and insignificant measure in the public interest. 

 

So on second reading of Bill 5, the three-day suspension would 

have been invoked, and it would have been used to give the 

public their first chance to get more than a passing glance at the 

Bill before it was debated in principle -- the debate in principle 

being the second reading stage debate.  This gives the public a 

chance to know what is going on before the process becomes 

irrevocably committed to passage.  So Bill 5 would have been 

the subject of a three-day suspension at second reading. 

 

Now what would have happened if a 60-day suspension with 

public hearings was the alternative?  What would the 

opposition have done then?  Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

would not have triggered the process on Bill 5.  We would not 

have done that because it would not have been reasonable in 

the circumstances. 

 

There were no extremely basic issues at stake, and the will of 

the Saskatchewan people, clearly on the subject of the Bill . . . 

was reasonably clear on the subject of the Bill -- certainly clear 

enough that what further needed to be brought out could be 

brought out in second reading debate itself. 

 

So as long as the suspension period would not have been used 

to trigger on Bill 5, 60 days was not necessary for that Bill, Mr. 

Speaker.  There was no need to hold up that legislation. 

 

What do we see here in relationship to the amendment before 

us today?  We see that experience with Bill 5 tell us that 

bell-ringing did not happen, that a long suspension would not 

have been used, but that a three-day suspension would almost 

certainly have been applied.  So clearly a three-day suspension 

in regard to Bill 5 would not have accomplished what the Rules 

Committee intended. 

 

The Rules Committee intend the suspension to serve as a 

replacement for prolonged bell-ringing.  That is clear from the 

report.  It's a replacement for the power to ring bells 

indefinitely.  But it is also clear from our examination of the 

process that it would affect Bill 5, that the intention of the 

committee would not and will not be served. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us look at the next example.  We need to be 

very comprehensive in our examination of this amendment.  

We need to be very comprehensive in examining the cases we 

have experience with because the government's entire argument 

rests on the fact that if there is more than a three-day 

suspension, it would become routine that the opposition would 

use a prolonged suspension without discretion. 

 

So we must be comprehensive and look at each instance to see 

what would have happened under three days, what would 

happen under the existing rules, and what would 



1464 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

happen if the committee reconsidered and expanded the time to 

some longer period -- perhaps 45 days, perhaps 60 days, but 

some period of time longer than three days. 

 

So if we return to look at our Votes and Proceedings, what is 

frequently referred to as the whites, if we look back into the 

whites for July 2, 1992, we can examine the next example.  I'm 

sorry, Mr. Speaker, I should have said July 3, 1992 not July 2, 

1992.  If we look to the whites for that day we will find the 

next example.  On May 13, 1992, Bill No. 6, An Act to amend 

The Meewasin Valley Authority Act passed first reading.  It 

passed first reading without any hesitation on the part of the 

opposition.  We were prepared to accept that legislation to 

come forward.  Under the current rules and procedures, this 

Bill was considered next. 

 

There is another one of the members . . . this was another one 

of the member from Melfort's Bills.  And I ask the member 

from Melfort, did we ring the bells on that Bill?  No we did 

not, Mr. Speaker.  We did not ring the bells on An Act to 

amend The Meewasin Valley Authority Act.  We could have, 

but we did not do so.  We did not ring the bells and Bill 6 

received first reading without any disruption of any kind.  It 

was brought into the Assembly and it received first reading as 

is recorded in the votes and procedures. 

 

We take bell-ringing very seriously, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

we would not abuse it.  The amendment to the report as 

presented by the member from Wilkie would allow us to retain 

that right which we have and which we will continue to use 

responsibly. 

 

On May 12, 1992, another of the Environment minister's Bills 

was considered.  This Act to amend The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act passed without first reading.  

And as you recall, Mr. Speaker, on July 3, 1992, Bill 3, An Act 

to amend The Environmental Management and Protection Act, 

passed second reading.  At any stage prior to that, Mr. Speaker, 

at first reading we could have exercised our right to ring the 

bells but we did not do so.  We looked at the Bill; we allowed it 

to come forward to the floor of the House.  We gave it first 

reading.  It went to second reading and we allowed it to 

proceed from there.  It passed second reading again after we 

had debated it on the floor of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am somewhat familiar with this Bill.  As the 

Environment critic, I have watched this Bill proceed through 

the House, and we did not stop it from proceeding as the 

government would seem to indicate that we would do with 

every Bill that came before the House.  We have been 

responsible.  We have allowed a number of Bills to proceed all 

the way to Royal Assent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Bill 4 came forward into the 

House, An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley Authority.  

The Act passed first reading on May 13, 1992.  Again this was 

an Act in which we had the opportunity to ring the bells on first 

reading.  We did not do so.  We let it go through to second 

reading. 
 

On May 21, 1992, An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley 

Authority Act passed second reading.  There were a number of 

people who had some concerns about that Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

and we brought those forward in 

debate.  The government members had their opportunities to 

speak, we took our opportunities to speak, but no place in 

there, Mr. Speaker, did we ring the bells.  The bell-ringing is a 

very powerful tool, and like all powerful tools must be used 

with caution. 

 

On May 25, 1992, the Act to amend The Wakamow Valley 

Authority Act went to committee.  And as we all know, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the committee gets into the intimate details of 

any Act.  On May 25, 1992, the very same day, an Act to 

amend The Wakamow Valley Authority Act passed into third 

reading.  On June 3, 1992, Royal Assent was given to the Act 

to amend The Wakamow Valley Authority Act. 

 

So this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, proceeded all the way 

through the House, through its various stages -- first reading, 

second reading, Committee of the Whole, and third reading, 

and Royal Assent -- without the opposition using a tool which 

they have at their disposal, and that is the ringing of the bells. 

 

The report as brought forward by the member for Regina 

Churchill Downs would deny the opposition that tool on the 

assumption that the opposition members would use this as a 

regular basis.  And that's simply not the case, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 7, An Act to amend The Assessment Management 

Agency Act, passed first reading on May 13, 1992.  We had a 

busy day on May 13, 1992.  Again we had the opportunities, 

but we didn't stop the Bill from proceeding. 

 

On July 3, 1992, an Act to amend The Assessment 

Management Agency Act passed into second reading.  This 

Bill could have come forward sooner.  We were prepared to 

talk about it, but it's the government's agenda that sets the dates 

and when Bills . . . as they move through the House.  We could 

have stopped it at that point.  We did not do so. 

 

(2115) 

 

Bill No. 8, an Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing 

Act, passed first reading on May 13, 1992.  My seat mate, the 

member from Maple Creek, is not impressed with that Act.  

But again, we did not use the power of the bells to stop that Act 

from proceeding.  We could certainly have done so, but we did 

not. 

 

And on May 22, 1992, An Act to amend The Municipal 

Revenue Sharing Act passed into second reading.  We talked at 

great length on that Bill.  The member from Maple Creek 

certainly had his opportunity to express his point of views on it, 

and he did do so.  The members of the general public made 

their views known to the members in the opposition as to what 

their concerns were on these Bills. 

 

On May 25, 1992, An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act went into committee.  And there in committee the 

members of the opposition took the opportunity to ask 

questions concerning that Bill detail by detail, item by item.  

And on May 25, 1992, An Act to amend The Municipal 

Revenue Sharing Act passed into 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1465 

third reading.  On June 3, 1992, Royal Assent was given to the 

Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act. 

 

So this Bill originally came forward on May 13, received first 

reading on May 13, second reading on May 21, Committee of 

the Whole on May 25, and third reading on May 25. 

 

This Bill moved through the House fairly rapidly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  So the idea of limiting the bells, as presented in the 

report from the Special Committee of the Rules and 

Procedures, does not seem necessary in this case because the 

bells were not used to limit the government's agenda.  The 

opposition acted responsibly.  We take our job responsibly.  

We take the statements that we make in this House responsibly. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bill 9, An Act to amend The Mineral 

Taxation Act, 1983, passed first reading on May 14, 1992.  

Again, from the sound of the name, An Act to amend The 

Mineral Taxation Act could cause great concern in my 

constituency because in my constituency we have a fair amount 

of oil.  And when you start talking about mineral taxation, 

everybody's ears perk up.  And they wonder, well should the 

opposition be stopping this kind of a Bill?  Well perhaps we 

should or shouldn't, but we did not do so, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

We did not use the bell-ringing to stop that Bill from coming 

before the House. 

 

On May 22, 1992, An act to amend The Mineral Taxation Act, 

1983, passed second reading.  We took the opportunity during 

second reading to make our concerns known, to make the 

concerns of our constituents known, the constituents from 

Maple Creek, from Kindersley, from Souris-Cannington, 

Estevan, Weyburn, all those constituents who may have a 

concern with an Act with the name of The Mineral Taxation 

Act.  This amendment, as presented by the member from 

Wilkie, would allow us to retain the right to hold up that type 

of legislation if, as an opposition, we deemed it necessary, and 

if we had the support of the general public to do so. 

 

On May 25, 1992, An Act to amend The Mineral Taxation Act, 

1983, went to committee, and at that point we asked questions 

dealing with that Act.  On May 25, 1992, An Act to amend The 

Mineral Taxation Act, 1983, passed into third reading.  This 

Bill moved through the House from May 14 to June 3 without 

any severe interruptions -- three weeks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

While I am new in this House, it would seem to me that a Bill 

that moves through the House in three weeks is moving 

through fairly rapidly, that the government has done their duty 

in presenting a Bill that serves a particular need, that the 

opposition has done their duty in bringing forward any 

concerns that the public and the opposition may have, but yet 

the Bill has moved through the House to serve its purpose.  

And a responsible opposition will do that.  It will meet the 

needs at the time, as seen by the general public and the 

opposition, in dealing with government legislation. 

 

But the power of the bells is not always used.  And in fact, it is 

rarely used.  On June 3, 1992, Royal Assent was given to that 

Act, the Act to amend The Mineral Taxation Act, 1983. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bill 10, An Act to amend The Crown 

Minerals Act and to make consequential amendments to certain 

other Acts resulting from the enactment of this Act, passed first 

reading on May 14, 1992.  This particular Act, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, did concern us.  We took the opportunities, while the 

Bill was sitting in first reading, to go out and discuss the issue 

with the public.  Members of the public brought their concerns 

to our attention.  This Bill is still on the order paper because 

those concerns . . . the members of the public took those 

concerns to the government, and the government is now 

hopefully considering the implications that this Act would have 

on the people involved in Crown minerals, on the mining 

industries, on the oil industries. 

 

This is also a Bill, Bill 10, which has an impact on my 

constituency, which has an impact on the constituencies of 

many of my fellow colleagues.  But we did not ring the bells on 

this Act.  We were responsible.  We realize that bell-ringing is 

a tool that can only be rarely used.  If it's used extensively, then 

it is abused. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bill 11, An Act to amend The Marriage 

Act, passed first reading on May 19, 1992.  We didn't hold this 

Bill up, as the member from Regina Churchill Downs would 

seem to indicate that opposition would always do if it has the 

power to ring bells.  We have not taken this opportunity, the 

opportunity in the case of The Marriage Act, to hold up the 

legislation from proceeding into the House. 

 

On May 25, 1992, An Act to amend The Marriage Act passed 

second reading.  Again, as opposition, we certainly had the 

opportunity to ring the bells, but again we did not do so.  On 

May 25, An Act to amend The Marriage Act went into 

committee -- same day, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And on that 

same day, on May 25, 1992, An Act to amend The Marriage 

Act passed third reading.  So that Bill went through second 

reading, through Committee of the Whole, and through third 

reading all in the same day. 

 

Now an obstructionist opposition could have held up that Bill 

for a long period of time, just as we could have held up Bill 10 

and the other Bills that I have mentioned prior to this. 

 

On June 3, 1992, Royal Assent was given to the Act to amend 

The Marriage Act.  So the Bill had made it completely through 

the House and was now law. 

 

Bill 12, An Act to amend The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Act, passed first reading on May 19, 1992.  Again, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the opposition did not use the power that we 

have, that we still have today, but that we are discussing in the 

report from the special Rules and Procedures Committee and as 

was amended by the member from Wilkie.  We have not used 

this power. 

 

Now if we were to change this to three days, we would 

certainly, almost certainly, be using the three-day rule, 

suspension rule, on almost every piece of legislation, because it 

does not significantly affect the government's agenda and it 

does not significantly affect government legislation.  But in not 

affecting government's agenda, it 



1466 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

also does not give the opposition any power to have any 

meaningful influence on that legislation. 

 

On May 25, 1992, An Act to amend The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Act went to second reading after it had 

received . . . and went to committee after it had received second 

reading on May 21.  We had some questions with this Act, Mr. 

Speaker, and we dealt with them.  We did not hold up the 

procedures by ringing the bells; we asked questions.  We made 

comments and debate during second reading and we asked 

questions during the Committee of the Whole.  And that was 

enough for us, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We did not have to hold up 

that legislation by ringing the bells.  We have not and will not 

ring the bells on every piece of legislation at every opportunity 

when it comes before the House. 

 

On May 25, 1992, An Act to amend The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Act passed third reading, and on June 3, it 

received Royal Assent.  On June 3, there were many Bills that 

received Royal Assent, and those Bills had moved through the 

House.  From when the House initially started sitting in this 

section, I believe on April 27 to the June 3, we didn't ring the 

bells.  We talked about the various Bills that came forward, we 

debated them, we asked questions, and we did the job that the 

opposition is supposed to do in scrutinizing the government 

business.  But we did not use the power to ring the bells. 

 

But if we had the opportunity, as presented in the report, to 

hold those Bills up for three days at some point during their 

passage through the House, we would almost certainly have 

done so.  It would become a routine part of House proceedings.  

The same as when a Bill . . . when the government wishes to 

bring a Bill into the House they first give notice, 48 hour notice 

of the Bill being presented to the House. 

 

It would simply become a routine matter that the House would 

get a 48 hour notice of a Bill coming to the House. The Bill 

would be presented and read for the first time.  And then at 

some point there would likely, most very likely, be a three-day 

suspension of that Bill, at some point during its passage 

through the House. 

 

Bill 13, An Act to amend The Adoption Act, passed first 

reading on May 19, 1992.  And that was a Bill which my 

colleague from Arm River and my colleague from Moosomin 

had some serious concerns about it.  But they did not, again, 

they did not take the opportunity to stop that legislation from 

proceeding through the House. 

 

On June 3, 1992, An Act to amend The Adoption Act passed 

second reading.  The member from Arm River made his 

comments during debate concerning this Bill, and at the end of 

those comments, the Bill was allowed to pass into this 

committee . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  I've listened to the 

member with great care, and I must confess that I'm having 

some difficulty in relating what it is that he is now saying and 

has been saying now for some time to the questions that are 

before the House. 

 

The question before the House is the amendment to the main 

motion.  The member has spoken to the main motion.  The 

member is now speaking concurrently to the amendment and to 

the motion, but the tenor of most of his remarks seem to be 

geared at the main motion itself. 

 

I think that the member should try, as much as possible, to 

relate what it is that he is saying to the amendment that is 

before the House.  And it may well be of necessity that he will 

want to refer to the main motion.  That is appropriate.  But the 

member should try to relate his remarks and his examples to 

the amendment as well.  And I encourage the member to keep 

that in mind. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  The 

amendment made by the member from Wilkie allows us to 

refer . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wonder if by leave of 

the member from Souris-Cannington, if he would mind 

answering a question of mine. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Well, that's entirely up to the member 

for Souris-Cannington, I would submit, if he wants to answer a 

question. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm prepared to accept the 

question from the member from Maple Creek. 
 

(2130) 
 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I note that 

I'm getting some rather odd reaction from the government side 

because they don't understand that it's important for us to put 

into the record what we have on our minds, rather than just 

simply pass it between us as colleagues.  It's important that the 

public know what our questions among one another are so that 

we can get the people to know what the issues are. 
 

And my question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is:  I would like to 

know from the member from Souris-Cannington, what kind of 

public support you are getting on this issue from your 

constituents?  Do you think that they want the opposition to 

continue to try to preserve the tools that we have being debated 

here?  Do you, for example, think that the people out there 

want you to try to retain the tool of bell-ringing to use on such 

issues as perhaps hospital closings, on such issues as perhaps 

tax increases on crude oil? 
 

What do you think about the 8 per cent tax increase from 7 per 

cent and how it relates to cross-border shopping?  Do you think 

your people down there would like us, as an opposition, to use 

the tool of bell-ringing for that issue to try to bring home some 

attention to these matters?  That's the gist of my question, and I 

would like that answered. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- I would like to thank the member from 

Maple Creek for that question.  I have indeed been receiving a 

fair amount of support on this item, on the amendment, that it 

go back to the committee to retain either the bell-ringing or 

some other means by which the opposition can have an 

influence on government's legislation.  On the particular issue 

of GRIP, I have been receiving total support on the issue of 

whether or not we 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1467 

should be allowed to ring bells. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I attended a church function 

yesterday afternoon at which there were many people from 

both in and out of the province.  And while the people did not 

understand what we were discussing here today about the 

amendment on the report, they did understand the fact that the 

government at times needs to have brakes applied to its 

progress, that the opposition needs to be able to use either the 

bell-ringing or as in the case of the amendment where it would 

go back to the committee of rules and regulations, that some 

form of suspension, some time period for suspension would be 

in place there, and that the rules, that a committee would be set 

up to review whatever this Bill was that was being suspended. 

 

The member from Maple Creek asks about hospitals.  I am 

very sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that my constituents, the people 

of Souris-Cannington, in particular the towns of Gainsborough, 

Oxbow, Redvers, and Arcola, would be and are adamant that 

this amendment as presented be passed, that they get the 

opportunity to have a say on whether or not their hospitals 

close.  They want the idea of public hearings to be part of 

whatever solution we come up with in this House. 

 

Public hearings are very important.  The people in 

Gainsborough have a relatively new hospital.  They're an older 

community with many seniors that reside there.  They would 

want to have the opportunity, if a motion came before this 

House to eliminate, to close, or to change their hospital, they 

would very much want to have the ability to go to public 

hearings and to speak there, to let the government know what 

their feelings are.  And in some communities it may very well 

be that the public in place would be happy to have their 

hospital close.  But I can say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that is 

not in my constituency. 

 

The people in my constituency would very much like to have 

the opportunities that are presented in this amendment that a 

Bill which is suspended in the House, if it was dealing with 

hospitals, that it would be able to go to public hearings. 

 

The hospital in Arcola, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is an older 

hospital.  Not only would they like to go to public hearings as 

made possible by this amendment if this amendment were 

accepted, they would not only want to discuss the closure of 

their hospital, but also the reconstruction of that hospital. 

 

For the benefit of the member from Maple Creek in the 

concerns of hospitals, this amendment as presented by the 

member from Wilkie, "for particular consideration of a process 

to trigger public hearings during such a suspension of a Bill" be 

in place, that if a Bill dealing with the hospital in Oxbow were 

to come forward, that the people in Oxbow be given the 

opportunity to express their ideas and concerns.  Because, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the hospital in Oxbow is currently under 

construction.  A totally new facility is being built there and if a 

Bill was to be brought forward that would eliminate that 

hospital, that would change it into some other form, I am very 

sure from the comments being made this past weekend that 

the people in Oxbow would like to take the opportunity as 

presented in this amendment to hold public hearings. 

 

In the case of the taxation that the member from Maple Creek 

mentioned, if a Bill dealing with cross-border shopping was to 

be presented to the House, and if that Bill were to be 

suspended, and if the amendment as presented by the member 

from Wilkie were to be adopted, then the people living along 

the border -- and not just in my own constituency but in the 

constituency of the member from Estevan, the member from 

Bengough-Milestone, the member from Assiniboia, the 

member from Shaunavon -- I'm sure those businesses would all 

want to have the opportunity to participate in public hearings.  

And it would not affect just the people who live along the 

border but also all of the businesses and the people in 

Saskatchewan, because not just businesses are affected but also 

consumers and they would want to have a say in whatever 

legislation was being brought forward. 

 

So I hope that I have, Mr. Speaker, answered the questions for 

the member from Maple Creek.  Because the whole process, 

the whole idea of being able to take a Bill that has come before 

this House, has been suspended, out to the general public, is 

very important.  The general public needs to have the 

opportunity to make its views known.  They have the 

opportunity now through the members of the House, but at 

times, Mr. Speaker, the members of the general public wish to 

be able to present their views to a government body, to where 

they think that the government may accept some input.  And 

the public hearing process gives the public the feeling that they 

indeed are having an opportunity to present their ideas, their 

solutions to a problem, to a government body where they will 

be heard and hopefully where they will be considered. 

 

If the public process, as outlined by the member from Wilkie in 

his amendment to the report, if it works in the way that it is 

conceived, as in a manner in which the rules -- the Special 

Committee on Rules and Procedures -- would develop it, then 

the public would indeed have that opportunity to present their 

ideas.  The government would hopefully accept the 

recommendations that comes from those committees -- be it the 

Committee of Agriculture, or the Education Committee, or all 

that list of committees that I had gone through prior to this.  

And fact is, Mr. Speaker, we just had a new committee struck 

not that long ago.  It passed through the House with no 

problem.  We debated it but it passed.  And that was the 

establishment of a new Standing Committee on the 

Constitution. 

 

The public in the election of October 21 stated that they wanted 

to have a chance to speak on any constitutional changes which 

occurred to Saskatchewan.  They said they wanted . . . they 

spoke in the plebiscite which was held at that election, 

approximately 65 to 70 per cent said they wished to have a 

voice in any decision which was made on the constitution.  If a 

constitutional Bill were presented to this House, then under the 

amendment by the member from Wilkie, that Bill could be 

suspended at some point during its passage through the House, 

and then if the Committee accepts the recommendation of the 

member from Wilkie, public hearings could be held.  The 

public could have their direct input into constitutional affairs. 



1468 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

And that is what the Committee for the Constitution has been 

set up to do. 

 

So right now it would seem that that committee will deal with 

whatever recommendations the Premier brings back from the 

meetings in Ottawa.  But perhaps when the Bill comes back 

into the House -- or some other Bill -- if the amendment as 

proposed by the member from Wilkie were accepted, then that 

could turn around and go back out into the public to be 

reviewed by the public, that recommendations would come 

back into this House through the committee for consideration, 

and if those recommendations meet with the view of the 

general public, then accept it.  We are not prepared to hold up 

Bills that suit the needs of the general public and that suit the 

needs of the province.  We are prepared to be reasonable and 

responsible in how we deal with the legislation that comes 

before the House. 

 

Some other Acts passed this House and the member from 

Regina Churchill Downs seems to indicate that if the report is 

accepted, but if the amendment is rejected, then all will be well 

and good.  If the report were to be rejected by the House then 

the opposition would be continuously using the bell-ringing as 

a tool to hold up the government's business, and that has simply 

not been the case in the past and would not be the case in the 

future.  But under the amendment it would give us the 

opportunity to take a Bill that comes before the House, 

postpone it for a period of time, and allow the public to 

scrutinize it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 14, An Act to amend The Child and Family 

Services Act, passed first reading on May 19, 1992.  Under the 

proposal made by the member from Regina Churchill Downs, 

we could have held up that Bill for three days.  But we did not 

do so.  Under the old rules that we currently operate under, we 

could have held up the Bill indefinitely if that had been our 

desire.  But under the Bill, under the report, the amended report 

as amended by the member from Wilkie, we could have 

suspended the Bill for X period of time -- whatever is finally 

decided on by the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

-- and asked that it be taken to the public to be reviewed. 

 

And this is one of the Bills that we did have some concerns 

about, but in debate with the minister, in second readings with 

the minister, our concerns were somewhat clarified and 

mollified.  Bill 14 passed second reading on June 3, and on 

July 2, An Act to amend The Child and Family Services Act 

went to committee.  And it was at that point, Mr. Speaker, 

under the report, the way the report would set out the rules, 

again we could have held it up for another three days, but we 

didn't do so.  Under the rules we operate today, we could have 

rang the bells and held it up indefinitely, but we did not do so.  

But if there was a strong need as indicated by the public, under 

the amended rules, we could have suspended the Bills and gone 

to public hearings.  Because there were some people that had 

some very serious concerns about this Child and Family 

Services Act, just as there were for The Adoption Act. 

 

On July 2, 1992, An Act to amend The Child and Family 

Services Act passed into third reading.  It had made it through 

the House and now only awaited Royal Assent. 

So the amendment that allows this report to go back to the 

committee for review and for consensus is very important.  We 

have not been abusing -- neither did the government members 

when they were in opposition abuse -- the right to use the bells. 

 

Bill 15, An Act to amend The Wills Act, passed first reading 

on May 20, 1992.  On May 25, it passed second reading.  This 

Act went right through the House without any problems.  We 

didn't hold it up as we could have under the member from 

Regina Churchill Downs's proposal.  We could have stopped it 

at some point for three days.  We didn't do so.  We certainly 

would have done so under those rules.  We would have held it 

up at some point for the three days.  But under the current 

rules, the bell-ringing unlimited, we did not do so.  And if we 

felt the need was there under the amended proposal by the 

member from Wilkie, we could have suspended it for the three 

days and allowed the general public to have access through 

public hearings to make their comments.  This Bill was given 

Royal Assent on June 3. 

 

(2145) 

 

Bill 16, an Act to amend The Jury Act, passed first reading on 

May 20, and second reading on May 25.  If we were to use the 

rules as proposed by the member from Regina Churchill 

Downs in the report to suspend Bills -- we could use it to 

suspend Bills at some point, for three days -- every Bill that 

proceeded through the House would most likely be held up for 

those three days.  Whereas today, under the rules as they exist, 

the ability to ring bells is not used to hold up legislation. 

 

In this particular Bill, this particular motion, we are certainly 

holding up procedures with the filibuster.  But we would not 

use the bell-ringing on these Acts that I have mentioned, to 

hold up their progress through the House.  The public has 

access to them, we make the comments that the public provides 

us with, the information they have concerns about.  But we 

don't necessarily hold up the Bills just to be vindictive. 

 

Bill 16 went to the committee on May 25, the same day it 

received second reading.  And it also passed third reading on 

May 25, and on June 3 it received Royal Assent. 

 

Bill 17, an Act to amend the Commissioners for Oaths Act, 

passed first reading on May 20, 1992.  And as with all the other 

Bills that I have mentioned, we didn't ring the bells on it.  We 

talked about it; we allowed it to move through the House.  

Under the proposed rule changes by the member from Regina 

Churchill Downs, and the Special Committee on Rules and 

Procedures, we would almost certainly have used the three-day 

suspension on this Bill to provide us with more time to contact 

the people who may be interested, who may be affected by this 

Bill. 

 

But did we use the bell-ringing to do so?  No we did not.  The 

amendment as proposed by the member from Wilkie, if the 

opposition felt it was necessary, if they were receiving the 

comments from the general public that this Bill should be 

suspended, would do so. And then if the amendment were 

accepted as proposed by the member from Wilkie, public 

hearings would be held to determine 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1469 

exactly what the stand of the public is on the matter, to have 

their input so that the government could include that as part of 

the legislation that they're presenting, and included as part of 

the changes that they are making to any Bill or to the new 

legislation that they may be presenting. 

 

If a new Bill comes forward, it would be very beneficial to the 

public at large to have the ability to go to public hearings at 

some point and make their views known, make their concerns 

known.  But under the motion as presented by the member 

from Churchill Downs that is not part of it.  But under the 

amendment by the member from Wilkie, the idea of public 

hearings is definitely part of the procedure, as outlined, to be 

considered by the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures. 

 

On May 25, An Act to amend The Commissioners for Oaths 

Act passed second reading.  Again in this Bill we did not use 

the power of ringing the bells to hold it up, but under the 

original motion, the report as presented by the House, we 

almost certainly would have.  But with the amendment as 

presented by the member, that would not have been necessary.  

The time frame would have been a lot longer.  If we suspended 

a Bill, it would mean it was that much more serious.  So you 

take that responsibility a lot more heavily.  The three-day 

suspension does not really do anything to the government's 

agenda or to a Bill that's being held up.  Most Bills that come 

forward into the House do not proceed in one day or even two 

days or three days.  It takes a period of time for those Bills to 

move through the House and an additional three days at some 

point would not be a great inconvenience. 

 

The Act to amend The Commissioners for Oaths Act passed 

second reading on May 25.  It also passed . . . went through the 

committee on May 25, and received third reading on May 25 

and Royal Assent on June 3.  This was another one of the Bills 

that we did not obstruct in the House.  We could have but we 

did not. 

 

Now Bill 18, An Act to promote Regulatory Reform in 

Saskatchewan by repealing Certain Obsolete Statutes passed 

first reading on May 20.  Now when this one was presented to 

the House under the report rules, as presented by the member 

from Regina Churchill Downs, we may have had some 

questions as to just what was being eliminated here.  We could 

have suspended it for a period of time, or under the current 

rules we could ring the bells.  But under the amended formula 

as presented by the member for Wilkie, we could certainly 

have suspended the Bill for 45 days, 60 days, whatever, if we 

felt that was necessary at the time, if the public had a great 

concern over this Bill and allowed it to go to public hearings 

and to be aired. 

 

The Act to promote Regulatory Reform in Saskatchewan 

passed second reading on May 25.  May 25 it went into 

committee.  And on May 25 it also passed third reading.  And 

on June 3 this Bill received Royal Assent. 

 

No place in there, Mr. Speaker, did we hold it up.  We allowed 

it to proceed through the House in the proper manner.  We 

could have, under the proposed rule change, held it up for three 

days but we did not do so. 

Bill 19, An Act to amend The Contributory Negligence Act 

passed first reading on May 22, 1992.  Under the amendment 

as proposed by the member from Wilkie for particular 

consideration of a process to trigger public hearings during 

such a suspension of a Bill, if we had suspended the Bill, then 

the amendment as presented by the member from Wilkie would 

have been part of what would happen.  The Bill would be 

suspended for a certain period of time and then we would go to 

public hearings. 

 

Or, as the rules stand today, we could have rang the bells.  But 

we did not do so.  So the power of that suspension, that 

long-term suspension, the power of ringing the bells being 

equivalent to a certain degree, are not used but only rarely. 

 

Bill 20, An Act to amend The Surface Rights Acquisition and 

Compensation Act passed first reading on May 22, 1992.  This 

is an Act which, from the title of it, is also of concern to the 

people of my constituency as they are to a good many of the 

members in this House.  We did not ring the bells on this Act.  

But under the amended . . . not amended, rules as the report 

recommends, we could have suspended it for three days. 

 

But if it were as much of a problem as the name could imply, 

then under the member from Wilkie's amendment . . . that the 

Bill be suspended for a period of time and that for particular 

consideration a process to trigger public hearings during such 

suspension.  If the public hearing process were in place, then 

that Bill would have gone to the public's hearing, taken that 

period of time, whatever the suspension was for.  The Bill 

could have come back into the House after that point for 

passage through the House.  But in the mean time, the public 

would have had their opportunity to have a look at the Bill and 

to have a say on what was included in that Bill. 

 

On June 3, 1992, An Act to amend The Surface Rights 

Acquisition and Compensation Act passed second reading.  We 

didn't stop it. 

 

Bill 21, An Act to continue SaskEnergy Incorporated, to make 

certain consequential amendments to certain Acts resulting 

from that continuance and to validate certain transactions 

involving SaskEnergy Incorporated, passed first reading on 

May 25, 1992. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, and I'm sure the other members of the 

House are also aware that an Act dealing with SaskEnergy 

created quite a furor in the House in 1989.  But on this date, 

May 25, 1992, the Act was not held up in the House as it was 

in 1989.  We allowed it to proceed through first reading.  We 

had the same power that stopped the SaskEnergy Bill in 1989.  

We had the power to ring the bells but we did not do so. 

 

Under the member from Wilkie's amendment, that a certain 

period of time be fixed for a suspension on a Bill, and that it 

trigger a public hearing process, if we had had serious concerns 

about this, and if the government members when they sat in 

opposition had the opportunity to utilize the rules as proposed 

by the member from Wilkie, then they could have suspended 

that Bill for a certain period of time and taken it out to the 

public to have the public's comments and inputs. 



1470 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

It would have been beneficial to them.  It would have been 

beneficial to the government.  It would have been beneficial to 

the people of Saskatchewan, because during that time that that 

suspension took place the business of the House would have 

proceeded.  For that 17 days, or for whatever sitting days were 

in that 17 days, the business of the House would have been 

conducted. 

 

This spring, in that period of time that we rang the bells on the 

government's GRIP legislation, had the amendment been 

approved that the member from Wilkie proposed, then that Bill 

could have gone out to public view, could have gone out to the 

public for comment and then come back into the House at a 

later point for passage through the House, for debate in the 

House. 

 

Bill 22, An Act to amend The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. 

Trust Fund Act, passed first reading on May 26.  Now, why 

would we want to suspend this Bill for three days?  I don't 

know, but under the proposed rule as amended, as proposed in 

the report by the member from Regina Churchill Downs, this 

Bill would almost certainly have been suspended for the three 

days. 

 

But it received, this Act . . . in fact, had second reading waived.  

It was allowed to proceed through the House immediately.  Not 

only was second reading waived, but taking it to committee 

was also waived. And on May 26, the same day that the Bill 

was presented, An Act to amend the Doukhobors of Canada 

C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Act passed third reading. 

 

Now, the Lieutenant Governor cannot come into the House 

every day to pass a Bill that makes it through the House, so she 

came in on June 3, 1992, and gave Royal Assent to the Act to 

amend The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Act, 

along with many other Bills that we had already passed in this 

House. 

 

Now with a time period greater than the three days to suspend a 

Bill, as proposed by the member from Wilkie in his amendment 

to the report, we would not have used that power, but we may 

just have used a three-day suspension because this Act . . . we 

were notified of this Act 48 hours before it came in on May 26, 

so there was a two-day delay in there already.  It would almost 

certainly, as a matter of routine procedure, have received a 

three-day suspension at some point. 

 

Bill No. 23, An Act to amend The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act, passed first reading on May 26, 1992.  We 

didn't hold it up in the House, Mr. Speaker.  If the amendment 

by the member from Wilkie had been in place, we could have 

suspended the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I have listened very carefully to the 

member from Souris-Cannington, and I want to remind the 

member of a ruling made by the former Speaker of the 

legislature on June 12, 1991, when it comes to repetition and 

also for obstruction in the legislature on work that is before the 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker made it very clear in the presentation of petitions 

that if a member can present the petitions and make his point 

by presenting more than one petition, that 

that must be done.  The member makes the same point on each 

Bill that he goes through.  In fact his words are identical on 

each.  And so I say to the member that his tactic of 

obstructionism at this particular time is not well taken.  And the 

member has made his point, I think, on 22 Bills, that number, 

and I think we are well aware of the point that he is attempting 

to make.  And so I ask him to move on with his debate on other 

points that he wishes to make. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was not 

trying to be obstructionist but merely to indicate . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  The member knows that he 

cannot comment on the Speaker's decision or ruling. 

 

(2200) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will try to 

make my comments brief then and to get to the point. 

 

We in opposition feel that the amendment, as presented by the 

member from Wilkie, has a great deal of merit to it, that it will 

allow people to have an input and to allow the proceedings of 

this House to proceed as they should be.  I read the motion 

again, the amended motion: 

 

 That the report not now be concurred in, but that it be 

referred back to the Special Committee on Rules and 

Procedures for further consideration of the time period over 

which a Bill may be suspended, and for particular 

consideration of a process to trigger public hearings during 

such a suspension of a Bill. 

 

There are two important parts in this amendment.  The first is 

the time period that we are dealing with.  As I tried to point out 

in my earlier comments, a three-day suspension would merely 

mean that it would become routine, that it would be 

continuously being suspended for three days.  If, though, as the 

amendment suggests, that a longer period of time be used to 

suspend a Bill, then the process would not become routine but 

would rather be used more judiciously and more responsibly. 

 

The time period, Mr. Speaker, should be debated in the 

committee.  It could be debated on the floor of the House but it 

should perhaps be better placed in the committee, the Special 

Committee on Rules and Procedures, and there to develop a 

consensus and a compromise -- somewheres between three 

days and indefinite, that is currently in place for bell-ringing.  

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that such a compromise is possible 

if all members remember what happened -- what they felt -- in 

1989, and what happened in 1992. 

 

The second part of this amendment is the process to trigger 

public hearings.  We already have a number of committees in 

place that have the ability to go out and generate public 

hearings.  The constitutional committee has that power.  The 

Municipal Law Committee exercised that power this past 

spring, over the winter.  The environment committee, as 

proposed by the Minister of the Environment, will have that 

power.  There is no reason, Mr. Speaker, why, if this process to 

trigger public hearings was in place as proposed by the 

amendment, 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1471 

that we could not take a Bill before its particular committee 

that would deal with it, take it out into the public view, and 

allow the public to have access and to comment on it. 

 

But the idea of limiting the process, under the report, to three 

days is of no benefit to an opposition, and it is in fact the 

opposition that is giving up the right to ring the bells.  It would 

certainly be of benefit to a government to ram through 

whatever legislation they propose. 

 

The government members that were elected prior to October 21 

sat on this side of the House, and through the spring of 1989, 

debated quite eloquently the need to maintain the right to have 

the power to ring bells.  And now it's somewhat ironic, Mr. 

Speaker, that those same members are the members who wish 

to remove that right.  It was right then and now it is wrong, in 

their minds. 

 

The amendment as proposed by the member from Wilkie, that 

further consideration of a time period over which a Bill may be 

suspended, would give some power back into the hands of 

opposition, that would be removed by going to the three-day 

suspension, as proposed by the member from Regina Churchill 

Downs. 

 

But we realize that to simply hold up the Bill for an X period of 

time is not real productive.  That at some point in time the 

public needs to have some input into the reason that Bill is 

being suspended, some input into what the Bill is about.  And 

that is why the member from Wilkie included that 

consideration be given to triggering a public-hearing process. 

 

We feel that it is very important that this take place.  That not 

only the time period be extended in there, but also that the 

public hearings are an integral part of the whole process. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe that we are reaching a point in my 

comments where it's clear to the members where I feel.  I feel 

that the amendment, as proposed by the member from Wilkie, 

has some very definite advantages to it, that's a very beneficial 

possibilities.  This House needs to take the opportunity to 

compromise and to find a consensus in the Special Committee 

for Rules and Procedures, and this amendment would allow 

that to happen. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a motion: 

 

 That the Assembly proceed to consideration of second 

reading of Bill 54, An Act to amend The Farm Financial 

Stability Act, (No. 1). 

 

The division bells rang from 10:08 p.m. until 10:23 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

-- 8 

Nays 

 

Van Mulligen Trew 

Wiens Sonntag 

Teichrob Flavel 

Shillington Cline 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Penner Crofford 

Cunningham Stanger 

Hagel Knezacek 

Murray Keeping 

Bradley Kluz 

Lorje Renaud 

Johnson  

-- 23 

 

The Speaker: -- The debate will continue on the main motion 

and the amendment thereto. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It certainly is a 

pleasure for me to enter into this debate this evening to attempt 

to convince the government members to go along with our 

amendment, which would return this ridiculous measure back 

to the committee where it really belongs.  To think that any 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, would be able to be considered 

foolish enough to sit in this House and allow such a thing to 

happen is just totally ridiculous.  We couldn't possibly do it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I know, Mr. Speaker, that as we debate this 

issue and use the parliamentary tactic of debate, that there is a 

good chance that some of the members of the government will 

in fact realize that the points we are making are reasonable and 

that we are making points that not only we consider important, 

but they themselves considered important in days gone by. 

 

I'm absolutely convinced, Mr. Speaker, that there's a good 

chance that some of the back-benchers might start to agree with 

us.  In fact, I note with some pleasure, that as we have gone 

through these motions to try to get the government back to 

work that the percentage of vote has been getting closer. 

 

And this gives me reason to be optimistic that perhaps the 

government members are thinking about what we are saying 

and that they might in fact even change their mind and do the 

honourable thing and return this report back to the committee 

where it should have stayed to begin with, and give it that due 

consideration that is necessary in order for harmony to continue 

to exist in this House, and so that we can, in fact, do the 

business of this Assembly for the good of the people of this 

province as it was intended to be done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- It has been brought to my attention, Mr. 

Speaker, that folks have debated this issue before, that it's not a 

new thing for oppositions to find themselves having to struggle 

to keep the tools that they need to work with.  I'm told that this 

has happened both at the federal level as well as other 

provincial levels. 



1472 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

And certainly I have been told and had it explained to me that 

people have worked for many, many hours and sometimes even 

days to make the points necessary to preserve these rules and to 

make sure that the democratic process continues to work. 

 

We therefore are committed, Mr. Speaker, to working long and 

hard to bring forth the necessary arguments to convince the 

government that they should go along with us on this 

amendment.  And I really think that we're starting to get 

through to some of them because you can see that they're 

starting to sit up and listen a little closer to our debate and our 

points, and that's interesting. 

 

You will note that a couple of days ago, Mr. Speaker, these 

folks were busy heckling us and laughing almost off their seats.  

Tonight I noticed with pleasure that they were starting to be 

very quiet and listening to exactly what we had to say.  And my 

colleague, the member from Souris-Cannington, was driving 

home such good, solid points that I believe that they are 

probably on the verge of voting for this amendment to pass. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I am convinced, Mr. Speaker, that as time 

goes by the rational, intelligent approach that we take will be 

served and that we will win the day; that we will convince 

these folks to take . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 10:30, this House stands 

adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow afternoon. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 p.m. 

 


