




















































Hansard: May 27, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 667 

 May 27, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am happy today 

to rise to add to the long list of petitions that have been 

presented over the past week or so.  Now with regards to the 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) program, the very 

same points are made in the petition that were made in the 

previous ones, so I won't read it in detail.  I think that everyone 

here knows pretty well what it's all about, so if a page will 

come, we will have them present it. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Clerk: -- The following petitions for private Bills are hereby 

presented and laid on the Table: 

 

 by Mr. Kowalsky of the Ukrainian Catholic Council for the 

Ukrainian Catholic Eparchy of Saskatoon in the Province of 

Saskatchewan; and 

 

 by Ms. Hamilton of the Regina Exhibition Association 

Limited of the city of Regina in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I'd like to 

introduce to the legislature a constituent of mine and a former 

member of this House, Mr. Bob Long, and also was minister of 

Highways.  We are very pleased to have him here and hope he 

enjoys his stay with us and please help me welcome him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you and 

through you to the House, I would like to introduce 23 grade 6 

and 7 students from the Alameda School in my constituency.  

They're seated up in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and I'll be 

pleased to be meeting with these students after question period 

for pictures.  I would ask all the House to welcome them here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to introduce to 

you and through you to the other members a class of grade 8 

students from the Rosetown Central High School accompanied 

by Mr. Schwab and Mr. Wiebe.  I hope you enjoy the session 

here this afternoon and I ask the members to join me in 

welcoming this delegation from my home school town. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, having observed events of last week and the 

response by some media to one clause of the television 

guidelines in the new rules -- some of that response made 

tongue in cheek and some not quite so tongue in cheek, Mr. 

Speaker -- and noting the motion before the House to delete the 

phrase that some media felt inappropriate, I wish to make a 

private member's statement primarily to the Assembly's friends 

in the media, Mr. Speaker, which I have put into limerick form: 

 

 In regard to this rule that we're ridding, 

 In response to the media's bidding, 

 'Twill ensure you the tools 

 For your jokes, April Fools, 

 For you see, CBC, we were just kidding. 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's not an easy act 

to follow, the hon. member, ever, but I want to put today a 

message of congratulation and encouragement to all of the 

1992 graduates in all Saskatchewan high schools of which my 

son, Orion, is one this year. 

 

The four years of high school are such short years, and I think 

we're all a little bit surprised when all of a sudden our kids are 

adults standing before us who are ready to either go into the 

work force or to go on to some further training or careers, 

which will be a very big lifetime choice for them. 

 

But we recognize all the efforts that parents and teachers and 

students put into this, and additionally the parents and the 

teachers who've gotten together to celebrate in a positive way 

through safe grad activities after the graduation ceremonies. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, through yourself and through the legislature, 

I'd like to wish all the best to the spring 1992 graduates, their 

teachers, their friends, and their families.  And keep up the 

good work and stick with Saskatchewan.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, thank you.  A public 

meeting of concerned leaseholders was held at the Ravenscrag 

community centre on Monday, May 25.  This meeting was 

called to discuss with leaseholders the possible implications of 

The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and there were 75 

people in attendance. 

 

The main concerns of these leaseholders present was the 

consultation practices of Parks and Renewable Resources.  

Leaseholders were notified by form letter and were not given 

an opportunity to have input into the decision to place all this 

land in critical wildlife habitat. 

 

Each individual leaseholder should be able to have a 

one-on-one input into the management and status of his lease.  

The term "critical" misleads people, as this land is very well 

managed by leaseholders.  They have developed and improved 

these leases over the years, and good management is to their 

benefit as to the wildlife. 

 

They passed a resolution saying that the critical wildlife Act be 

dropped and that this be made retroactive on land already 

designated; be it further resolved that any 



668 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1992 

designations be a co-operative effort amongst Parks and 

Renewable Resources personnel, municipal government 

officials, individual lessees, and the Department of Rural 

Development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well as those people from Ravenscrag, I have 

120 of these people in my constituency who are also 

leaseholders, and as I sent letters to them through the years, 

they have indicated to me that the majority of them also are of 

the same opinion.  And I want to thank the Assembly for this 

time to state this opinion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to rise in this 

Assembly today to announce Redberry's part in the wellness 

program.  I would like to take this opportunity to show the 

members of this legislature the co-ordinated studies of people 

and organizations throughout Redberry.  This project was 

undertaken some time ago as a method of getting the thoughts 

of the people of Redberry put forward to our government. 

 

Today I had the opportunity to present this document to the 

Minister of Health.  I would like to take this opportunity to 

thank the Minister of Health for her receptive approach to the 

health concerns of the people of my constituency of Redberry. 

 

I would also like to take this opportunity to publicly thank my 

staff and the people of Redberry who contributed to this 

project.  This collection of documents outlined the 

recommendations of the contributors on health and social 

issues of great concern to them. 

 

I believe this is the kind of background information that our 

government requires to develop programs to best serve the 

health requirements of the people of Saskatchewan.  Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the Kindersley 

constituency I had the privilege of taking part in a seeding 

demonstration.  There were five companies represented there 

and my own private seeding unit was there on display. 

 

It was a demonstration of direct seeding which, for the 

members that aren't aware of what that's all about, it is a new 

soil conservation related technique to try and demonstrate the 

benefits of soil conservation in the area.  It was very well 

attended, Mr. Speaker. Something in the order of 200 to 250 

people were there taking part in the demonstration. 

 

I think after a number of years of very low rainfall on the west 

side of the province, it has certainly raised the awareness of 

soil conservation in the area, and that's why the demonstration, 

I believe, was so successful. 

 

The program was sponsored by the save our soils program, a 

program that is jointly funded by the provincial and federal 

governments, and also the district 40 ADD (agriculture 

development and diversification district) board and the Brock 

Soil Conservation 

Association.  I again say I had the privilege of attending it and 

taking part in it and I think it was a very worthwhile activity for 

the area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to talk to 

you a little bit about the bud worm problem in Big River.  

Weyerhaeuser and Environment department are closely 

monitoring the problem right now of the bud worm.  Okay has 

been given to Weyerhaeuser by the Environment department, 

which they are closely monitoring.  And at this stage they're 

closely watching to see how bad the infestation of the bud 

worms will be. 

 

There's approximately a couple hundred hectares of infestation 

of forest right now in Big River.  They do not believe they will 

have to spray if the weather acts responsible and does destroy 

the bud worm.  So in this, Mr. Speaker, I just want to bring you 

up to date on the bud worm problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to talk 

briefly today and make a statement on the farm financing 

situation.  I have personal experience, as you may know, in the 

credit union system for over 12 years and also born and raised 

on a farm, so I think that I have a reasonable background of 

this. 

 

And I just simply want to say that I believe it's high time for 

some co-operation from all parties involved.  There's an 

absolute necessity for the Hon. McKnight and the Farm Credit 

Corporation to accept the proposed six-year leaseback 

proposal, and also the federal government has to be prepared to 

absorb some of the cost. 

 

The people of the constituency of Meadow Lake have always 

pulled together when it required.  And I want to close, Mr. 

Speaker, by saying that it's time for our federal minister to pull 

together and respond positively to the grave financial situation 

that is faced by many of the Saskatchewan farmers today.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Government Agreement with Crown Life 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier and it relates to his government's 

practice -- and I might say dangerous practice -- about talking 

about the financial deals in the absence of complete 

knowledge, and in part I suspect it's an attempt to really 

bad-mouth anything that the previous government has done. 

 

The government yesterday released a number of details about 

Crown Life which intentionally leave the impression that 

taxpayers and the people of Regina will not benefit, and frankly 

this information will do the company harm. 

 

Is it not true, Mr. Premier, that you and your ministers 



May 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 669 

were completely briefed on this project prior to Christmas and 

that you had full knowledge of the terms of the guarantee, the 

proposals for public offerings, and that you were indeed 

warned then that delays in allowing a public offering would 

only add additional interest costs to the overall transaction? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, first of all, the member I 

believe is in error when he bases his question on the 

assumption that information has been deliberately revealed by 

the government with respect to this transaction.  I don't believe 

that to be the case.  Some of the officials are not in Regina as 

of this moment or as of this day, so I can't be perfectly certain 

about it, but we have none the less indicated that there is no 

release of the information. 

 

With respect to the Crown Life matter, as with respect to the 

matters which the former administration was involved in, we 

have taken the position that we want to take the appropriate 

time to learn about all the details, investigate all the aspects of 

the proposed funding and other arrangements and take what 

other necessary measures are appropriate in this regard to 

satisfy ourselves that the direction and the aim taken by the 

former administration with respect to these projects is in the 

right direction and in the right area.  This has been, in the case 

of some of the projects, a little more complicated because 

they're complicated and therefore a little more time consuming. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, a question again to the Premier.  

You knew, Mr. Premier, that not to go into the market-place 

was going to cost a great deal of money, and not to go in 

quickly.  And yet you decided to spend 4 or $500,000 on yet 

another study, another analysis of Crown Life, and you did this 

with Goldman Sachs in New York despite the recommendation 

of two of Canada's best financial advisors, RBC Dominion 

Securities and Gordon Capital. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you tell the House why you decided to 

conduct another costly review and why they refused to take the 

advice of RBC Dominion Securities and Gordon Capital to 

allow Crown Life to issue a public offering prior to Christmas 

and save the taxpayers some money? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, what the hon. member 

asks I think again is predicated on the wrong assumption.  The 

newspaper story which I think he bases his question on -- at 

least the one that I have is The Globe and Mail story of this 

morning -- talks about one of the partners in the arrangement, 

HARO, being advised on this matter by Gordon Capital 

Corporation and RBC Dominion Securities ltd. 

 

That being the situation, it is only appropriate for another party, 

which is the government -- a separate entity -- to get its 

independent advice as well, in the interests of the taxpayers and 

the financial arrangements.  It is in that context that the 

decisions to which the member refers in the question were 

made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier.  

Mr. Premier, you were told that another review would cost 4 or 

$500,000.  And yet and on top of that, Mr. Premier, you were 

told that the delay of a public offering could cost up to $50 

million because of interest that would be paid as you continued 

to study or review or examine again, over and over. 

 

So your decision not to do a public offering is not just a 

$500,000 decision, but it appears it could be up to $50 million 

cost to the taxpayer.  Mr. Premier, will you not admit that the 

50 million potential cost overrun, that is a result of your 

inability to act in a timely fashion on the recommendation of 

very serious firms who have made the recommendations to you 

in November, is really just breaking the terms of the original 

agreement and is going to result in a very expensive bill to the 

taxpayer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I obviously do not 

agree with the statement or the conclusion, I may put it that 

way, of the hon. member's question.  What the hon. member 

must understand, and I'm sure he does more than anybody on 

the opposite side does, we're talking here about a multimillion 

dollar deal.  We are talking about the question of short-term 

financing and long-term financing which involves the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan in one form or another with 

millions of dollars. 

 

It would be and is the only prudent thing to do, which is to 

make sure that the dimensions of the proposed arrangement are 

fully and properly examined especially by an incoming 

government.  And that appropriate authorities and experts in 

this field give the independent advice so essential for a decision 

to be taken.  Those that have been engaged, I am advised, have 

acted with dispatch and with as much speed as the complexity 

and the importance of the project dictates. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier.  

Mr. Premier, the media reports also see the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government leaving the impression that the 

former government tried to hide the terms of the public 

offering and that all of a sudden it has turned into a convertible 

bond transaction. 

 

Is it not true, Mr. Premier, that the proposal for the form of the 

public offering, a convertible bond offering, came after the 

election and again came from RBC Dominion Securities and 

Gordon Capital close to seven months ago, and that your 

failure to act has severely restricted the company's ability to get 

on with doing what it wants to do, namely attract new equity to 

this new firm in Regina? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I do not see it that way, 

nor to the best of my knowledge do any of the partners see it 

that way.  It's not been communicated to us at all.  As they, I 

think in the newspaper story -- I haven't read it in detail -- it 

indicated.  Mr. Hill himself is quoted in the context that he sees 

no problem.  I can't find the 



670 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1992 

exact quotation.  And the government responses I think are 

fully appropriate. 

 

The answer is again the one that I've given.  If the hon. member 

opposite believes that with respect to any arrangement, 

especially one which involves hundreds of millions of dollars, 

we as the new government, as anxious as we are to have 

development in the province of Saskatchewan and as anxious 

as we are to have new investment in this province, that we 

should rush into making decisions without appropriate 

examination of all the terms and conditions, and getting all of 

the independent advice that is necessary, then I'm afraid we 

have a disagreement as to how we conduct the business of this 

government. 

 

We are especially predicated by the financial picture in which 

we find ourselves.  We are predicated to take the positions of 

careful examination, prudent consideration of options, and 

making the decisions public at the appropriate time, as we will 

in this case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier.  

The handling of this transaction, Mr. Premier, in public like 

this, and then causing a story to make The Globe and Mail 

seven months later does not leave the private sector with a 

feeling of good faith.  It's not bad enough that they are dealing 

with this issue through the media, but to do so with a partner 

who is working with the government on the Piper deal -- which 

also appears to be being negotiated in public and not doing all 

that well -- is causing people across the country to say, what is 

the Government of Saskatchewan up to? 

 

Will the Premier not agree that the original transaction 

provided for the loan guarantee to last up to seven years to 

facilitate loans from the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, 

but that had the NDP taken the advice of respected investment 

professionals that I've mentioned here today, the loan guarantee 

would already be substantially diluted or reduced as we sit here 

today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I frankly don't 

understand where the Leader of the Opposition is coming from 

on the base of his questions because he predicates his question 

on a false set of facts. 

 

I have here in front of me a photocopy of the Regina Leader-

Post's front page story.  And this last two paragraphs, very 

shortly put, is my answer to the premier: 

 

 Haro principals say they aren't bothered by the government's 

new questions about the deal and maintain that while 

progress has been slower than expected, everything is on 

course. 

 

 "Nothing has changed from the original announcement," 

Haro president Paul Hill said. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is the position that the president, Mr. 

Paul Hill of HARO, takes.  That's the story report.  But the 

former premier, the Leader of the Opposition, is 

 oblivious to those facts and constructs a series of questions 

based on some sort of political agenda which he seeks to 

advance. 

 

I say to him: face up to the facts and the facts are as stated in 

this story.  And understand please, that because of the 

complexity of the deal involved, this is a new government 

which is going to act in the best interest of not only the partners 

and the investors, but the taxpayers of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And that's a refreshing change. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier.  

Mr. Premier, you're finally getting at the point. 

 

It's your dithering that's costing up to potentially $50 million.  

And Paul Hill and others would say, Mr. Speaker, that the 

share offering could have been done last fall, or by the latest 

January, and you'd save yourself all this money. 

 

Now the question I have to you on top of all this $50 million is 

simply this: is it not true that your private sector partners, as 

well as RBC and Gordon Capital, were prepared, Mr. Premier, 

for a share offering or public offering of some sort at Christmas 

time and that it was in fact your government's dithering that 

may end up costing taxpayers additional financial costs as well 

as an extension to the loan guarantee period.  Isn't that the fact, 

the truth, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer to the 

question is the one that I have given to the Leader of the 

Opposition, which I must repeat again.  The answer is in this 

very same story.  The answer is that the HARO principals say 

they aren't bothered by the new questions.  I don't know why 

the Leader of the Opposition should be bothered if they're not.  

Nothing has changed from the original announcement.  That's 

what Mr. Hill says -- nothing has changed from the original 

announcement. 

 

The position that the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .  No, that's 

what Mr. Hill says.  I'll take his word rather than your word, 

with the greatest of respect.  And it is our position that the 

government should carefully look at a matter as complex and 

as financially important to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan as carefully and as diligently as we are doing.  

That's the answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the media has been prompted by 

the government through Mr. Don Ching, reported that because 

of the former government's handling of the deal that the 

government will end up owning Crown Life after seven years.  

We can only assume that the government's motive for this leak 

is to discredit the company so much that any potential public 

offering might be a failure and the NDP can blame the former 

government again. 

 

Mr. Premier, despite these motivations by the NDP 



May 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 671 

administration, will you not acknowledge that it would be 

impossible for the government to own the insurance company 

for any length of time because the federal regulations just won't 

permit it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the point that I want to 

make here is the one that everybody knows.  The government 

does not intend to own a portion of Crown Life.  

Anti-government provisions and federal legislation prohibit 

government ownership, in any event.  The government 

however may in realization proceedings take ownership in trust 

for subsequent sale if that ends up to be a part of the 

negotiations and discussions. 

 

Now I mean that was a large part of what your question was 

based on.  And the member opposite knows more than anybody 

on that side and surely as well as anybody does in the treasury 

benches sitting here presently, what the federal provisions are.  

So I don't know why the question was predicated on that. 

 

But let me come back to the other central proposition.  This has 

nothing to do about the former premier's concern about 

blame-casting, the Crown Life situation.  This has to do with 

what I said earlier.  It has to do with the fact that as far as this 

government is concerned, in a complex basis of negotiations 

and a complex deal as we have in this nature, that full and 

careful examination of the implications, the due diligence, the 

financial obligations -- short-term, long-term, medium-term -- 

be examined. 

 

And we have to be especially careful of that, given the 

extremely difficult financial picture in which we find ourselves, 

if I may say so -- here is now a little bit of blame-casting but 

justly so -- as the result of nine years of your administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, my question will be to the 

Premier.  On one hand, Mr. Premier, the NDP government uses 

the successes of the previous governments, like upgraders, 

Saskferco, FCC (Farm Credit Corporation), and Crown Life to 

pump up your economic growth figures.  And then it turns 

around and has people like Don Ching maliciously leak 

half-truths to the media about the projects. 

 

Mr. Premier, I think it would be fair to the Saskatchewan 

taxpayer if you and your ministers and your key people who 

are now running Crown Management Board and others would 

be fair and prevent and stop talking out of both sides of their 

mouth.  Could you today, Mr. Premier, assure the people of the 

province, the employees of Crown Life, the residents of 

Regina, that the Government of Saskatchewan, the NDP 

Government of Saskatchewan is committed to living up to the 

transaction and moving Crown Life to Regina? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, again this is an 

interesting example of how a straw man, or perhaps I 

should say in today's world a straw person, is constructed on 

the basis of a question leading up to the point that the Leader of 

the Opposition tries to make about the government's intentions. 

 

The one quotation that I see in The Globe and Mail by Mr. 

Ching says this: The government is carefully looking at the 

matter to be sure it does the right thing, the Crown 

Management Board Mr. Ching said.  There may have been an 

earlier quotation but nothing beyond that.  And then the main 

story says, but the government is reluctant to comment on the 

transaction.  Period. 

 

Out of that, the Leader of the Opposition constructs a straw 

person to make some sort of an allegation.  I say with the 

greatest of respect to the Leader of the Opposition, you have 

really drawn a long bow here, stretched the point beyond 

credulity. 

 

Clearly we'd like to have as much economic development as 

possible.  We do not dismiss out of hand everything that your 

administration did.  We think that those issues which can work 

to the benefit of building jobs and security for the people of 

Saskatchewan in the future should be supported and 

maintained.  If that can work with Crown Life, we're all on side 

for that.  Who would be opposed to it? 

 

And we are asking the questions, not from the point of view of 

being harmful to it, but we are asking from the point of view of 

being diligent for the interests of all the taxpayers who in these 

very difficult times, as you know, ask governments to act with 

prudence and care. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Final question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier.  

Mr. Premier, clearly what we want to do is clear this up before 

the public and before the media so that in fact Crown Life 

employees and the city of Regina and those that are thinking 

about investing can feel confident that the NDP administration 

supports this move. 

 

Two questions: will you put a leash on Don Ching so that he 

doesn't jeopardize the project any more?  And secondly, Mr. 

Premier, will you document and table in the legislature the 

interest costs to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan of your studies 

and your delay?  And I believe, if you're paying in the 

neighbourhood of prime plus anything on $250 million, it can 

cost you up to $50 million because of your delay.  Would you 

table the costs of the delays so the public of Saskatchewan 

knows exactly what the dithering has cost? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm tempted to say again 

to the Leader of the Opposition that if I take a look at Mr. Paul 

Hill's quotation which says nothing has changed from the 

original announcement, and they aren't bothered by the 

government's questions, he seems to be fairly optimistic.  

Everybody seems to be fairly optimistic except, for some 

reason or other, the last few months the Leader of the 

Opposition has been so doggone pessimistic, and it's so 

difficult in that environment to get him to be a little bit 

optimistic.  As my colleague says -- 



672 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1992 

you know your own message: you never say whoa in a 

mudhole.  So just say that and break this pessimism and be 

optimistic. 

 

I say to the Leader of the Opposition and the House opposite: 

we are working on this as carefully and as quickly as we can, 

as I'm sure the premier would want . . . the former premier 

would want us to do.  That's the job of a premier and the 

government.  We want economic development, and at the 

appropriate time when the studies are finished and the 

announcements need to be made, the costs which are attached 

to it, we'll examine with a view to tabling as well. 

 

Research into Energy Development 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My questions 

are to the minister for SaskPower.  There's a need in Japan for 

increased power and they're looking to Canada, apparently for 

the ability to produce hydrogen from electrical power to meet 

their needs.  This innovative technology is also being pursued 

by Germany, which would create a whole new market and a 

demand for electrical power from suppliers like Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, given that the federal government has already 

spoken to Quebec, to British Columbia, and Manitoba, what 

discussions have you had with the federal minister about 

research funds available into this technology for our province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member asks what discussions 

have gone on on energy development on the provincial level in 

Canada and around the world.  I want to tell you that 

discussions are in an ongoing stage with Mr. Epp.  My 

colleague from Swift Current and myself met in Ottawa about a 

month ago, and we spoke of energy options around the world 

and what Canadians might do, also where we might on a 

regional basis share information that would have local and 

regional application but also world-wide application. 

 

So to the member opposite, it's something we're interested in, 

concerned about, because we believe that in many areas of the 

world some of the technologies we have have great application.  

And what has been done in some of the areas, i.e., SaskTel and 

other Crowns, SaskPower is looking at those opportunities as 

well. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to the same 

minister.  Given the development of these kind of innovative 

technologies -- and I'm talking specifically about the 

containment of hydrogen that can then be shipped and turned 

into power -- and all the potential international market 

demands, how can your government conclude that 

Saskatchewan's energy supplies are indeed sufficient to carry 

us into the year 2003? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The studies done by the 

corporation, the Billinton Report which was commissioned by 

the previous government along with the experts in the 

corporation, would indicate that the power supply needs that 

we've indicated that are on the drawing board and being 

commissioned -- that is Shand 1, about 260 megawatts of 

power; the potential of Shand 

2, another potential of about 260 megawatts; we believe a 

hundred megawatts from co-generation; 90 megawatts in 

conservation, a bit of a wind project -- that those projects that 

are on the drawing board will take us to about the year 2003. 

 

We've then looked at and are in fact setting up an institute in 

Saskatoon which will look at the power needs for the province 

from the year 2003 to the year 2020.  So the expression that our 

power needs are basically met to the year 2003, that is the new 

power coming on plus the institute being established to the year 

2020, is done with the best experts in Saskatchewan and from 

across the piece. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  It's 

most interesting how you're selectively attempting to choosing 

some things from the Billinton Report, but you also choose to 

ignore others. 

 

The Billinton Report also recommended the AECL (Atomic 

Energy of Canada Ltd.) deal, and of course what you're 

suggesting now is that their prediction of 2003 is an accurate 

prediction. 

 

Mr. Minister, in view of the increased demands for 

arrangements that will be made -- perhaps with Germany, 

perhaps with Japan, the fact that Manitoba is saying that it 

doesn't have enough power and may have to buy some from the 

province of Saskatchewan, if it in fact follows through with 

Japan -- this could place on Saskatchewan's energy supplies a 

much different kind of colour.  And I ask this government 

again: will you admit to your mistake about cancelling the 

AECL deal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- There's two points that I want to 

clarify, Mr. Speaker, I think, in terms of keeping our facts 

straight in the House.  I want to indicate that Billinton did not 

recommend the AECL deal.  That's completely false.  And the 

member opposite, whether she's just not up to speed on the 

Billinton Report or whether she's attempting to mislead the 

public, I want to say that the Billinton Report did not 

recommend the AECL deal and you should clarify that. 

 

Secondly, the AECL deal contained a couple of points that 

many people in Saskatchewan were concerned about.  One, the 

commitment to building a CANDU 3 reactor, 450 megawatts, 

that we don't need at least until the year 2003.  Why would we 

start spending a billion dollars to build a nuclear reactor when 

we don't need it for another 10 years?  That doesn't make any 

sense. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- That was the main point in the 

AECL agreement.  The second main point was dumping of 

nuclear waste as a disposal site in Saskatchewan.  Many people 

are concerned about that as well. 

 

So what we've done is we've rejected the commitment to a 

CANDU 3 reactor.  We've rejected using Saskatchewan as a 

dump site for nuclear waste from around the world.  You may 

support that, but we don't, and many people don't. 



May 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 673 

But we are also moving and discussions are ongoing with 

AECL for research on nuclear medicine, irradiation of food -- 

all of those areas.  And I'm sure that at some time in the near 

future there will be further discussions and announcements 

made about AECL, and work that can and will be done in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 27 -- An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 

1989 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I move first reading of a Bill to 

amend The Rural Municipality Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Decision on a Question of Privilege 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, yesterday I deferred 

my decision on a question of privilege raised by the Opposition 

Deputy House Leader. 

 

The member makes two points in his question of privilege.  In 

the first point the allegation is made that someone improperly 

removed files from the storage of the member for Arm River.  

This, it was said, interfered with the member's ability to do his 

duties and therefore constituted a prima facie case of privilege. 

 

In the second point, the member argues that the use of these 

documents in the debate that took place on May 25, 1992 

constituted a contempt of this House. 

 

I think the Deputy Opposition House Leader realizes that an 

accusation of theft is a serious matter of a criminal nature, for 

which this House has no power to adjudicate.  Of course when 

criminal activity affects the dignity of this Assembly, then it is 

within the penal jurisdiction of the House to punish for 

contempt in appropriate cases. 

 

For the Assembly to take such action however, there must be 

conclusive evidence of such a breach.  The question of whether 

the documents were stolen can only be determined by normal 

criminal procedures.  In the meantime we have two versions of 

events.  I have no option but to accept each member's 

explanation and consider this whole matter as a dispute 

between two members over facts. 

 

The second point made by the member was that the use of the 

documents by the minister in the Assembly constituted a 

contempt of the House.  It is my view that a contempt of the 

House could be found only if the documents used had been 

illegally obtained and this was known by the member using 

them. 

 

As I said earlier, the Chair is not in a position to determine 

whether the documents were illegally obtained. 
 

I therefore find no prima facie case of contempt or breach 

of privilege has been established. 

 

I do want to point out, however, that the use in debate of 

private correspondence between another member and his or her 

constituent should be treated as an ethical question, which I 

invite all members to carefully consider. 

 

That is the end of my statement. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 21 -- An Act to continue SaskEnergy Incorporated, 

to make certain consequential amendments to certain Acts 

resulting from that continuance and to validate certain 

transactions involving SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks I'll be moving second 

reading of The SaskEnergy Act.  It's my pleasure today to rise 

in the House and outline the role that we believe SaskEnergy 

will play in Saskatchewan's economic future.  Our government 

is committed to finding innovative solutions to meeting 

Saskatchewan's energy needs and SaskEnergy . . . The 

SaskEnergy Act is part of that initiative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy will be established as a free-standing 

Crown corporation by the Bill that we are dealing with here 

today.  With this status, SaskEnergy will have its own identity 

enabling the Crown corporation to carry out its mandate more 

effectively for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

While in opposition, Mr. Speaker, we fought hard to keep 

SaskEnergy in the hands of the people despite the previous 

government's plan to privatize SaskEnergy.  That struggle is 

over and I'm proud to say that our natural gas utility still 

belongs to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1415) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's fair to say that our 

province, the province of Saskatchewan, is in dire economic 

straits.  It is time for crucial decisions; Mr. Speaker, I say for 

smart decisions.  Regaining fiscal integrity means using our 

resources like natural gas as part of overall economic strategy. 

 

Today's environmental concerns require new solutions for 

tomorrow.  Natural gas is the most environmentally friendly 

fossil fuel and our province is fortunate to have vast a supply.  

Our government is determined that natural gas play a key role 

in our search to fulfil Saskatchewan's energy needs.  Mr. 

Speaker, SaskEnergy will lead the way in achieving some of 

these goals. 

 

Through its provincial-wide network of natural gas 

transmission and distribution pipeline, SaskEnergy serves 



674 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1992 

over 291,000 customers.  The corporation continues to provide 

Saskatchewan residents with the second lowest natural gas 

rates in Canada. 

 

Rapidly changing technology, together with a competitive 

market-place, requires continuous upgrading of skills.  

SaskEnergy's people have effectively met this challenge, 

enjoying one of the best safety records in the country while 

transporting record volumes of natural gas on its system.  

System upgrades, such as last year's Rosetown to Regina 

pipeline expansion, have enabled the corporation to go on to 

increase operational efficiencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed legislation follows the 

recommendations made by the Saskatchewan Financial 

Management Review Commission to establish SaskEnergy as a 

Crown corporation.  Crown corporations must be accountable 

to the people of the province, and the previous government's 

practice of using them to hide the debt has ended.  Establishing 

SaskEnergy as a Crown corporation will make it subject to the 

same financial reporting requirements as all other Crown 

corporations.  The Crowns and all other areas of our 

government are going to be open and accountable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The SaskEnergy Act will ratify all the 

corporation's previous transactions since 1988.  Our 

government has taken measures to correct improper transfer of 

assets and debt from SaskPower to SaskEnergy.  The net gain 

of $226 million was determined to be inappropriate by 

SaskPower's auditors because it did not allow and follow 

generally accepted accounting principles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act will establish a new Crown corporation 

within Saskatchewan to be known as SaskEnergy Incorporated, 

providing it with the required statutory power to carry out the 

corporation's mandate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, TransGas Limited will remain a wholly owned 

subsidiary of SaskEnergy Inc., and will be recognized as part 

of the agent, the Crown operating the transmission system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy Incorporated and TransGas Limited 

will have full franchise rights to purchase, distribute, sell, 

manufacture, produce, transport, gather, compress, and process 

stored natural gas. 

 

Armed with this mandate, SaskEnergy will continue 

researching non-traditional natural gas applications.  The 

electrical energy options review panel recommended that 

co-generation be studied as a viable alternative to 

Saskatchewan's energy needs.  SaskEnergy will participate in 

co-generation projects to meet the future electrical demands, 

resulting in further economic development throughout the 

province. 

 

More opportunities will be created for SaskEnergy as natural 

gas usage continues to expand.  SaskEnergy will have the 

responsibility to maintain a secure supply of natural gas for all 

Saskatchewan customers.  The province is strategically located 

to take advantage of existing transportation corridors, and these 

factors will enable the corporation to develop interconnections 

with other 

pipeline systems, expanding into additional markets and 

increasing natural gas storage facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the corporation we intend will play an aggressive 

role in promoting natural gas as an environmental energy 

source in a variety of home, business, farm, and industry 

applications.  Working with the appliance dealers association, 

SaskEnergy will aim to increase the use of natural gas 

appliances which are cost-effective and environmentally 

friendly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, environmental awareness will present growth 

potential as customers shift to natural gas -- as I've said, the 

most environmentally friendly of the natural resources we have 

in the province to consume for energy.  SaskEnergy will set 

new standards in the greening of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say natural gas will be the fuel of the '90s and 

SaskEnergy will be a leader in promoting the use of its 

environmentally sound fuel source.  Clearly our commitment to 

save the environment has to be backed by action, and 

SaskEnergy is ready for that challenge.  The corporation is on 

the threshold of setting new, responsible trends in energy 

consumption. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy will continue to pursue the benefits 

of natural gas as an alternate vehicle fuel.  The corporation is 

involved in converting fleet vehicles throughout the province to 

natural gas and doing a study on setting up permanent natural 

gas fuelling stations throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this proposed legislation will establish 

SaskEnergy as a major provincially owned corporation.  The 

public made it clear in 1988 they wanted public ownership of 

this utility and transmission.  And, Mr. Speaker, we are giving 

the public what they asked for in the last election. 

 

As I have indicated, this corporation will play a major role in 

providing Saskatchewan citizens with a secure and yet 

competitive supply of natural gas while contributing to the 

economic development needed to secure our future.  I've asked 

all the members of the House to join with me in supporting the 

new proposed SaskEnergy legislation and establishing this new 

and exciting Crown corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that, I move second reading of The 

SaskEnergy Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a few 

observations I'm going to make and then I'm going to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Some of the observations that the member from Elphinstone 

made as it relates to energy, I believe, need to be expanded on.  

One of the items, that the energy component of natural gas is 

probably the cleanest that we have in term of the fossil fuels, 

and I think that it's important that we use them to the greatest 

amount of their potential. 

 

I want to say, however, an observation that the minister 



May 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 675 

made that some of this would be used in making available 

electrical energy and the types of things that we can do with 

natural gas, I want to point out that I believe it's the only 

natural gas conversion to electricity station in the province of 

Saskatchewan is located in my constituency.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is the most expensive form of power in the whole 

province. 

 

When all of the other sources are used, then the people in the 

south-west turn on the natural gas electrical energy component.  

And I want to just say that perhaps we have to take a serious 

look at whether that is the most efficient and effective way to 

generate electricity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the Assembly that I 

fundamentally believe that the public as a part of a personal 

and private initiative should be allowed the opportunity to set 

up as a part of an investment opportunity, the transmission 

portion of SaskEnergy.  I still believe that that's the right thing 

to do.  I've always believed that that's the right thing to do. 

 

How to develop an industry when the government is strapped 

for cash.  As we've heard for the last six or seven months, 

they're strapped for cash for farmers; they're strapped for cash 

for a whole host of items. And now they're going to say, we're 

going to borrow the money to make the investments in the 

distribution process in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this whole discussion is a very interesting one.  I 

find it interesting from the point of view that the minister also 

said that he wants to have more sales of natural gas.  Well I 

agree with that. 

 

I just ask him why he cut the program for selling gas to people 

along the various areas that they had already established that 

they were going to do for this year.  We had people who were 

prepared to become involved in a natural gas distribution focus.  

Buffalo Pound I believe was one place that was supposed to be 

done; it was cancelled.  All of these are additional sales 

opportunities for the SaskEnergy Corporation, and I think that 

they should be established and enhanced. 

 

We need to have as a part of a development for an opportunity 

for SaskEnergy to use that as the most effective, clean, 

environmentally friendly fuel, we need to have that given to the 

people of Saskatchewan.  And I believe that the natural gas 

distribution's focus that we have to rural Saskatchewan -- small 

urban, and farmers of the province of Saskatchewan -- was an 

effective way of doing a number of things:  reducing the costs 

to the farming community; reducing costs to small urban 

centres. 

 

I'll give you an example of reducing costs -- the town of 

Bateman for example.  Mr. Jim Bateman told me this when I 

opened up his natural gas distribution centre in the little town 

of Bateman.  He said, we have reduced the cost in our schools, 

we have reduced the costs in our local community arenas, our 

sports complexes.  We have reduced the costs of these very 

effectively, Mr. Speaker, by reducing the amount of cash that is 

required to operate these facilities.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

the kind of things we need to have. 

Small communities throughout this province in the last 10 

years have been provided that opportunity and a very important 

part of the function of SaskEnergy.  That is not the part that 

this opposition believes should be allowed with the private 

sector to control.  I believe that we have large, significant 

opportunities for transmission of gas to other locations that 

could enhance the opportunity for not only people to work in 

this province but could deliver a better, probably, a balance of 

payments to our treasury for the opportunity that we would 

have to develop and allow people to earn money rather than the 

government to earn money. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the point that we want to make and 

we will be making that further in our discussion here as we go 

through the second reading speeches.  And therefore I move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 1 -- An Act to amend The Clean Air Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks 

today I'll be moving second reading of The Clean Air 

Amendment Act.  I'm pleased to address the House today about 

the urgency of protecting the environment of Saskatchewan.  

We are here today to introduce amendments which will 

strengthen environmental protection laws in this province. 

 

There could not be a more appropriate time than now to 

address these critical issues.  We are living in a period when 

federal, provincial, and municipal governments are making 

concerted efforts to protect the environment in which we live.  

The United Nations in its Brundtlund report in 1987 calls for a 

commitment to pass on our resources to our children in the best 

possible condition.  This will be for the benefit of future 

generations. 

 

I am pleased to be speaking to these issues today because it is 

the job of the minister in this government to protect 

Saskatchewan's natural environment. 

 

Compared to other parts of the globe Saskatchewan has been 

spared environmental catastrophes and the need for many 

major clean-ups in operations.  This is because we have neither 

a concentration of industrial smokestacks nor a high density 

population.  But we do have an abundance of natural resources 

to protect -- rich agricultural soils, fresh water, clean air, 

timber, and minerals.  We also have a significant reserve of 

non-renewable resources which we must conserve to make 

them last -- oil, natural gas, coal, and hydro power.  Our 

problems then are still manageable.  We are not by and large . . 

. they are not, by and large, problems of environmental 

remediation but most often of environmental protection.  

Therefore our focus today must be on protecting what we have. 

 

As our society becomes more knowledgeable about the global 

environmental crisis, we recognize that resources, particularly 

non-renewable ones, are valuable and limited.  We must all 

make changes -- changes to our life-styles, changes to the way 

we conduct business and run our institutions, and changes to 

the way we govern 



676 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1992 

our province. 

 

We must protect our environment wisely and comprehensively 

because our decisions, individually and collectively, affect the 

lives of Saskatchewan people now and in the future. 

 

Environmental protection does not mean ceasing to live here, 

nor does it mean halting development.  We need to develop our 

resources and to generate wealth to support a healthy society.  

What we need is a means to bring economic and environmental 

activities into harmony.  We can do this through sustainable 

development. 

 

Sustainable development is a new concept for many people.  It 

means ensuring that while we use our resources to meet our 

needs, we must not jeopardize the ability of our future 

generations to meet their needs.  To enhance sustainable 

development, our province requires a commitment of all 

Saskatchewan people -- the public, business, industry, farmers, 

educators, and this government. 

 

(1430) 

 

To integrate all our efforts, this government must be committed 

to principles of openness, consultation, public involvement, 

and partnership with all sectors of the society. 

 

Today in this spirit of working together, we are tabling 

amendments to current legislation in order to upgrade 

environmental protection in this province.  It is our hope to 

raise environmental standards which we all must follow. 

 

The first proposed piece of legislation is a Clean Air 

Amendment Act.  The existing Clean Air Act preserves our air 

by prescribing standards for activities which pollute the air.  

Fuel burning equipment, incinerators, and industrial sources are 

regulated for smoke particles and other emissions.  These units 

must have a permit.  Non-compliance can result in an issue of 

orders against an offending operator.  Various exemptions are 

already included in this Act. 

 

The Clean Air Amendment Act before us today will fill some 

gaps in regulation and enforcement.  It'll eliminate legislative 

overlap and remove administrative obstacles. 

 

First, treatment facilities for crude oil were never intended to 

be exempt from permit requirements under the existing 

legislation.  However, the wording of the present exemptions is 

unclear.  These amendments will clarify the exemptions so that 

these facilities will be subject to proper regulation. 

 

Second, the jurisdiction of the Act now overlaps the 

jurisdiction of The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act.  Both cover the licensing of refuse burning at municipal 

landfills.  These amendments will eliminate the overlap by 

making burning at municipal landfills exempt from this Act, 

but burning will still be covered under the EMPA 

(Environmental Management and Protection Act). 

Finally, the proposed amendments broaden the legal authority 

to enforce pollution control orders through injunctions and to 

levy environmental fees and charges based on the amount of 

emissions released into the air.  With these amendments we can 

effectively keep Saskatchewan's air quality high. 

 

Mr. Speaker, like the two pieces of legislation that will follow, 

this Act represents important changes in response to recent 

global concerns for environmental protection.  We are fortunate 

to have a rich, productive land.  We want to be good stewards 

of all our natural resources -- our land, our air, and our water.  

It is our shared belief that a healthy environment is everyone's 

responsibility. 

 

To ensure a sustainable future, we must begin to practise 

sustainable development now.  It is my job to commit myself 

and my department to a spirit of co-operation with all people of 

Saskatchewan.  And I ask all members of this House to join me 

in supporting the passing of these amendments to improve 

environmental protection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hereby move second reading of The Clean Air 

Amendment Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

comment on this legislation.  I think that it's extremely 

important for us to protect the air in Saskatchewan.  I also 

suggest that it is equally important, since there are not high 

walls erected between each and every province, that we should 

be concerned not only from province to province with an 

overall policy developing across the nation, but be concerned 

world-wide as well. 

 

And I'd just like to take a few moments to go back and to help 

people understand what I was trying to get at earlier today with 

regards to hydrogen development.  Hydrogen, if in fact we as a 

province can become participants in this, can make a 

significant contribution to ensuring that we have clean air 

throughout the world.  Because when hydrogen is burned, the 

only result from it is water.  It's one of the reasons why Japan 

and highly-populated areas like Germany wish to have research 

into this and why it is they are willing to put research dollars 

into Canada in order for Canada to become a supplier of 

hydrogen for them in their energy production. 

 

And I do hope that this government will take upon itself a 

determination, if you will, to ensure that this kind of thing is 

explored, because this kind of development will ensure that 

world-over we will have the kinds of pure air and far fewer 

environmental concerns that we're faced with today.  Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to add a few 

remarks to the remarks made by the member from Greystone 

and just say that there has to be a balance between protecting 

an environment and the costs involved in relating to protecting 

the environment.  We have to be very careful what we do.  And 

I'm a firm believer that we need to protect the environment. 

 

I spent some time in the Soviet Union or Russia, whatever you 

want to call . . . or whatever they call the country 



May 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 677 

today.  I spent some time there in Kiev and Moscow and St. 

Petersburg, and I found out some very interesting things.  One 

of them was that it was a pleasant winter, just like we had.  It 

would snow in the morning.  And every one of the cities that I 

was in, in the morning the snow would come down, and by 

middle of the afternoon the ground and the sidewalks and the 

roads were just almost like a tar on the whole of the area that 

we were in.  And these are large, large centres -- two and a half 

million, five and a half million, and over ten million people. 

 

What we need to do is consider what we're doing, but we also 

have to consider what's happening internationally.  I firmly 

believe that we can cut down to almost zero in our environment 

the pollution that we put into it.  And if some of these countries 

increase by a fraction of 1 per cent, they will almost . . . well 

they will exceed all of the environmental protection that we've 

put into the process.  Countries like China, countries like 

Russia, countries like India -- they probably put more carbons 

into the air than any other . . . in one day than we would put in 

in 10 or 15 years. 

 

So we have to take that into consideration in this sustainable 

development.  A sustainable development has to be also a focus 

that we have.  We want to enhance all of the areas of 

environment, but we do not want to put at risk some of the 

things we are doing. 

 

And I believe, for example, another area that we talked about 

with the city council in Kiev.  I told those people there that I'd 

come from just north of the Black Sea and that my grandfather 

had lived there, and he talked about the vineyards and the olive 

trees and all of the things that they grew there.  And a member 

of the city council that we were talking to, he said to us, he 

said, you know if you had stayed there, we'd have probably 

grown up as neighbours.  He said, you go to that area today and 

the land is completely destroyed by the fact that there are so 

many pollution . . . or pollutants in the water and in the ground 

that nothing seems to want to grow there today.  Now that's 

only three generations removed, Mr. Speaker, and therefore it's 

important for us to consider this. 

 

However, we have to realize that it's a very serious problem 

internationally and we have to be very careful how we deal 

with it.  I'll give you another example.  We in the province of 

Saskatchewan as farmers put sulphur in our ground in order to 

enhance the opportunity to grow.  Well, Mr. Speaker, in the 

eastern part of North America they want to take the sulphur out 

of the air in order to have some benefits accrued to the lakes 

and the rivers and the natural resources because the fish are 

dying. 

 

And that's, Mr. Speaker, the complexity of the area that we're 

talking about.  We put sulphur in to make . . . because we have 

a shortage of sulphur; in other parts, they want to take it out.  

And that's, Mr. Speaker, the complexity that we have in dealing 

with the clean air, with environmental control over various 

areas.  We have to be careful.  What we have to do . . . and we 

have to have some balance between an economic rationale for 

doing it and the cost that it is to the people involved. 

 

So with that, we were going to review the remarks of the 

minister, and the critic for the department will be making 

some observations at the next session.  So I move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act to amend The Ozone-depleting 

Substances Control Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The second set 

of changes we propose to current environmental legislation are 

contained in The Ozone-depleting Substances Control 

Amendment Act.  I will be moving second reading of the Act 

shortly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The original legislation is concerned with protecting the ozone 

layer.  This layer of our upper atmosphere acts as a screen to 

shield us from over-exposure to ultraviolet rays of the sun.  

Increased exposure to ultraviolet radiation can cause skin 

cancer and cataracts in animals and human beings.  It can also 

bring reductions in crop yields. 

 

The present Act requires amendment to respond to this growing 

concern.  For example, scientists are now warning you that 

ozone depletion may be more serious than originally suspected.  

Current research identifies man-made chemicals called Halons 

and chlorofluorocarbon, or CFCs, as the chief culprits.  

Because of this new urgency we need to increase our efforts to 

control the substances that break down ozone. 

 

First, the proposed amendments will expand regulation-making 

authority to govern the destruction of ozone-depleting 

substances.  We will also allow certification of the people who 

handle these substances, that is, those who sell and service air 

conditioners, automobile dealerships, provincial agencies, and 

the government departments, technical training institutes and 

other groups and officials who may handle CFCs or Halons.  

Their adoption of industrial codes, standards, and emission 

levels will also be ensured.  Environment staff will be able to 

regulate the maintenance of records by all those who handle 

these substances.  Finally, expanded authority will allow the 

charging of fees and cost recovery initiatives. 

 

It is crucial that we act now before the earth's ozone layer 

suffers further damage.  We recognize that Saskatchewan's 

contribution to holes in the ozone may be relatively small, but 

it is in our own best interest, that is our global responsibility to 

save the ozone layer now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hereby move second reading of the 

ozone-depleting substances amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We're going to take 

a look and review the remarks and some of the other areas that 

we need to take a look at in reviewing this Bill.  We're going to 

review the remarks of the minister and the critic will be making 

an observation or two at the next session.  So I move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 3 -- An Act to amend The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act 



678 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1992 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to talk 

about amendments to The Environmental Management and 

Protection Act.  Again, Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks, 

I will be moving second reading of The Environmental 

Management and Protection Amendment Act. 

 

The original Act deals with pollution control.  It is also 

enabling legislation allowing the government to regulate the 

storage, handling, control, transportation, disposal, and 

destruction of harmful materials.  The Act needs amendment in 

order to: (1) bring it up to date with developing environmental 

technologies; (2) comply with the federal legislation; (3) 

increase monitoring; and (4) expand regulatory-making 

authority. 

 

The amendment Act which we have tabled will address four 

important needs: first, the amendments will enable the 

government to prescribe regulations which introduce fees and 

charges for pollution; second, these amendments will expand 

the authority to monitor the storage of hazardous substances.  

The construction, operation and decommissioning of storage 

facilities need to be monitored, and tradesmen and companies 

who install underground storage tanks should be certified.  

These amendments are consistent with my department's recent 

implementation of the new hazardous substances and waste 

dangerous goods regulations. 

 

Third, the amendments introduce new definitions that are 

consistent with the legislation in other jurisdictions.  For 

example, we recognize and adopt the term "waste dangerous 

goods" as it is used in other legislation. 

 

And fourth, right of entry provisions will be enhanced to allow 

environmental officers to have quicker access to property when 

pollution standards need to be enforced.  We should not lose 

sight of our main goal, that individuals, industry, and 

institutions will be largely self-regulatory.  This legislation will 

set high standards for industries, institutions, and agencies and 

when necessary control and regulation . . . pollution may be 

harmful to the environment. 

 

Public consultations and meetings with stakeholders have 

convinced us that Saskatchewan people have given this 

government a mandate to improve environmental protection in 

the areas covered in all of the legislation examined here today:  

air quality, the control of ozone-depleting substances, and 

environmental management and protection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The 

Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to make a 

few remarks on it and then I'll adjourn debate. 

 

I want to indicate that we have a couple of very serious 

concerns about this Bill, and I'm going to point them out and I 

hope that the minister would take this into consideration. 

This Bill was proposed originally by us when we were in 

government and I understand a little bit about it.  And I also 

understand, Madam Minister, some of the things that are 

required by the Bill.  I want to point out that there is what I 

would consider a dangerous trend beginning to evolve.  And I 

want to point out in this Bill and in the Bill that she's bringing 

forward the rights of individuals, I believe, are being erased.  

And I think that we should very seriously consider some of 

these areas. 

 

For example, if the minister in Bill 3 wants to, she can choose 

to enter land or a building that he or she is anticipating is 

harming the environment.  Well that's fine; we did that in the 

old Bill.  However, the disturbing part is that the NDP have 

chosen to delete an important right about a person's personal 

property.  The Bill allows the minister to enter the land or 

building without consent from the owner of the property. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that may be the way they used to do things 

in undemocratic systems, but in a democratic system I don't 

believe that that's the way it needs to be done. 

 

The bottom line is that the power is in the hands of the minister 

and is removed from the hands of the individuals.  And I don't 

think that that's right.  It allows the minister to designate a 

person to use whatever means the minister finds necessary to 

break through the door to the building or the fence around the 

land, all in order to gain entry without the consent of the 

owner.  So the minister can cause damage to the premises she 

wants to inspect, and I don't think that she would be the one 

that would be carrying the responsibilities for repair. 

 

Why is this necessary, Mr. Speaker?  Previously, if consent 

were not given to the minister or inspector, a court of law had 

to issue a search warrant.  That's why it is done.  That's the way 

it's done in a democracy.  Then if the occupant or owner did 

not comply, and only then, could force be used. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I find it very hard to believe that this 

government consulted with any organizations in drafting the 

Bill.  Certainly no civil rights groups where this is involved 

have been asked or anyone else who cares about the very basic 

rights and freedoms we should all be able to count on.  Why 

not ask the court for an opportunity to search the premises?  

Why not ask for an opportunity to do an investigation? 

 

The police, for example, have to have a warrant to enter a 

facility on my property.  Why wouldn't it be the right 

responsibility of the government to insist that a warrant be used 

as a method to convey the opportunity for search in a place like 

that?  We require that policemen require a warrant. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, an observation I want to make about the 

Journal last week showed us how the various media are going 

to be required to submit photographs or video of events that 

took place.  For example, in the riot in Toronto, they will be 

required to make that available to the police.  However, they 

will be required to do that on the basis of a warrant being 

issued by the court. 



May 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 679 

And I don't think it's the right of the government or the minister 

to go in and seize property on the basis of a whim.  You can do 

that through the court and that is the way the system in a 

democratic system works.  And I think that we need to have 

that opportunity protected.  I see it being eroded in this Bill, 

and I see it in a number of other Bills equally being eroded.  

And I think that that's a fundamental responsibility on our part 

to point that out to the minister, and we're going to do that. 

 

Another thing, the minister can choose what the fine will be.  

The minister can be . . . if she wants to choose one company or 

another, she can assess a $50 fine on one and a $500,000 on 

another.  And what if she doesn't want this industry to grow 

and develop?  She can make a point of putting a high fine on it 

and it will squelch it.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what I 

think could happen.  I'm not saying she's going to, but that's the 

possibility that could happen.  And I would seriously say that 

we need to have some restrictions on the capacity of the 

department to infringe on the personal rights and freedoms of 

individuals. 

 

I want to make my last point, and that is this.  The opportunity 

for this Bill to succeed will hinge itself on the basis of the 

charter of rights on individuals.  And rights of individuals are 

seriously being infringed on in relation to the kinds of things 

that you're doing here, Madam Minister. 

 

And that's also going to be a part of your costs in defending 

that position when you do go on someone's property and take it 

and require changes when you do not have, number one, a legal 

right to be there; and number two, you are infringing on that 

person's right.  And then if you cause damages when you do 

not have a right to be there, that, Madam Minister, will also 

cause serious problems and you will have to defend yourself in 

court in relation to that. 

 

And it will cost the government money, Mr. Speaker.  And 

that's what I think we have to be very aware of.  There is a 

balance here.  And I have spoken about this to various 

members who investigate criminal action and RCMP (Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police) and city police.  They are highly 

trained and they are trained in specific areas.  And one of the 

things that they tell me over and over again, there must be 

reasonable grounds to provide an opportunity for them to 

investigate.  And those reasonable grounds have to have some 

respect for property and some respect for the rights of the 

individual.  And that is what they go by, and they've been 

trained for that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of people that are going to 

have to be trained in order to have this environmental 

assessment done on whether the individual has the right to 

enter that property or whether he doesn't.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is going to cost money.  Now I'm not saying that that 

shouldn't be done.  However what we have is again an 

infringement on the rights of individuals that is, I believe, very, 

very serious. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, we are going to be discussing this 

further with other agencies, and we're going to be looking into 

it from that perspective in a very serious way.  And therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 7 -- An Act to amend The Assessment Management 

Agency Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The 

Assessment Management Agency Act amendment 1992 

increases the amount to be paid to the Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency for 1992 by the provincial 

government by 6.4 per cent over the amount paid in 1991. 

 

This amendment sets the amount of the 1992 provincial 

payment at $7.5 million.  The increase will help in meeting 

SAMA's (Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) 

cost this year in preparing for reassessment.  SAMA is 

presently undertaking a round of consultations with local 

governments, reviewing the anticipated impacts from its more 

recent proposed changes to the assessment system. 

 

The impact reports being presented to municipalities should 

give them a sound basis on which to determine whether the 

reassessment proposals will be acceptable.  The government 

will be looking for confirmation of general, local government 

support before moving ahead with legislative amendments 

necessary to implement the proposals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading for this Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I just 

want to make a couple comments before moving adjournment 

of debate on the Bill as it's being presented for second reading 

today. 

 

Just to comment, first of all, we realize the fact that it does take 

extra money for any group or agency to perform their duties.  

And we also are quite well aware of the concerns out in rural 

Saskatchewan, specifically in small town Saskatchewan, 

regarding implementation of the new assessment that is being 

proposed by SAMA. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, there are a few things . . . the Bill 

itself doesn't really get into all the meat regarding SAMA, other 

than to give them some more money to perform their duties and 

obligations.  And I don't see a lot of problems or major 

problems that we'd be looking at regarding this specific Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, but we certainly will want a little more time to 

review it, and so I ask leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 19 -- An Act to amend The Contributory 

Negligence Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

I appreciate that.  Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 

move second reading of The Contributory Negligence 

Amendment Act, 1992.  This amendment overrides an old 

common law rule called the merger rule. 



680 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1992 

A common law judgement against, or a settlement with, one of 

several persons responsible for the same loss or damage was a 

bar to action against the other.  This applied even if the 

judgement against the first person could not be enforced. 

 

This Bill provides that where two or more persons are 

responsible for the same loss or damage, the person who 

suffered the loss or damage may deal with them separately.  A 

judgement against one or a settlement with one does not 

preclude an action against the others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment makes our law consistent with 

other provinces and is long overdue in correcting an injustice 

of common law.  Mr. Speaker, I therefore move second reading 

of an Act to amend The Contributory Negligence Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again, Mr. Speaker, 

having taken quick perusal, just a quick notice of the Bill that's 

presented before the House, and I believe many of the 

procedures that are being implemented by this Bill were some 

of the procedures that I remember going through in legislative 

committee. 

 

I don't see any major problems with the Bill itself.  But just 

before we give the nod to go into committee, I think we should 

review it a little more fully, and so, Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave 

to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 20 -- An Act to amend The Surface Rights 

Acquisition and Compensation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise 

today to move second reading of The Surface Rights 

Acquisition and Compensation Amendment Act.  Under the 

authority of The Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation 

Act, the Surface Rights Board of arbitration plays a central role 

in managing the important and ongoing relationship between 

Saskatchewan farmers and oil producers. 

 

One aspect of the overall function is to act as the central 

depository for hearing transcripts, lease arrangements, and 

various other documents which legislation requires the board to 

keep and have custody of. 

 

This legislative amendment will expand the regulation making 

authority of the Lieutenant Governor in Council to allow for 

regulations prescribing a tariff or fees for the production, 

reproduction, or transmittal by the board of any documents or 

records that it is required by the Act to keep. 

 

This amendment reflects this government's ongoing 

commitment to sound fiscal management at all levels of 

government.  Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to 

amend The Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, we do have . . . my critic has some questions to 

raise regarding this Act, and certainly we want to take a little 

more time to look over the Act and make sure we're well 

acquainted of what the Act is doing . . . with what it's doing.  

And so, Mr. Speaker, at this time I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 23 -- An Act to amend The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act, 1990 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 

move second reading of The Summary Offences Procedure 

Act, 1992. 

 

The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990 is the legislation 

which establishes the procedure relating to the administration 

of provincial offences.  It includes rules that govern the 

issuance of tickets for these offences, the options by which 

persons served with a ticket may respond, the method for 

processing tickets through the court system, and the means by 

which fines will be enforced.  A  large proportion of offences 

covered by this legislation are traffic related offences. 

 

The most significant change to the legislation removes the 

ability to register in the fine option program directly with the 

ticket.  There is administrative work involved with each fine 

option placement.  In addition the province pays a fee to fine 

option agents for each placement. 

 

The change to the legislation is expected to reduce the numbers 

of persons who choose to register immediately in the fine 

option program rather than pay the specified fine amount 

indicated on the ticket.  This will reduce costs associated with 

the program. 

 

This change will not prevent anyone who wishes to work off a 

fine from choosing this option.  The government believes that 

the fine option program provides an important alternative to 

fine payment, especially for those persons who do not have the 

means to pay a fine. 

 

All persons who are fined as a result of convictions for 

provincial offences will still have the option of registering in 

the fine option program.  However, the registration would be 

later in the process, after the person has been convicted and 

fined by the court, or after the person has received a notice of 

default conviction as a result of failing to respond in any way 

to a ticket. 

 

The other amendments to the legislation are aimed at 

improving certain aspects of the administrative procedure 

relating to provincial offences.  For example, the requirement 

that informations which are analogous to tickets for parking 

offences be sworn by a judge or justice of the peace as being 

removed. 

 

The current Act adopts the summary conviction provisions of 

the Criminal Code if no other procedure is specified.  This 

requires an information to be sworn.  For parking offences, 

however, the swearing of an information is a rubber stamp 

procedure.  A provision already exists for provincial offences 

for which a summary offence ticket is used that eliminates the 

need to swear an information on a ticket. 



May 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 681 

It is incongruous to require parking tickets to be sworn when 

documents for more serious offences are not.  Consequently 

this requirement is being removed. 

 

Another amendment will extend the failure to appear charge, 

which now applies to failure to appear at trial, to situations 

where a defendant fails to appear after making a promise to 

appear at the court.  This occurs where the person fails to 

appear at the trial and is subsequently arrested and brought 

before a justice who does not charge the person with the 

offence of failing to appear at trial because the person promises 

to appear at a new trial date. 

 

If the person again fails to appear at the new trial date, the only 

alternative is to again arrest the person and obtain another 

promise to appear, or to charge the person with failure to 

appear under the Criminal Code.  The latter method is often 

chosen, but it is inappropriate to create a criminal offence and 

criminal record because of failure to appear with respect to a 

regulatory offence. 

 

The other proposed amendments essentially provide for a 

resolution where a particular charge for an offence is stalled 

indefinitely at some stage in the process because the Act does 

not provide an adequate method of resolving the situation. 

 

These changes provide for a time limit within which extensions 

for time to pay a fine may be obtained, a means of bringing 

before the court rather than convicting a defendant who fails to 

appear at trial, but whom the prosecutor believes may have a 

good defence to the charge, and a procedure for having an 

appeal for municipal bylaw offences dismissed where the 

appeal has been abandoned. 

 

It is anticipated that the proposed changes to this legislation 

will result in a more streamlined, effective, and efficient 

procedure that does not in any way prejudice the rights or 

options now available to a person who receives a ticket for a 

provincial offence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 

Summary Offences Procedure Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I've listened to the 

minister as she has outlayed the background behind the Bill 

that's before us and there are some questions that I think we'd 

like to certainly take a look at. 

 

I can appreciate the fact that the Bill is going to simplify the 

process of paying fines and I remember going through some 

discussion re this format about a year and a half ago as well, 

Mr. Speaker.  And so in light of the few questions we would 

have and addressing even the fine options program and just 

looking at the concerns that may arise from the bill, Mr. 

Speaker, I now ask for . . . I now adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 24 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Printer Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 

move second reading of The Queen's Printer Amendment Act, 

1992.  The Queen's Printer is the official 

publisher of statutes, regulations, and government notices and 

proclamations.  The Saskatchewan Gazette is the official 

publication in which government notices, proclamations, and 

regulations are printed and distributed to the public. 

 

The purpose of this Bill is to authorize the Queen's Printer to 

charge fees to a person on whose behalf notices are required to 

be published in the Gazette.  Under various Acts such as The 

Business Corporations Act, notices are required to be published 

by a statutory officer in the Gazette.  While the notice is printed 

on behalf of a person, there is authority to charge a fee to that 

person to recover the costs of publication. 

 

As mentioned, the amendments give the Queen's Printer the 

authority to charge a fee, and if the fee is not paid, to not 

publish the notice.  The Lieutenant Governor in Council retains 

the power to direct the Queen's Printer to publish a notice even 

if the prescribed fee is not charged.  This amendment will 

allow the Queen's Printer to fulfil its statutory obligations in a 

manner that reflects this government's ongoing commitment to 

sound fiscal management. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Queen's Printer Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I don't 

think we have a lot of problems with the Bill as it is presented 

as well, but just to give us a little more time to peruse the Bill 

and make sure that we aren't overlooking something, I move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 25 -- An Act to amend The Real Estate Brokers 

Act, 1987 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to 

rise today to move second reading of The Real Estate Brokers 

Amendment Act, 1992.  The purpose of this Act is to ensure 

the consumer protection provisions of The Real Estate Brokers 

Act, 1987 function as intended. 

 

The first problem this Act addresses is protection of consumer 

deposits in real estate transactions.  A recent judicial decision 

has identified a problem with the definition of a trade in real 

estate.  As a result, consumer deposits on making an offer to 

lease or purchase real estate may not be protected by the fund 

until the offer is accepted.  This Act will ensure that consumer 

deposits are protected by the real estate assurance fund from 

the time an offer to lease or purchase real estate is made. 

 

In addition, limitation periods for consumer claims against the 

real estate assurance fund will now be included in the Act 

instead of being set out only in the regulations.  Including these 

provisions in the Act will promote greater consumer awareness 

of the time periods in which claims against the fund may be 

made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to move second reading of An Act to 

amend The Real Estate Brokers Act, 1987. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred 



682 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1992 

to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 10 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Penner that Bill No. 10 -- An Act to 

amend The Crown Minerals Act and to make consequential 

amendments to certain other Acts resulting from the enactment 

of this Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

more that the opposition has looked at this Bill, the more 

concerned we have become with it.  Mr. Speaker, I've sat in 

this legislature now for some three weeks and listened to 

minister after minister in this government claim that they have 

consulted widely with groups that they are involved with, that 

they have consistently gone out and done their homework.  Yet 

they refuse, Mr. Speaker, when placed on the spot, to tell us 

exactly who they have consulted with. 

 

In the case of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to indicate to the 

Assembly today that there was no consultation with the groups 

that are involved in the various industries located in this 

province and indeed outside -- an absolute denial by any of the 

industry groups that this minister has gone out and done the 

work that should have been done ahead of time. 

 

I'm going to make a case, Mr. Speaker, during my remarks of 

why that consultation is so absolutely necessary to the province 

of Saskatchewan and why it is so absolutely necessary to the 

groups involved -- people, men and women, companies, many 

Saskatchewan based, that are major employers in our province, 

that are major contributors to the wealth of this province. 

 

These people, Mr. Speaker, oftentimes don't have enough 

money of their own to ensure their livelihood as an ongoing 

company.  They rely upon the confidence of investors, both 

within our province, our country, and indeed world-wide, in 

order to carry out the mandate of their particular companies. 

 

The Saskatchewan Mining Association, for instance, Mr. 

Speaker, flatly denies that there was any consultation, Mr. 

Minister, with them before this Bill was presented.  In fact, it 

wasn't until the critic stood in this legislature for the first time 

on this very action that a Bill . . . a copy of the Bill was 

delivered to the association the next day, Mr. Speaker -- not 

before its introduction, not before establishing the principles in 

the Bill, not before setting out how the Bill would actually 

operate. 

 

No, Mr. Speaker, the minister sent a copy of the Bill the day 

after the critic told him in this legislature that we needed more 

time to consult with those organizations that would be most 

affected. 

 

And I say to the minister, as one who has had some experience 

in this area, that there is always a very fragile 

balance involved with these various groups of people in 

maintaining viability and in maintaining the thousands of jobs 

and the tens of millions and indeed hundreds of millions of 

dollars that these organizations, through their member 

companies, contribute to the over-wealth of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those groups are very . . . Mr. Minister, those 

groups are well known to you, your staff, and the people in 

your department.  There has always been, at least for the last 10 

years, a very close, consultative relationship with these groups 

and the individuals around them. 

 

(1515) 

 

Not only were they not aware of the Bill, they have some very 

serious concerns, Mr. Speaker, once they have had the 

opportunity to view the contents.  This Bill has some complex 

retroactivity attached to it.  I am not sure, Mr. Speaker, about 

all of those ramifications.  Some of it seems to be very obtuse, 

and I'm wondering, Mr. Speaker, if that isn't intentional. 

 

In my two years as the minister of Energy and Mines in this 

province, the attempt was always made, Mr. Speaker, to 

explain in fairly clear English to the people most affected by 

government legislation exactly what the intentions were, not 

only today, tomorrow, next week, a year from now, but indeed 

one of the things that is absolutely essential, whether we're 

talking about oil and gas, mining, various sectors of mining, 

potash, uranium, is that these people all work in the 

international market-place; they all have to have some type of 

long-range predictability to their industry in order that they 

may go out, invest very large sums of money -- very large sums 

of money -- in order to ensure that the raw products and 

resources of this province continue to be successfully exploited 

in a reasonable manner. 

 

But along with that exploitation the people that directly work in 

those industries will have some comfort that their job is not on 

the line tomorrow; that the people who invest their money in 

these ongoing enterprises will have some reasonable 

expectation of a return on investment; and that the people that 

sign contractual arrangements, contractual arrangements, Mr. 

Speaker, that indeed sometimes spread over a number of years, 

that those contractual arrangements can be fulfilled in a 

reasonable manner. 

 

The very fact that retroactivity in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is 

hidden away in the coming-into-force sections, I think 

underlines the secretive principles at play in this Bill.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I do not understand the motives for that. 

 

The minister has stood in this House and given his word on 

many occasions that no changes would occur to the legal 

regimes governing the industry, without plenty of consultation, 

without plenty of advance warning.  Indeed on debate in third 

reading on another Bill in this House this week, Mr. Speaker, 

the minister made the comment that if he has talked to them 

once he has talked to them a hundred times. 

 

Well the members of the opposition would definitely like 



May 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 683 

to know, Mr. Speaker, who was involved in those hundred 

consultations.  Because I can tell the minister that I have made 

a lot of phone calls in the intervening two days, phone calls to 

all sectors of society affected by this Bill, and I have yet to find 

these hundred consultations.  I have yet to find a half a dozen 

consultations. 

 

And I am saying to the minister very early on in his tenure in 

this portfolio, that if you continue to treat the people affected 

most directly, most directly in this way then, sir, you will not 

contribute to the ongoing growth and well 

_being of our province.  There are remedies, Mr. Speaker, that 

can . . . and can be taken by the minister before this Bill 

continues through the House.  The minister can pull it from the 

order paper and proceed with those promised consultations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition is not trying to be unco-operative 

on this issue in the legislature today.  In fact many Bills, as you 

have noticed, have gone through this legislature with very little 

debate, unimpaired, in a true spirit of co-operation.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, the industries affected by this Bill are of such 

magnitude, the number of people employed in these industries 

is of such magnitude, that it would be absolutely irresponsible 

to the opposition today, Mr. Speaker, to not make the minister 

aware of what people in Saskatchewan and indeed across 

Canada are saying about this particular piece of legislation. 

 

We cannot have this legislature, Mr. Speaker, simply 

transferring authority from this body to individual ministers.  

As we go through this Bill we find a number of instances 

where everything will become at the discretion of the minister.  

That is not a casual matter, Mr. Speaker, in dealing with issues 

of such magnitude. 

 

In fact I wouldn't be surprised, Mr. Speaker, if members of the 

media will not be talking to the members of SEPAC (Small 

Explorers and Producers Association of Canada), the small 

producers in our province; if they will not want to talk to IPAC 

(Independent Petroleum Association of Canada), if they will 

not want to talk to the Saskatchewan Mining Association, if 

they will not want to talk to the Canadian Petroleum 

Association, if they will not want to talk to the people in the 

various communities that are so directly affected by these 

industries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the consultation that I have done with the 

industry groups tells me some things.  It tells me that a 

retroactive period of two years is scary to people in the 

industry.  It's scary because the minister the other day in 

committee indicated that he had now launched into a royalty 

review. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell the House today that no one out 

there that is affected knows anything about a royalty review.  

No one has had the opportunity to make any comments.  No 

one has been asked for their thoughts on a royalty review.  No 

one in the department that these people have talked to seems to 

have any details of how long the royalty review will take, what 

parameters will be attached to it.  Is it only going to do with 

uranium, is it only going to deal with potash, is it only going to 

deal with the natural gas business, is it only heavy oil, is it light 

oil, is it only the oil produced from horizontal drilling?  None 

of 

these questions have been answered, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we see a Bill that allows a minister retroactivity for two 

years -- retroactivity couched in very vague terms.  As one 

person involved in the oil industry said to me, they find that 

very disconcerting because they were thinking about making 

some investments in the province of Saskatchewan, 

investments that will probably take two to three years to come 

anywhere close to a break-even proposal. 

 

So we make the investment . . . and I'll put it in the vernacular, 

Mr. Speaker.  He said, all of a sudden two years down the road 

we're having our pants pulled down because the minister has 

that power in this Bill.  We've gone out and convinced 

investors to invest in our project.  We've sunk all this money in, 

and this minister has the ability to undress us two years down 

the line. 

 

It's very interesting, Mr. Speaker -- and this is another thing 

that has really got people wondering -- that in this Bill, the 

minister refers back to a real date of infamy in this province, 

back to 1974 in Bill 42.  Now I don't know if that was 

intentional, that the minister wanted to send out some kind of a 

signal, particularly to the oil and gas industry, but if the 

minister didn't realize the significance of Bill 42 to that 

industry and this province, then I would suggest that he talk to 

some of the people that went through that experience. 

 

That experience, Mr. Speaker, basically saw the oil and gas 

industry in this province shut down.  It saw all the drilling rigs 

head for other jurisdictions.  It saw unacceptable royalty 

expectations from the government of the day.  It saw an 

industry that was absolutely devastated until 1982, because of 

Bill 42.  And yet the time frame that the minister includes in 

this Bill is back to that time. 

 

And if the minister doesn't think that that doesn't make people 

involved particularly in oil and gas feel very uncomfortable, 

then I would suggest he probably should have picked a 

different date in order to do his retroactivity to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have talked to people in the mining business.  

One individual says, well we've been told sort of second-hand 

that this will only apply to the uranium industry.  And yet I 

look at Bill 10, Mr. Speaker, and I find no reference 

specifically to the uranium industry. 

 

Another individual tells me, well we've been told sort of off 

hand that this only applies to the potash industry.  And no 

where in the Bill, Mr. Speaker, do I find anything that 

specifically refers to the potash industry. 

 

So it's no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that -- as we make these phone 

calls, as we do some consultation with people most affected by 

this Bill -- that they feel a certain degree of unease because 

nothing is spelled out.  One group is told one thing.  One group 

is told another thing.  And because all of it seems to be 

speculation, or at least the minister and his staff remain very 

vague.  And the few people that they've talked to -- everyone, 

everyone, Mr. Speaker, that is concerned with this piece of 

legislation is becoming very, very uneasy. 



684 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1992 

As I said at the beginning of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, upon 

initially looking at this particular piece of legislation, it did not 

seem that onerous.  But the longer that it goes on, the more 

people that have a look, the more people that become informed, 

it seems the stronger the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill has a section under section 23 that 

specifically speaks to the minister limiting the amount of 

monies which individuals or individual companies can garner 

from leases.  Now the minister may have some very legitimate 

concerns with certain companies.  Those concerns, particularly 

in the south-east area of our province, have been around a long 

time.  And I won't mention individual companies in this 

legislature, Mr. Speaker, because I don't think that's fair to 

them, but there have been a few of our corporate citizens who 

over the years have given many ministers of Energy reason to 

be a little exasperated at times. 

 

What the minister is saying here today though in this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, is that it doesn't matter what contractual obligation 

has been made, either first party to second, second party to 

third -- as is the case very often in the oil industry -- or indeed 

first party to a half a dozen other parties through subleases, 

through working-in agreements, through pool sharing, that the 

minister will interject himself into those signed agreements and 

he will overrule them, he will set limits on the amount of 

remuneration, and he will do that retroactively up to two years, 

if necessary. 

 

Is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, with ramifications that strong in 

this particular piece of legislation, that investor confidence is 

not high these days in the industries affected in the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

I had a phone call, Mr. Speaker, from an individual who I got 

to know in my days as minister, one who has played a fairly 

active role in Saskatchewan's oil patch for a goodly long time, 

who informed me that after taking a look at this Bill, he is 

strongly considering putting up all of his properties in the 

province of Saskatchewan for sale.  And that is because, Mr. 

Speaker, this individual relies heavily upon other investors in 

order to carry on the exploration and development that his 

company has done in this province, employing people, 

providing jobs. 

 

And I might say, Mr. Speaker, given that Saskatchewan, 

because of the nature of our production, has the highest royalty 

regime in all of North America today . . . the highest royalty 

regime in North America today, Mr. Speaker.  And this 

individual has paid a goodly share of monies to the coffers of 

Saskatchewan that he is now considering putting all of his 

properties up for sale because of the uncertainty viewed in this 

particular piece of legislation. 

 

There's the whole question, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

(1530) 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

An Hon. Member: -- With my apologies to the member from 

Thunder Creek, I would ask for leave of the Assembly to 

introduce some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- On behalf of my colleague, the member from 

Melville, I would like to introduce 25 grade 8 students from 

Ituna High School that are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  

The teacher is Mr. H. Martin, and the bus driver is Walter 

Petrowsky.  And being the neighbouring MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly), more than likely I have some students 

up there as well. I'd like all members of the Assembly to greet 

them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 10 (continued) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would also 

like to pass on my greetings to the students in the gallery.  I'm 

glad that you could make it today. 

 

As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, there are so many areas in this 

Bill that upon further review are causing concern out there, that 

I believe that the minister should seriously, seriously consider 

reviewing the process that he has embarked upon. 

 

He's launched into a whole new area for Saskatchewan in this 

Bill, and that is the question of deeper rights.  Traditionally the 

land sales in the province of Saskatchewan have been on the 

basis of a tract of land, often a quarter section, that goes from 

the surface to the bedrock.  And all intervening layers of 

sedimentary rock and formations have been there for the 

successful bidder to develop. 

 

It has been the practice, Mr. Speaker, in Alberta for some time 

after a lot of consultation with industry, a lot of regulatory 

development, to allow the expiration of deeper rights.  It has 

never been in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I can appreciate the minister wanting to explore it because new 

drilling technology, particularly horizontal technology, has 

allowed companies to go down and go horizontal through 

formations that previously were very poor producers.  They 

were that way, Mr. Speaker, for a number of technical 

engineering geological reasons. 

 

We have many formations in the province, Mr. Speaker, that 

have good initial production but then have sand infiltration, as 

an example, in some of the Kindersley fields.  It quickly dries 

the production up to two or three barrels per day.  Being able 

to, for instance, go horizontal through Viking sands and be able 

to keep the production of that well on track has a lot of merit. 



May 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 685 

We've had the situation in south-east Saskatchewan where the 

pinnacle reef has been difficult to exploit with conventional 

drilling.  One must be very accurate in the drilling.  It's deep 

oil.  It is below the existing producing areas in many cases.  

New technology, new drilling techniques have allowed people 

to be far more accurate in their access to some of this deep oil.  

The Mark discoveries in the Ceylon area are a prime example 

of a company using the most advanced technology available to 

them to access some of those deeper pools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to have deeper rights ensconced in legislation 

with this Bill with all of the other things attached to it when 

there has been no consultation with the people most affected, is 

very dangerous, Mr. Speaker.  It says that the minister may 

without any prior consultation go into south-east 

Saskatchewan, for example, and apportion out mineral rights 

below the two primary existing pay zones that we have in that 

area and sell them off to another company.  And he may do this 

without consulting with the people most affected above. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Five years. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- The minister says from his seat, five years.  If 

he knows anything about the time involved, the seismic work, 

the geological, the geophysical work that is necessary, and 

some of the horizontal drilling and the expense that goes with 

that work, he will know that five years oftentimes is the lead 

time.  If he would go and consult with people like Mark 

Resources and others that have gone after some of the deeper 

pools in southern Saskatchewan, he would know that some of 

that work had gone on way beyond five years. 

 

And I go back to my earlier comments made by a member of 

the industry, Mr. Speaker, who said you go out, you make that 

investment, you do your geophysical work. And all of a sudden 

two years from now the minister defrocks you because 

someone in the cabinet has decreed we're going to get some 

more money out of these boys.  We're in a jam because we've 

gone off and made an insurance investment in Manitoba or 

Alberta, and it hasn't worked out right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can think of a number of reasons, given a 

number of reasons from the path that I have seen the 

government of the day taking where the necessity may come 

about where they will go to the Minister of Energy and say, we 

want you to use Bill 10 to do a quick and dirty on the folks in 

the oil and gas business or the mining industry in this province. 

 

And I hate to think, Mr. Speaker, that that is why this Bill is so 

intentionally vague, so intentionally vague.  If we're talking 

about uranium, why don't we spell uranium out.  If there's a 

problem with uranium mining and royalties, then the minister 

should spell it out in the Bill, not have people in the potash 

industry or the gold industry wondering, is this intended for 

me. 

 

And it's that vagueness, Mr. Speaker.  It's the retroactivity.  It's 

a royalty review that no one has heard about or been informed 

about that has people really wondering what exactly the 

government is up to.  Is this the thin edge of the wedge, Mr. 

Speaker?  Is this the thin edge of the wedge for 

some . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Mr. Speaker, may I have leave to introduce 

guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

Legislative Assembly, I would like to introduce today 37 grade 

7 students from the Delisle Composite High School. Their 

teachers today attending with them are Mr. Glenn Key and Mr. 

Marv Schultz.  Chaperons are Judy Bentley and Elaine Miller. 

 

I will be meeting with them later for photos and drinks, but I 

would like to have the Assembly welcome them here today on 

their tour of the Assembly and I think Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 10 (continued) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, it would be absolutely unfair 

for this Bill to go into Committee of the Whole without you 

taking the proper time to consult with people in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members of the oil industry, the members of 

the gas industry, the members of the mining association don't 

sit in this Chamber as we go through Committee of the Whole 

and ask the minister questions.  They expect that those 

questions have been placed to the minister prior to.  That the 

members of the opposition will be asking some very fine points 

attached to it where the minister can clarify exactly what the 

intent is. 

 

But the intent of some of the regulations . . . because always it's 

the attached regulations, Mr. Speaker, and how they operate 

that determines how the Bill functions.  And that is the way it 

should be.  That is the way it should be that both sides have 

done their consultative work, that there has been some 

consensus achieved. 

 

You will never make everyone happy, Mr. Speaker, in the oil 

and gas business.  You will never make everyone happy in the 

uranium business.  You'll never make everyone happy in the 

potash business.  You are dealing with individuals; individual's 

concerns come to the light.  But by and large the practice has 

been to try and arrive at some kind of a consensus that is 

manageable. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, that takes a lot of effort.  I know it will 

mean that the minister will have to spend untold hours talking 

to people, listening to opinions -- some of which he may not 

agree with, some that he may have a fundamental philosophical 

difference with.  But, Mr. Speaker, I say to you and this 

Assembly that there are simply too many lives involved here.  

There are too many  



686 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1992 

jobs.  There are too many families.  There are too many 

communities involved to be flippant about this, to not do the 

necessary homework. 

 

One only has to go across the southern part of our province -- 

Estevan, Weyburn, Swift Current, Gull Lake, Maple Creek, up 

the entire west side.  Every major community, Mr. Speaker, has 

people that work in these industries.  One only has to go across 

northern Saskatchewan and see that mining is a very major 

employer, an excellent employer I would put to you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

One only has to be in the mining camps of Cameco and the 

other uranium companies.  One only has to be in the gold 

camps, to go through the kitchens, to sit and eat with the people 

that are working there, to realize that those are very good jobs.  

People are treated in a respectful manner.  The native 

employment, aboriginal employment has been going up on a 

consistent basis.  The people that didn't have access to good 

technical training, the people that will have jobs and the job 

training that will further them in their lives for years and years 

and years have been benefitting.  To know that you don't treat 

those people in a haphazard and retroactive manner because the 

very lives and jobs of those people is affected very long term. 

 

I would suggest to the minister that there are probably uranium 

contracts coming out of northern Saskatchewan that are of 10 

years in length -- long-term contracts to hydro facilities in 

eastern Canada, power plants across the United States, power 

plants in the Pacific Rim.  Those contracts, given the price of 

yellowcake today, do not allow ministers two years down the 

road to all of a sudden retroactively change the rules and not 

expect a massive dislocation of people employed in those 

industries.  And, Mr. Speaker, the minister may say, well that's 

not the intention at all.  That simply isn't what is on the 

government's mind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in designing legislation affecting those industries, 

one must be fairly specific because otherwise people are on 

edge.  Their investors are on edge.  And I suggest to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that when the people that invest their money in these 

companies and organizations are on edge, then the taxpayer of 

Saskatchewan had better be on edge because the tens of 

millions of dollars of royalties and taxes and personal income 

tax and spin-off jobs that are affected by those industries are 

affected, and then the taxpayer of this province should be on 

edge. 

 

And that is why the taxpayer of this province said Bill 42 was 

wrong.  It wasn't consultative.  It didn't take into consideration 

the communities affected by it.  It simply hacked and chopped 

its way through much of Saskatchewan society, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1545) 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it's always been unfortunate in our 

province that our two major cities, Regina and Saskatoon, are 

so far away from the majority of our resource production.  

Saskatoon has a strong potash presence that has grown over the 

years and does make people aware of what that industry goes 

through. 

And certainly the uranium industry has tried, Mr. Speaker, I 

think over the last eight or nine years, to make Saskatoon 

aware of the presence that it plays in this province.  We have 

seen the location of Cameco's head office in Saskatoon.  We 

have seen a number of the other companies that formerly were 

located in Denver or other areas relocate to Saskatoon because 

they know the importance of informing our large, urban areas 

of the impact of those industries. 

 

And it's always I think been the difference maybe, Mr. Speaker, 

between Alberta and ourselves, is that both Calgary and 

Edmonton are almost within the range of a gunshot to the 

producing areas of that province -- that you can look from 

downtown Calgary and see the fields of Turner Valley; that it's 

not far from downtown Edmonton to Leduc. 

 

And I think that's why that province has been so successful, 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps in exploiting those resources -- exploiting 

them so that the people of that province understand what it 

takes to make them tick, what type of legislation is necessary, 

what role they play in the environment of that province. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, in this province of ours, where we 

tend to think of places like Maple Creek, Richmound, places 

that don't hit the news every day in Regina and Saskatoon 

papers, that we don't necessarily put enough thought into some 

of the things that we do when we really greatly influence the 

lives of the people in those communities and in fact the 

community itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was one of the reasons, I think, that 

Saskatchewan felt very strongly about having the heavy oil 

upgrader at Lloydminster on the Saskatchewan side of the 

border -- that the impact of that upgrader and its potential to 

use Saskatchewan feedstocks and at the same time generate 

economic activity in north-west Saskatchewan was a signal 

maybe to the rest of our province that yes, Saskatchewan is a 

major player, that our heavy oil reserves, if they can be 

exploited, have the potential to make Saskatchewan the Saudi 

Arabia of North America.  The 385 billion barrels of heavy oil, 

if it can be exploited properly, will make Saskatchewan an 

energy giant in the North American context. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, if we are to achieve that, it means 

that some of the new technology associated with heavy oil, the 

ability to horizontally drill in combination with water flood, 

with fire flood, with using CO D22 (carbon dioxide), which is 

particularly adaptable to heavy oil because of the way that it 

acts as a solvent in the parent rock, means that there are going 

to be tremendous amounts of money invested or necessary to 

invest, Mr. Speaker, to unlock that 385 billion barrels of oil. 

 

It means that even though the costs have been coming down 

from somewhere around a million and a half dollars in the 

Lloydminster situation -- you can probably do a horizontal well 

now for 6 to $700,000 because the formations are relatively 

shallow -- it still means, Mr. Speaker, that if you are to unlock 

literally millions of barrels of oil a year, you are going to need 

tremendous amounts of money and investment. 



May 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 687 

That investment, Mr. Speaker, with the things that I see in Bill 

10, are going to be very edgy.  They're going to be edgy 

because the minister has not taken the time to go out and 

clarify to the people affected exactly what is in his legislation.  

It's not content, it's intent of this Bill that has people worried, 

Mr. Speaker -- it's intent.  And so far no one out there seems to 

know exactly what those intentions are. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that if this government is truly serious, 

truly serious about standing in this legislature day after day and 

telling us how consultive they are, how modern they are, how 

open and accountable and honest they are, then show it to the 

Assembly.  But before you bring in a Bill such as this, that you 

take the time to go out and use all of those pretty words with 

the people most affected by legislation such as this. 

 

Go out and enunciate what your consultive process means, 

what your open process means.  Don't come into this legislature 

and say that you've . . . if you've spoken to one you've spoken 

to a hundred, and then have the opposition phone around for 

three days and you can't find anybody that the minister's talked 

to.  That's not open, that's not consultive, that's not being honest 

with the folks out there.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, that you're 

affecting the lives of far too many people to not practise what 

you preach. 

 

If you don't intend on breaking contracts, spell it out.  If you 

don't intend on playing jiggery-pokery on the royalty side, spell 

it out.  If you don't intend on involving the oil and gas industry 

in this Bill, only uranium, spell it out.  If you don't intend on 

involving potash, spell it out. 

 

And for goodness sake, Mr. Speaker, before you start taking 

Saskatchewan's advantage away, which we've enjoyed for the 

last number of years, probably being the leading jurisdiction in 

North America for the advancement of heavy oil technology, 

before you would say to people like Sceptre Resources, who 

have probably drilled the most successful well in the heavy oil 

areas of our province -- still flowing, I understand, in excess of 

1,000 barrels a day -- that you don't say to them and their 

investors, I'm going to pass a piece of legislation in this 

legislature that uses executive power to come in a couple of 

years from now and tell you I want a different piece of the pie, 

or I want to regulate you in a different manner, or I want to 

take your deeper rights away from you and give them to 

somebody else. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, the minister hasn't spelled that intent out 

to that company or any other.  And that's why, Mr. Speaker, we 

really wonder.  We really wonder on this Bill why it is so 

intentionally vague, why we should be expected to go into 

committee of the whole asking the minister clause by clause, 

questions that have been left intentionally vague, questions that 

he has either neglected simply because he's new at the job, to 

ask the people most affected, or because -- and I hope this isn't 

the case, Mr. Speaker -- because he doesn't want to talk to the 

people involved because of the kind of questions they might 

ask and the kind of answers that he might have to give. 

 

And I believe the member from Swift Current is an 

honourable man.  People in that area tell me that he has a long 

history of being honourable in that community.  People in the 

oil and gas industry tell me that the member from Swift Current 

has been an honourable man.  And I say to the minister, why 

would you want to sully your reputation in a community 

known for its oil and gas production, known for being a 

community that has taken that industry and been very 

progressive with it, when all you have to do, sir, is go out and 

talk to the people most affected. 

 

That all you have to do is get a hold of their member agencies 

and sit down and explore with them their ideas on this Bill.  

Explore with them perhaps some reworking of the Bill that 

would give comfort, that would say to them over the next two 

or three or four years, because the minister and his government 

have legitimate obligations to meet, that perhaps like the 

former government did when reducing the royalty holiday 

period, that it will be done over a 24-month period of time.  

That a 2-year holiday will go to a 1-year holiday, that each 

month goes by there is less holiday -- and it goes from 24 

months to 23 months to 22 months. 

 

But at least, Mr. Speaker, people knew that when they were 

going to go out and drill a well and it was going to take so 

many days to drill a well and so many days to bring it on 

production and maybe so many days to hook it up to the 

existing pipelines or so many day of trucking associated with 

the production, that over that period of time -- with their 

projections on what the WTI (Western Texas Intermediate) 

price is going to be, what the natural gas price was going to be 

-- that they could have some confidence of meeting the payroll, 

of a return on investment.  That that particular company would 

be around next year and the year after and the year after that. 

 

That they would continue paying Saskatchewan people very 

good wages.  That those people would continue paying income 

tax.  That the local store would keep on having a flow of 

people through it.  That maybe somebody in a metal-bending 

business who was associated with the industry would keep their 

employees.  That type of approach allows people to plan.  

There's no retroactivity attached to it.  It's spelled out.  People 

go through the process of managing their business and their 

lives and there's nothing scary. 

 

Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I sure hope so.  

Because there's a whole lot of people out there, Mr. Speaker, 

are going to be terribly disappointed in this minister and this 

government, if the minister, if the minister doesn't take the 

reasonable road and do what his government has preached over 

the last seven months, do the reasonable thing and talk to the 

people most affected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan's ability, Saskatchewan's ability to 

stay in the forefront of so many ventures, means that these 

industries have to be . . . have a predictable process. 

 

If Cameco is going to deliver the laser technology that they've 

developed to refine uranium ore, if the CRISLA (chemical 

reaction by isotope selective laser activation) process is going 

to go forward, if horizontal drilling is going to go forward, if 

Saskatchewan's ability -- as a 



688 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1992 

government says -- to develop co-generation with natural gas 

and some of our major industries and cities is to go ahead, then 

it's absolutely necessary for a minimum, they tell me in the 

business, of say 25 megawatt generating plant to be 

economically viable.  If a 25 megawatt generation plant under 

co-generation is going to go ahead, these people can't be 

undressed by the minister two years down the road.  It simply 

would not be acceptable financially or ethically, I think, Mr. 

Speaker, to have those kind of provisions available to the 

minister without consulting with the people most affected. 

 

I say to the members opposite, Mr. Speaker . . . and I heard 

some chirping about the environment from members opposite.  

If the environmental agenda, if taking CO D22 stack gasses 

from the power plants of southern Saskatchewan and injecting 

them into the Midale field or any of the other existing oil fields 

in our province is going to be achieved, then there are going to 

have to be tens of millions of dollars available to do that 

undertaking. 

 

Those tens of millions of dollars aren't going to come, Mr. 

Speaker, from people that are edgy and concerned about their 

investments.  They aren't going to come from people that are 

concerned about a minister's ability to retroactively do things.  

They aren't going to feel good about a minister's ability to 

break contracts and limit the amount of remuneration, even 

though those contracts may have been signed years in advance. 

 

(1600) 

 

Because I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, the potential is there.  The 

Midale field has produced a hundred million barrels of oil for 

the province of Saskatchewan since the early '50s.  The Midale 

field has another hundred million barrels of oil locked in 

because existing enhanced oil recovery does not remove it very 

efficiently. 

 

But if the stack gasses from the power plants of south-east 

Saskatchewan can clean up our environment, help us meet our 

requirements under the federal green plan, and at the same time 

unlock a hundred million barrels of oil that has the highest 

royalty regime in North America attached to it, then I say the 

taxpayer of this province will be well served; the environment 

of this province will be well served; power generation in this 

province will be well served; and it is a win, win situation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that environmental concern is not going to 

be looked after if the government insists on bringing in 

legislation that is vague, that is open-ended, that goes back to 

the days of Bill 42, because it simply will not work.  You've 

burnt those folks once, and you burnt them bad.  And they 

aren't about to be burnt again. 

 

And I think the minister, if he went out and talked to them, 

could rectify the apprehension that exists out there today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would not be standing in this legislature 

speaking at some length on this issue if the people affected had 

not been calling, if the people affected had not been making 

representation. 

 

So I say to the government today on Bill 10, you have a very 

clear option before you.  You can live up to your 

rhetoric, or you can proceed to push.  And, Mr. Minister, I give 

you the opportunity now to stand on your feet and tell this 

legislature that you're pulling this Bill from further 

consideration until you have done your job and gone out and 

talked to the people that are most affected by it in this province.  

Will you do that, sir? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to be able 

to enter into this debate on Bill No. 10. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to explain to the people who may be 

watching the proceedings this afternoon that we're debating 

what is called the second reading of a Bill.  Second reading is 

the stage where members of the Assembly discuss and explore 

the principles of the Bill presented by the government.  At this 

stage we try to determine whether this Bill in its various 

provisions operates on sound principles, and whether in a 

general sense this Bill should be supported. 

 

The reason I want to explain that to the viewers this afternoon 

is that many of the remarks I'll be making will not be about 

mining or owning mineral lands, which is what this Bill talks 

about in its specifics.  Rather I'll be discussing the broad 

principles of this Bill, principles which I believe offend much 

of what is important to the values of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, among the operative principles in this Bill is the 

principle that the NDP cabinet minister will be the judge and 

jury in matters related to mineral lands.  Another is the idea 

that the minister, a single person, can retroactively change the 

law.  And another, Mr. Speaker, and this really is contained in 

the principle of the whole Bill, is that individuals within 

Saskatchewan in businesses are either too incompetent or too 

evil to be trusted with their historic rights and freedoms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this principle is simply a continuation of the 

principle that has been put forward in every major law and 

policy that this government has implemented since the day it 

was elected. 

 

Bill 10 continues with this campaign to take away from 

Saskatchewan people their rights and to give the minister the 

absolute discretion to do as he pleases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see this business of increasing the power of 

the cabinet ministers take on several forms in this Bill.  The 

minister for example will acquire the power to simply have an 

opinion that the person or the business is doing something that 

reduces the amount of money the government should be 

receiving in taxes. 

 

If, just in the opinion of the minister, if that is what's 

happening, this law would give the minister the right to simply 

send those people or businesses a bill for the extra amount the 

minister thinks he should take.  There's no recourse for the 

person who is the target of the minister's opinion.  He just 

receives a bill and must pay up.  The Bill does not provide for 

any disagreement, any method of appealing.  If the minister has 

an opinion, then this law says the minister is right, and the 

person must simply pay. 

 

It is very reminiscent of a remark made by the Associate 

Minister of Finance the other day, Mr. Speaker.  The 



May 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 689 

minister said, and I quote: if I think it, then it is so, end quote.  

If he thinks it, then it is so.  The government is applying that 

principle in Bill after Bill and in this Bill we see this afternoon.  

If the minister simply thinks someone should pay more, it will 

be so.  And that person will pay more with no argument 

accepted, none whatsoever. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is undoubtedly true that there will be 

times when unscrupulous individuals will try to cheat on their 

taxes.  That is even more of an inevitable result when the 

government continually increases taxes, continually takes more 

money out of the pocket of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  As they do that, particularly in hard times, the 

incentive for cheating probably increases somewhat. 

 

At this point, Mr. Speaker, that people are accused of cheating 

have always had the right to have a hearing on that matter, to 

put forward their own evidence and to have an impartial 

decision arrived at whether or not they have indeed cheated.  

This Bill says such a process is not necessary, Mr. Speaker, 

because the government has said if the minister thinks someone 

is cheating then they must be cheating, and they must pay. 

 

I find it incredible that a government would even present a 

package of ill-conceived measures to this Assembly like this 

Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It would like to claim that the only 

concern the opposition has is to defend the interests of the big 

oil companies.  That's always what they like to present to us; 

we're only apologists for big business, big oil companies. 

 

That's the kind of logic that they're hoping the people of 

Saskatchewan will accept.  But the fact is that the principles in 

this Bill affect every man, woman, and child in this province.  

The fact is the plan to increase the power of cabinet ministers 

at the expense of Saskatchewan people is already in full swing 

and this Bill is just one more manifestation of that plan. 

 

No one is as well suited to judge our people as an NDP cabinet 

minister.  That is what this Bill and others on the order paper, 

that's what those kinds of Bills say to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  No one can provide a jury 

that will be of equal to an NDP cabinet minister, so we just 

have to relieve the people of that inconvenience.  If the 

minister thinks it, then it is so. 

 

This Bill also includes a rather dramatic implementation of the 

principle of retroactivity, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Retroactivity 

principle is one that says that if you don't like the way the law 

was ten years ago, two years ago, two decades ago, then you 

just go ahead and pass another law that says that it never was 

that way after all.  So in the case of this Bill, if the minister 

doesn't think it was so, then it shall never have been so. 

 

The type of retroactive legislation that's been presented in this 

House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think is the kind of retroactive 

legislation that people have a great deal of difficulty accepting 

in a free and democratic society, Mr. Speaker.  We see the 

principles that they espouse of retroactivity being put forward 

in a number of Bills, not just this one, but also in others, such 

as the farm legislation.  So far, we haven't seen that legislation 

being 

put forward.  We've only seen copies of an affidavit that they 

presented to the court in Melville suggesting that they will have 

deemed people to have received notice of intention. 

 

That's the kind of principle that has been espoused in Bill after 

Bill after Bill by this government, and again with respect to this 

Bill.  The Bill that we see here actually pretends to go back and 

change two decades of history.  Snuck into coming-into-force 

provision, this Bill states that the law will deem regulations -- 

regulations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, mind you, not statutes -- 

regulations that were in force on January 1, 1974 to have been 

in force for the 20 years since then. 

 

I'm not sure what the government's intentions are with that, but 

I think the people, particularly the people in the industry 

affected, would like to know what the government has in mind 

in that area.  They continually -- this government -- want to put 

forward legislation that deems things into existence.  And I 

think that's the concern that us members of the opposition have, 

as well as the general public in Saskatchewan has. 

 

In other words, they are repealing any legal actions that have 

happened in two decades that would not legally have happened 

had they not been done before January 1, 1974. 

 

Just as we've seen in other Bills, this same type of retroactivity 

is being presented again in this one.  Imagine, Mr. Speaker, 

when we speak about retroactivity, if a government had ever 

been elected that didn't like the fact that labour unions had been 

legally recognized and collective bargaining had been in place 

for the last number of decades, could that government simply 

cancel, deem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, deem that that kind of 

legislation never happened in this province? 

 

The same principle of retroactivity that this Bill would allow 

that government to pass a law that deems the laws and 

regulations governing unions had never existed.  And the 

minister could simply decide, in his opinion and his opinion 

alone, that the salaries and benefits of union members should 

have been . . . what they should have been over the last number 

of decades and bill them for the difference.  The same principle 

applies to that as what's been provided in this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker.  It is exactly that same type of principle. 

 

Another example would be to say that the law protecting 

homesteads have never existed and sending a bill to all the 

farmers of the province for rent for their homesteads for the 

years that have gone by -- same type of principle.  You go back 

retroactively and decide for one reason or another, in the 

opinion of the minister, that someone hasn't paid enough tax 

over the last number of years and send them a bill.  That's the 

kind of legislation that's being presented before us today, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not being a lawyer, one has to wonder about 

whether these measures are even constitutional, retroactivity 

laws such as what we're seeing here.  Can it be constitutional in 

this country today that we can so casually remove the rights of 

people? 



690 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1992 

I know the NDP has consistently opposed property rights, and 

we even have the quote from the current president of 

SaskPower, Jack Messer, saying: property rights is simply a 

myth that has been imposed on us.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I think 

property rights, individual rights and freedoms, go exactly to 

the heart of a democratic society.  It's that type of thing that 

people fundamentally believe is the principle on which a 

democratic society should be founded upon. 

 

This government's lack of respect for property rights is 

absolutely legendary in the last little while.  It doesn't matter 

what anyone wants; the government will deem what they 

decide is necessary for the interests of this province, and I 

would say, Mr. Speaker, more particularly the interests of the 

NDP Party itself. 

 

What is even more frightening, Mr. Speaker, is how quietly all 

of this is being done.  The government did not consult with the 

industry about this Bill.  The minister did not consult.  When 

they formed government, that was going to be one of the 

fundamental principles that they said that they were going to 

put in place.  They were going to consult with the industries 

affected, they were going to consult with the people affected, 

but yet time after time after time we've seen that they haven't 

consulted with anyone. 

 

(1615) 

 

Did they consult with farmers of Saskatchewan when they 

talked about changes in the '91 GRIP Bill?  No, they put 

together a little committee and had them decide for themselves 

what they were going to do.  The farmers that were here on the 

grounds of the legislature, they weren't consulted with.  I wasn't 

consulted with, as a farmer.  None of the back-bench NDP 

members were consulted with, just as I'll bet they weren't 

consulted with respect to this Bill either. 

 

They weren't consulted, I would suspect, in all of the 

provisions that are put out in the budget either.  That's why we 

see things happening like one of the columnists, Mr. Dale 

Eisler, reporting in there that they're almost ready to jump 

down the foyer here, they're so concerned about what's 

happened in the budget.  They know very well that about 

two-thirds of them will never have another opportunity to serve 

in this House as a result of this type of Bill and the budget that 

this government has presented. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Just wait and see. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Just wait and see, the member says, just wait and 

see.  The people of this province I'm not sure can wait that long 

to see this government bring forward another election.  There 

won't be anybody left in this province as long as we see 

legislation like this kind presented.  The oil companies will be 

chased out; the potash companies will be chased out; the 

lumber companies will be chased out.  The farmers are being 

chased out daily by this government's actions. 

 

We talk about what's happening in agriculture.  It's the same 

type of thing that this Bill wants to bring forward on the oil 

companies and the mineral companies in this province. 

That's the kinds of things they want to do to people in this 

province. 

 

They fundamentally do not like private property rights.  They 

don't like private individuals owning businesses.  They don't 

like private companies owning and acquiring property in this 

country.  That's the problem with these people, as I see it, Mr. 

Speaker.  They don't like that kind of thing in this province.  

They want union people to run the whole place.  They want 

government to run the whole place. 

 

That's why we see, despite what they claim about a budget 

that's going to put this province in order, we see increased 

spending -- another $100 million going to be spent more in this 

province than was spent before.  They talk about fiscal 

restraint, Mr. Speaker.  I don't think they know what the word 

means, fiscal restraint. 

 

These people, Mr. Speaker, bring forward Bill after Bill after 

Bill that talks about retroactivity.  They talk about taking the 

rights away from the mineral owners and oil companies.  That's 

the type of thing that this Bill does, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

That's the type of thing that we see in this Bill. 

 

I'd like to tell you a little story about when I was going to high 

school.  We had a principal of the school then.  I think, in all 

fairness, I think everyone would recognize that went to school 

at that time in that particular school that that principal, he felt 

that he was the dictator of that school.  Everyone had to listen 

to his word . . . (inaudible) . . . Didn't matter what he said.  

They had to bow to his will. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that's the same type of thing that 

we're seeing in this province today being presented by this 

government and this minister -- the same type of thing, a Bill 

that brings in all kinds of retroactive actions, all kinds of 

retroactive provisions that no one will have any recourse to. 

 

The minister himself will decide whether people should have to 

pay more and retroactively go back and get it.  That's the type 

of thing that we're seeing in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and I think 

it's the kind of thing that the people of this province will in four 

years time summarily kick these people out of office for.  

That's the type of things that they will do. 

 

The industry representatives were not consulted.  The minister 

says that they were consulted.  Well I'm sure he probably called 

them up and said, we're going to talk about a few things that we 

might consider doing.  But did he give them any indication of 

what was going to be in this Bill?  Absolutely none, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The industry representatives that we have had the opportunity 

to consult with, they said they were not consulted about this 

Bill in any way, shape, or form.  Certainly the minister called 

them.  At least he provided them with that kind of courtesy and 

spoke to them.  But I don't think he spoke to them about the 

provisions that are outlined in this Bill.  If he did speak to them 

about the provisions in this Bill, I think he would've found that 

the people of the industry would not have been happy about 

what's being proposed here. 

 

The people that I had the opportunity to speak to in the oil 



May 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 691 

industry that are in my constituency -- a constituency that has a 

great deal of oil and gas presence, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- they 

say they were not consulted.  They had a courtesy call from the 

minister about a few things relative to the industry, but they 

most certainly weren't aware of the provisions of this Bill. 

 

And the only way they became aware of the provisions of this 

Bill was when one of the members, our Energy critic, took it 

upon himself to send them a copy of the Bill.  That's the only 

way they had any indication of what was going to be in this 

Bill.  The minister, a couple of days later, sent them a copy too.  

But it sure didn't do any good because they'd already received 

it from one of our members. 

 

That's the kind of consultation that this minister suggests that 

he puts forward.  That's the kind of consultation he decides that 

the people in the industry need to have.  Call them up, give 

them a courtesy call, tell them that we're going to do a few 

things, minor little adjustments -- don't worry about it -- and 

then bring in this kind of legislation.  That's the kind of 

consultation that they get in the industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It's interesting, I think, that the members opposite . . . they don't 

like it when we continually and continually and continually 

point out about the lack of consultation.  They know very well 

the industry wasn't consulted, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  They 

weren't consulted themselves.  They had no indication, I would 

suspect, of the provisions of this Bill, and if they did, they most 

certainly don't understand them.  Because if they did 

understand them, I think it would go against the grain of a 

number of those folks opposite with respect particularly to 

retroactivity. 

 

I would have to ask some of the back-benchers, do they agree 

with retroactive legislation?  Do you agree with it? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Yes. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- He agrees with it.  There's one member spoke up.  

He agrees with retroactive legislation.  That's interesting, I 

think, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  This Bill talks about the oil and 

gas, the rights of the oil companies and mineral companies in 

this province.  And that's the kind of thing that makes the oil 

companies and the mineral companies in this province so 

concerned, is when there's members like the member opposite 

that spoke up and said he believes in retroactivity.  That's the 

kind of thing that they're concerned about.  This Bill deals with 

retroactivity and that's the kind of thing that they're concerned 

about. 

 

Will this Bill be removed?  Will this minister decide to take 

this Bill . . . bring it back and give the industry representatives 

an opportunity to speak with him about it and consult with him 

about it?  I doubt it very much, not especially when we have 

members like the one opposite spouting off about he believes 

in retroactivity.  We'll never see that in this legislature, that 

they'll repeal this Bill, because they believe, they 

fundamentally believe in retroactive legislation.  If people don't 

accept it, we just deem it to be so.  That's the kind of thing that 

they believe in.  If people don't believe that they're doing the 

right thing, well we'll just deem it to be right. 

That's the kind of legislation that we're seeing -- no 

information, no discussion, no consultation with the industry 

that's being affected by this Bill, Bill No. 10.  As I said, the 

first opportunity that the industry had was an opportunity that 

our energy critic presented them with -- an opportunity to see 

the Bill firsthand.  That was the first opportunity, when we 

presented it to them. 

 

I believe that these type of measures -- retroactive legislation -- 

go against all of the principles that a democratic free society 

should have.  As my colleague says, scare the industry out.  

There's no question that that's exactly what this Bill will do. 

 

The people that are affected in the oil industry, particularly in a 

field like the field that I represent in the Kindersley area, that's 

a field that is a very marginal field, Mr. Speaker.  The well 

production there ranges from one barrel all the way up.  The 

average production is about three barrels.  There's about 1,500 

people directly employed in the industry out there. 

 

And when I speak to the industry representatives out there in 

the Kindersley area, they're telling me this is exactly the kind 

of thing that will drive them out of this province.  This is 

exactly the kind of thing that they expected from this 

government and this is exactly the kind of thing that they're 

starting to get from this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this Bill . . . had the minister given it a 

little more thought, if he gave it any, he would have realized 

that these are the type of Bills that worries the industry 

representatives.  The companies out there tell me that these 

type of provisions are the types of provisions that drive them 

out of the province and want to go into another province like 

Alberta. 

 

The members can be as sanctimonious as they like about what's 

going on here in the legislature, but the folks out there -- the 

real folks, the ones that are earning a living in the oil and gas 

industry and the mineral industry -- they're the ones that really 

matter in this province with respect to a Bill like this. 

 

I don't, quite frankly, care what the member opposite says with 

respect to the oil and gas companies.  I was elected to represent 

the Kindersley constituency, and a large per cent of the people 

in that constituency are people associated with this industry. 

And they are the people that are being affected by legislation 

being presented here . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, we'll 

just see about the election, the next time we have an 

opportunity to have that election, whether or not there'll be a 

Conservative member representing that constituency again.  

My prediction is that there will be a Conservative member 

representing that constituency again and there will be a heck of 

a lot less NDP members representing it. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The polls in Kindersley are going . . . 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- The polls in Kindersley . . . Let me tell you 

exactly: they're doing exactly that with respect to NDP support.  

The polls in Kindersley last fall told us that the NDP ran third 

-- the only constituency in the whole province that the NDP ran 

third. 



692 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1992 

And I'll tell you the reason why they ran third in that 

constituency.  They ran third in that constituency because 

exactly the reasons we see like are being put forward in this 

type of Bill.  That's why they ran third in that constituency. 

 

The oil and gas companies, the farmers, the business people, 

they all realized by past experience what this type of 

government will put forward.  They're close enough to Alberta, 

fortunately in a lot of respects, to have firsthand opportunity to 

see what a free enterprise government is able to do for them.  

And that's why they elect Conservative member after 

Conservative member. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government, I believe, does not 

fundamentally believe in democratic rights.  But, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, democratic rights do indeed apply to them.  They do 

indeed apply to this government as well as any other 

government in this country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill goes beyond just applying to the Exxons 

of the world.  It applies to the small oil and gas companies.  It 

applies to the small little companies like are out in Kindersley 

that are trying to eke a living out on a very marginal field, the 

swabbing type companies that are trying to recover oil that the 

bigger players have decided is uneconomic for them. 

 

For the most part, in the Kindersley field, most of the major 

companies have pulled out.  The field is too uneconomic for 

them with their high costs associated with running larger 

companies, that the smaller companies are the ones that are 

picking them up. 

 

I can think of one company out there that has just recently 

purchased a couple of hundred wells -- very, very marginal 

wells.  But they feel through enhanced recovery and swabbing 

techniques that they can make a living on those fields.  And 

when we see this type of regulation being brought into effect, 

that very type of thing that calls again into question whether or 

not these companies will be able to survive. 

 

The NDP believe that they must control, absolutely control the 

interests of those type areas.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's the 

way this government thinks and reacts.  Retroactive legislation, 

deeming of notices to people, the taking of the rights of the 

individuals.  This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is just another step down 

the road of socialism -- just another step down that road. 

 

This Bill and others presented by this government is a clear 

indication of the way this government of socialists believes this 

province should proceed.  And I believe fundamentally that 

that is the reason why the people of Saskatchewan, given 

another opportunity, will reject these folks.  They will reject 

them because of the types of things that they're doing with 

respect to legislation such as this one.  That's the type of thing 

that will turn the people of this province away from this 

government. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the opportunity to speak 

to this Bill.  I'll let it go at that. 

 

(1630) 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I wish I 

could say that I were happy to get on my feet to speak this 

afternoon, but it isn't a happy moment to have to discuss the 

kind of thing that's going on in this Bill. 

 

We had been so readily and totally assured the other day that 

this kind of thing was never going to happen.  We sat in this 

very Assembly and listened to members opposite assure us that 

50 cents on the last Bill per acre would only be an insignificant 

little tap on the petroleum industry -- just such a little bit they 

wouldn't even notice -- and that nothing more was going to be 

done.  There wasn't in fact any great plans to restructure the 

entire royalty package.  We were told that in this very 

Assembly. 

 

We were told that through the election campaign.  We were all 

assured of it.  And yet what have we got here?  An insidious 

plan that is developed with such a cautious manner that you 

almost could not see what was coming until you examined it 

very closely.  Such a plan so as to give people powers beyond 

the reason for any democracy to demand of one or two 

individuals; the devious nature to propel into society a Bill that 

provides the opportunity for a dictatorship in a democracy. 

 

That's what it's all about, and that's why we are so displeased 

with having to talk about such a thing.  We are assured that it 

won't happen, and it's within days thrown in front of us -- all 

the way from labour Bills to farm Bills and now to oil royalty 

Bills.  Every time we have a new Bill come forward here, we 

find that unless it is just a housekeeping matter, if it's 

something to do with anything important, it is a total flip-flop 

of what we have been absolutely assured -- perhaps days, 

sometimes months -- but absolutely assured by this 

administration that it would never happen, it would never be 

done.  And here it is again, Bill 42.  I'm sorry to say that I'm 

old enough to remember Bill 42 from the '70s, and here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we have Bill No. 10, a disguised Bill No. 42. 

 

Can you imagine these people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, trying to 

pull this off under the guise of being something new and 

something constructive when in fact it is the old Bill 42 that 

destroyed the oil patch and the whole industry in Saskatchewan 

in the 1970s -- destroyed the industry. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Read it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I have read it in absolute detail, word for 

word. The member across chirps away that we haven't read it.  

Well we've got it right here, the explanations, the Bills.  We've 

even got pieces of paper here that tell us about Bill 42 from the 

'70s.  We've got everything you could imagine about this thing, 

and it's all here.  And I tell the member across the way we have 

read it, and that's why we're so concerned.  If we hadn't read it 

very carefully, we would never have detected the deceit in this 

Bill. 

 

We can deem anything to have happened that we please.  We 

can just simply declare that all of a sudden something else 

happened that nobody else ever thought of.  That's an amazing 

approach to democracy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I recall last fall when we were campaigning there was a  



May 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 693 

lot of people in our area.  You have to understand that we have 

quite a bit of oil and gas activity in my constituency.  And a lot 

of those people were expressing concern.  And the NDP 

candidate had made some overtures in some debates that we 

had had.  These were public debates with all the party 

candidates involved and he said something to the effect that the 

royalty structures were going to be re-examined and that they 

would be rewritten.  And then he passed on to other matters. 

 

Someone in the crowd, of course involved with the petroleum 

industry, twigged on this.  And they said: say, what exactly do 

you mean by this?  Well he said, it's not right the way it is now.  

We're going to have to go and fix it all up. 

 

Now I alluded to this matter just a few days ago in this very 

Assembly.  And the members opposite said they were not only 

not responsible for what that candidate had said, but they 

seriously doubted that what he said was true, And that in fact if 

it was, they were never going to do that.  And now we've got 

this Bill in front of us that says exactly what he had told us in 

the election campaign in October.  A sequence of events that 

cause such complete concern out there, Mr. Speaker, that in 

fact the petroleum industry phoned him up and asked him for a 

private meeting.  And they've granted that meeting. 

 

They called in an expert from the NDP and the petroleum 

business -- so-called expert, their expert.  And he went to 

Richmound, Saskatchewan and they held a meeting there under 

lock and key of closed door -- supposedly -- with petroleum 

officials and with the NDP candidate and with their so-called 

experts.  And they explained in the cloak and dagger situation 

what they really meant so that they could calm the industry 

down because the tide was beginning to turn against them in 

that area. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we find out that all of the things that were 

rumoured to have come out of that meeting and all of the things 

that the candidate actually said were in fact true.  He was being 

an honest man.  He was telling it the way it was.  And the 

industry was assured that he really didn't know what he was 

talking about, and this government assured us that he was not 

telling it the way it was. 

 

And yet we have this Bill that proves that what he said then 

was right and what he had said about this happening -- the 

things that would've cost them many more seats if it had 

become generally known -- this very thing they denied that 

they would ever do, they now are doing it. 

 

We wondered very seriously in our constituency, Mr. Speaker, 

why Mobil Oil was suddenly selling out a lot of their properties 

last year.  It seemed odd to us that a big company with interests 

that had been in the province for many years would suddenly 

be evacuating the area.  And so we tried to get to the root of the 

situation and find out what was going on. 

 

But of course the industry people are polite and they are 

dignified people, and they weren't about to say anything too 

much, but there were some rumours that started.  And the 

rumours that were going about were that they anticipated an 

NDP government would be elected.  And 

in that anticipation, the fear of that alone, they believed would 

cause them to lose money in this province.  And so they were 

selling out everything they could sell as quickly as they could.  

And the things that they still own, I have been told just 

recently, are for sale as quick as they can find a buyer, but they 

haven't been about to find one. 

 

They anticipated.  And that tells us something, Mr. Speaker, 

about what's going on with this kind of an approach in 

government to industry.  We are sending a message outside of 

our borders that is driving away investment dollars, driving 

away industries, driving away people with expertise and money 

-- because of a fear. 

 

This Bill represents the same thing that's going on when a 

minister stands up in this Assembly and says he's going to tear 

up a thousand kilometres of road.  It's not that the roads are so 

important, but it's the message that he sends out to the whole 

world.  Do people in Ontario who hear a thousand miles or a 

thousand kilometres of road are going to be tore up, do they 

have the impression that this is a prosperous province with a 

tourist industry that would be good to come to?  My goodness, 

we're going to go out there and go out into the wilderness to go 

fishing and there won't be any roads because they're being tore 

up in this poor, backwards province. 

 

It might be that those people don't realize how many thousands 

upon thousands of miles of roads that we've got and that maybe 

a few taken up here or there might not matter.  But the message 

they got was that this province is tearing up roads, that it's 

backwards, that it's not a good place to come to. 

 

So we sent them a message and we've done the same thing 

again with this Bill to the petroleum industry around the world, 

that this is not a province that's open for business.  This Bill 

tells the petroleum industry that we are closed for business 

now, closed for business because if you pass this Bill you can 

deem anything that you want to have happened.  The minister 

has dictatorial powers.  He can go back retroactively to 1974. 

 

Suppose we put this in the context, Mr. Speaker, of what it 

might be to, say, a schoolteacher.  Suppose all of a sudden you 

passed a law that said the Minister of Education will now have 

the right to retroactively, for 20 years back, charge you double 

your pension contribution.  And you are now responsible for 

each year for 20 years back to put up the money for doubling 

your pension contribution because he deemed that you didn't 

give enough, that the province might be going broke or 

something, and that you should give some more.  How would 

you like that?  Tomorrow morning you wake up and the 

Minister of Education says you owe thousands of dollars.  Does 

that send some kind of a message to you about what the people 

in the petroleum industry are thinking when they hear about 

20-year retroactive legislation? 

 

What chance, Mr. Speaker, do you think that you could have 

any investor confidence in our province when we pass a Bill 

such as this.  We've got a whole lot of new technology arriving 

in the petroleum industry. 

 

My colleague alluded to swabbing and one of my other 

colleagues alluded to horizontal drilling.  And there are 



694 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1992 

some older technologies:  the water flood, for example, and the 

fire flooding.  These technologies cost a lot of money but they 

can bring about the recovery of oil and petroleum products 

where it is not economically feasible to do it in any other way.  

But it's a long-term plan and it takes a long time to get your 

money out of it. 

 

So when you say that you're going to have two-year retroactive 

decision making on these kinds of royalties that are attached to 

these new types of developments, then you totally destroy the 

incentive for those people to try that technology because it 

takes maybe 5 or 10 years for them to put it into place and it 

might take even longer than that to ever consider getting their 

money out of it to break even. 

 

And whether the people across the way like it or not, if there is 

an industry in this country that can't make a profit and if they 

can't make a profit, are they ever going to come to our 

province?  Is there an industry in this country that you know of 

that would come to our province to deliberately lose money?  If 

you assure them that they can't make it, if they're guaranteed to 

go bankrupt, how many do you know that are going to come? 

 

I have one farmer friend over across the way that probably is 

saying something to the effect that maybe he might as a farmer, 

but then we farmers do things a little different sometimes -- we 

stick with it when everything else is lost.  And I can take the 

humorous note out of that because we do farm at a loss a lot of 

years.  That's not the way it works with the industry. 

 

And it's the same in the mining industry.  We've talked about 

the mining industry, about potash.  We've talked about 

uranium.  And the reality is that this Bill covers all of those 

areas, Mr. Speaker.  It covers the uranium industry, because 

retroactively again the minister can take the power to do as he 

pleases.  And I know he sits over there very sanctimoniously 

thinking to himself, I'm a good Christian, honest man.  I'd 

never do that.  But what assurance do we have that he will be 

the minister while this Bill is still in effect next year?  

Absolutely none. 

 

He might have all of the best intentions in the world to do 

absolutely everything correctly and rightly, but if this Bill 

passed gives wrong powers to that man even though he himself 

won't use it, what assurance do we have that next year someone 

else who might not be so diligent and so kind and so 

respectable will be in that job?  What assurance?  None 

whatsoever. 

 

Once you pass that law you're stuck with it until they repeal it 

or until you have a new government.  And we're looking at four 

years or three and a half or whatever down the road.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is just too long to take a chance on what could 

happen to this entire industry. 

 

(1645) 

 

I want to put perspective into this thing for folks in my 

constituency, to get it down to the home level, down to the 

people level again where it hurts and where it's real. 

 

In my constituency we have basically four industries.  We've 

got gas and oil and cattle and wheat.  You could 

call wheat, grain farming.  And you'll wonder why did I say gas 

and oil as one each.  Well the truth of the matter is that gas and 

oil are sort of divided in our constituency into two distinct 

industries.  On the west side of our constituency the gas fields 

are in themselves an industry.  And while you dig a hole to get 

gas the same as you do for oil, the process of delivering it 

through the system and the whole concept of developing a gas 

field is a lot different than developing an oil patch, a lot of 

different problems.  You'll see some of the same folks working 

in it, but in reality there's a lot of difference there. 

 

And the remarkable thing, Mr. Speaker, is that because of the 

very nature of this industry to need, the petroleum industry, the 

gas and oil part of it, to need to be on agricultural land, or 

Crown land, somebody else's land -- they don't buy the land, 

they lease the minerals under the ground and then they come 

onto the property.  The property's owned by somebody else and 

there's a natural collision effect to people from those industries. 

 

And back 20 and 30 years ago, those collisions happened very 

often.  But there's a remarkable thing that's happening over the 

past few years, and that remarkable thing is that these two 

industries that used to smash into one another and have so 

many obstacles -- all the way from environmental 

considerations, to livestock getting killed in Texas gates, or run 

over by trucks -- these industries have started to intermesh and 

they've become one.  They are like two hands clasping and 

hanging on for dear life in our economy today. 

 

And that has happened in an evolution that, if we'd have 

thought about it, was natural to happen.  That evolution is that 

the farm boys out there, as the economy and agriculture got 

worse, started working for the industry, the oil industry, the gas 

industry.  Gradually, as they worked there, they found that the 

money they were making was good money and it helped with 

their farms. 

 

At the same time, the government of the day, of the past years, 

brought about the gasification of rural Saskatchewan and the 

very same gas wells that these farm boys were working on to 

develop was now the source of energy going through the gas 

line system to the farms.  And they were finding that their hog 

barns were being heated by the very gas that they were helping 

to deliver. 

 

And so the whole concept of these two industries, not to 

mention the cash flow that goes with surface leases and all 

those other kinds of things that are involved, but the whole 

thing started to mesh together and they became sort of like one.  

And so you will find an awful lot of difference out in the 

country now than what you saw 20 years ago.  In fact you will 

see farmers now fighting for the rights of the petroleum 

industry.  If I'm not proof of that I can take you and find others 

-- fighting for one another. 

 

And another remarkable thing, Mr. Speaker, is that you will 

find people in the oil patch having lived with us in our 

agricultural setting long enough so that they now understand 

us.  So there's enough farmers and ranchers and their sons and 

daughters who are working within the industry, that we've 

become very knowledgeable about one another and very 

protective of one another.  And they will defend our needs and 

our rights.  And I know that 



May 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 695 

some day if my rights need to be defended, those are the folks 

that will be behind us. 

 

All four important industries within our constituency are 

worried, desperately worried, about the effects of what Bill 42 

did in the '70s and the reintroduction of this Bill here now.  

And as they became aware of the fact, through this province, 

that this is in fact happening, they will be letting you know 

about that.  I have absolutely no doubt in my mind whatsoever 

of that. 

 

You wonder also about the effects of little things.  The other 

day, I said earlier, 50 cents was said not to be anything to 

worry about per acre, and yet we've got a situation where 56 

wells have already been capped south of Leader.  And I asked 

the members opposite their opinion about that and they 

flippantly said, well they were probably not productive enough 

to be worth having. 

 

Well the truth of the matter is that we haven't been able to get a 

documented statement as to exactly why the owners would 

close those wells in.  But we do have a rumour out there that 

the individual said that he simply could not stay in business if 

the new proposals that he believed were coming were going to 

happen.  Because 56 gas wells, even though they're drilled, are 

a long way from making money and being productive. 

 

A whole network of pipelines and collection systems along 

with a whole network of water filtering, of straining and 

cleaning has to be done to that product before it can be put into 

those lines.  And he said, in the stories that I've heard from 

home from some very knowledgeable people out there, that he 

is not prepared to invest that kind of money in Saskatchewan to 

bring that field into production if he's not going to be allowed 

to take a profit out of it and to make it operate. 

 

And when he sees this Bill I'll bet you he just stands there and 

goes, thank goodness I made that decision and walked away.  

Because really when he sees what is happening in this province 

right now with this Bill, he's going to thank his lucky stars if he 

can be out of here -- Alberta bound. 

 

And then we've got the service industry, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

We can talk for a long time about what this Bill is going to do 

to the service industry and to the jobs of this province.  If you 

think that this Bill isn't going to affect people, think about how 

many young people are not going to have jobs if all these wells 

that were planned before are now not drilled.  Starts right at the 

bottom, right at the base. 

 

And I asked the minister the other day how many oil wells and 

stuff like that have been drilled in the past while.  Well he 

didn't know right away, but he's going to get me that 

information.  But I happen to have some reports from the 

Canadian Petroleum Association that show that there haven't 

been many wells.  Last fall we were told there was going to be 

125 wells drilled in our area.  They've all been cancelled, I 

guess, except a few. 

 

And what has that done to jobs in the area?  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

believe it or not even at the drilling stage a lot of 

young farmers go out and get those jobs as drillers.  They start 

right at that fundamental basic start with the industry.  Not to 

mention who gets the jobs when those oil wells or gas wells are 

brought into production, in servicing those wells and in 

operating them -- well operators.  They operate them so well in 

fact that the industry doesn't go out of the province or any place 

else to look for people to do that; they come and look for the 

young farmers in the communities where these are located and 

they ask them to come and do those jobs. 

 

Those jobs are not going to exist if the industry is not growing 

and expanding.  You may have a basic field where people have 

invested so much time and money already that they can't walk 

away from it; they will stay.  But the reality is that the new 

ones won't be coming.  And we've got an awful lot of important 

technology, horizontal drilling, that could go on in this 

province, that could develop more oil, that could bring in better 

gas fields. 

 

It's just absolutely amazing when you think about the dollars 

that we're about to lose in international competition.  The 

people's needs for money grows greater every day.  Absolutely 

phenomenal amounts of money are needed to run our health 

care system and our education system, and where are we going 

to get that money?  From a bunch of broke farmers?  From a 

bunch of school teachers and nurses who are on fixed wages, 

who have costs of every kind?  They're being bled to death 

already by taxation in this province and throughout this 

country, and it's about time we recognized that we need a 

bigger tax base. 

 

The way to make the province work is to encourage these 

industries to come in and build the base of taxation so that you 

have more dollars to tax on, rather than to drive them all away. 

 

And it makes me just wonder, when people tell me that they've 

consulted with somebody and in fact we find out that that's not 

the way it was.  We've had all kinds of reports in the last 

month.  I can't believe the piles of paper that are mounting up 

on my desk and the phone calls I get.  It's unbelievable the 

amount of people in this province that are saying, somebody 

said we've been talked to and nobody ever came to us.  Or if 

they did, they talked about something else.  They may have 

discussed the weather, they may have discussed the price of 

rice in China, but they never discussed what they were going to 

do in Bill 10 or anything like that.  Absolutely no discussion 

going on with people. 

 

We've got contractors that are just amazed at what's going on.  

And we've got a petroleum industry and a mining industry that 

is totally in the dark as to what was going on in this Bill.  And 

they will be absolutely shocked to the bone when they find out 

what a minister will be able to do to them with 20-year 

retroactive decision-making power -- 20 years back.  How 

would you like to have the income tax department pull your tax 

files back for 20 years and examine them with a fine-tooth 

comb and no rights to limitation?  How would you like that?  

Most of you probably had written for rights to have them tore 

up. 



696 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1992 

And then you will deem that they were assessed too low if they 

didn't find anything wrong.  They'll deem that you should pay 

some more.  It looks very much to me like, Mr. Speaker, like 

that we're looking at a situation where we might in fact just 

deem that royalties weren't high enough. 

 

Or are they after Saskoil's assets again?  Maybe this is a cheap 

way to take over an industry that they once owned and would 

love to have back.  If you can force them to go broke by 

retroactively deeming that they didn't pay enough royalties and 

force them into receivership, you can take them over for 

nothing, can't you.  Is that your secret plan? 

 

What kind of devious methods are you going to use to take 

control of everything in this province again, from a land bank 

right down to Crown corporations owning the oil industry, and 

take over the potash mine as well? 

 

And here you have, Mr. Speaker, the ammunition to do exactly 

that.  The ammunition to drive them into bankruptcy so that 

they cannot exist in this province on their own, and so that they 

can be taken over by expropriation for taxes not paid or by any 

other method when they go into receivership. 

 

There is no question in my mind that this government has 

devious thoughts behind everything that they do.  Their 

motives are becoming clear to us now because we suspected it 

before and now it's becoming proven. 

 

Every time they said no, we'd never do that, we'd never do this, 

we wouldn't have anything to do with that, and then they throw 

a Bill on the table that says they're doing exactly the opposite.  

And this is not the first one.  All week long we're seeing this 

kind of thing. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it gets pretty discouraging when you read 

this kind of a Bill and you find that people were supposed to be 

consulted with, that weren't.  You find that people in the 

mining industry, the Saskatchewan potash industry, the 

uranium industry, the gas industry, the pipeline industry -- all 

under attack from this administration. 

 

We hear stories, Mr. Speaker, about the bank owning 400 oil 

wells in one area, and I'm not going to name the bank because I 

don't want to embarrass anybody.  I just wonder, if this Bill 

increases royalties by just another little bit, along with the little 

bit of 50 cents we got here a couple of days ago, I just wonder 

if those wells will be capped and put out of production. 

 

Is it not pretty likely that if a company that's in the business 

couldn't stay in business producing oil and had to let those oil 

wells go back to a bank through bankruptcy, isn't it pretty 

likely that they're in an economic situation that is very 

borderline?  And isn't it pretty likely that a borderline operation 

like that is even going to cause them to be written off and shut 

in and have the bank say, that's it; we give up; we're walking 

away; we're not going to operate them. 

 

And then where do the people work that worked on those 

wells?  And if it's 400 in one area, 

if it's 400 in one area, how many is it in another area? 

 

My friends in Burstall and Richmound and Fox Valley all 

depend on this.  Fox Valley is probably one of the driest places 

in all of Saskatchewan.  And yet that town has only got a few 

people less than it had in the last census.  This Bill is going to 

be devastating to that community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just read in the Shaunavon paper the other day a 

whole list of the census numbers of how many people were 

gone from the 1986 census to the last one, 1990 or '91.  

Anyway the figures were very high for most towns, but in Fox 

Valley only a few people have left because the gas industry has 

been there, and it's been growing.  It's been expanding. 

 

Those folks built a new curling rink last year.  I was there and 

helped them cut the ribbon.  They put up a new hotel, motel.  

How about that?  Richmound -- a little town like that -- my 

colleague says they have a car dealership, and he's right.  You 

can't even keep car dealerships in some of the bigger towns in 

Saskatchewan, but in that small town you've got enough people 

working, enough working people that need trucks to work in 

the oil field and the gas field that they can keep . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 5 o'clock this House 

stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 

 


