




















































Hansard: August 26, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3107 

 August 26, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 54 -- An Act to amend The Farm Financial 

Stability Act (No. 2) 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order.  The business before the 

committee is consideration of Bill 54, the Farm Financial 

Stability Amendment Act (No. 2). 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I'd 

just like . . . The first question I'd like to ask you why, what in 

your own words, why did you dissolve counselling assistance 

-- the department or the organization or whatever? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, as the member opposite 

may be aware, the Farm Debt Advisory Committee met with a . 

. . The committee was a broad representation of people who 

brought forward a balanced package of items with respect to 

dealing with farm debt in Saskatchewan.  And it was their 

recommendation that the money that was being spent in CAFF 

(counselling and assistance for farmers program) could be 

more wisely spent through a different mechanism.  And so in a 

balanced package of debt resolution matters, one of the things 

they recommended was a dissolution of the counselling 

assistance for farmers program and some changes in farm 

security legislation that allowed access to credit through the 

existing financial system with their lenders. 

 

And it was that rationale that, in balance, this was a more 

appropriate expenditure of public funds.  It was in the balance 

with the leaseback program and the use of some of those funds 

for compensation for leases in the last four years. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, yes when you 

form government you have your right to do these things.  And I 

just want it on the record that I was . . . over all the years that 

the farm counselling assistance program was there that it had a 

great use for farmers.  Many, many farmers had a lot of help.  

And I know that a lot of people that got their guarantees or 

operating money, they couldn't have got it any other way.  And 

it was . . . when a lot of people took that money out, they didn't 

know that things were going to get that bad, and it got to be 

naturally a serious thing. 

 

But the one thing I'm concerned about, Mr. Minister, is the 

counselling aspect.  Let's not talk about the big guarantees and 

the shortfalls to the bank.  Where are you going to have a 

mechanism some place in government to at least counsel these 

farmers?  Because I was quite involved with the counselling 

assistance people and the people there. 

 

And I often thought that sometimes the best part of that 

department was a panel sitting down with a farmer and maybe 

directing them to not borrow any money, not to get themselves 

more in debt.  Because I've always was of 

the feeling borrowing yourself out of debt is what a lot of our 

farmers did, thinking they were doing the right thing when they 

took the money.  But the way things went in the economy, 

naturally we're into a much more serious situation than when 

counselling assistance first started. 

 

So I'd just like you in here to tell me, Mr. Minister, where are 

farmers going to get that counselling, that panel . . . You talked 

about a panel here today that's going to decide on maybe their 

future of whether they can become under this lease program or 

not.  Where is there some kind of a panel of a counsel set up 

and train people to deal with these here people that need 

counselling? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it may depend on 

what the nature is of the counselling that farmers require.  

Certainly the financial management specialists within the 

department are trained and ideal.  There have been a variety of 

institutions that have been implemented through the 

department, some with federal assistance, some independently 

for management training for farmers to look at the financial 

management of their enterprises. 

 

As the member opposite is aware in this spring's budget we 

brought the extension services back in to agriculture to give 

arms and legs to the specialists that are in the department.  And 

we will be engaging in a full review of the department before 

long and looking at the role of extension and the role of some 

of these other pieces. 

 

And if there are any specialized functions that ought to be 

considered in that process, I would appreciate the advice of the 

member opposite in that regard because clearly it's the intent of 

the department to serve farmers both in the production and the 

management and the marketing end and to the extent possible 

the support to their operations as you request. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Chairman, 

Mr. Minister, I appreciate your words, but I'd like to have a 

firm commitment that some place in government there'll be 

something set up to replace the counselling.  Just not to come 

up and say that you're looking at it, and you think that the 

people in the Department of Agriculture are doing a great job.  

They're busy in their particular departments.  They're busy 

now.  I've watched them for 10 years, and I didn't find too 

many people in Department of Agriculture that aren't right to 

capacity now. 

 

We need a place where it's advertised to farmers in problems 

where they can come and expect some counselling.  I think 

that's very, very important.  That was the mandate of 

counselling and assistance, was counselling.  And if the system 

wasn't going to help, then they moved on from there even 

though maybe it turned that some of that extra assistance wasn't 

the best thing because we didn't know that the economy was 

going to get as bad as it did. 

 

I just could . . . We're not going to spend much time on this, 

Mr. Minister, because I've just got a couple of questions to ask, 

because we can . . .what we don't get happen in this . . . ask in 

this Bill here, now these two Bills that's before us now, I 

understand that the member from 



3108 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

Morse put them together.  We talked about them both and we 

can talk more about them in your Estimates later on. 

 

But I'd just like your firm commitment that there'll be 

something set up some place in government where it's 

advertised that you can go to them for some counselling, some 

help.  Because I know I've dealt with so many farmers and farm 

families that the biggest disaster out there is the person with the 

level head and he's been doing his business well but once that 

disaster strikes home, sometime they can't think and do the 

right thing.  They need some counselling, just some 

commitment what you maybe could do here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, as I had said in my earlier 

answer, there were a number of initiatives within the 

government -- some federally shared -- the Agricultural 

Institute of Management of Saskatchewan is a joint 

federal-provincial program through which some consultations 

of the nature of those you've described can be carried forward. 

 

As you're aware, the stress line was set up last winter to 

provide a contact point.  Now it's had some growing pains.  

And we believe it has a good, strong, basic function.  I know at 

the conference on agriculture health that was held, there were 

criticisms of the program and some suggestions for 

improvement. 

 

One of the pieces within the model is to involve community 

networks in the model, so there is room for growth in the 

personal counselling through the things that will evolve from 

the stress line as well. 

 

I appreciate your concern and I appreciate the need for it.  We'll 

be pursuing that through a number of initiatives in the 

department. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I won't further 

any more questions on that.  We can always talk about that 

again.  I just leave that message with you.  Let's see, cancelling 

the counselling assistance program -- you don't hear that on the 

street from farmers like you did the GRIP program because the 

GRIP program, we've been through all that and we're not going 

to get into that. 

 

So the last question I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, on the 

amalgamation of . . . or else taking all the files and turning 

them over to ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan).  I see a problem creating . . . I'm only hearing 

this from constituents, and perhaps you can clarify it for me 

because maybe it's not an issue but the farmers that I've been 

dealing with so far think it is an issue. 

 

I want to just leave you the one example.  An individual, his 

loan has been called in from counselling assistance, so the bank 

has called the loan in and counselling assistance paid out the 

bank.  And so he's left owing CAFF the money.  He's left 

owing the money. We'll just use the figure, a good example is 

$50,000.  He owes that money. 

 

So in good faith, he did what he was supposed to do.  He goes 

in and they sign a note and instead of having the judgement 

against him he has maybe over 15 years at 5 per cent to pay 

this off.  It's all in place and he's making his 

payments.  Now that ends over in ACS.  And the individual -- 

and I'm not talking about a specific individual, I'm just using an 

example of a hypothetical name here -- this individual could be 

at ACS, and he could be in terrible shape there.  And there is a 

coming to a closure point there where they're finalizing his 

problems. 

 

And so here they dump the counselling assistance bill on top of 

it and they're trying to deal with it altogether when he was 

sitting in good shape finalizing this that may be so much here 

for 15 years or sometimes or even 20 years.  So I see a problem 

unless your department can give me a different answer that this 

overlap of going in there instead of having . . . we'll use 

$50,000 he owes counselling assistance; he may owe a couple 

hundred thousand at CAFF.  And the one on top of the other 

makes it almost impossible for this person to try to . . . some of 

them are at their boards, and trying to come up with some way 

to solve this here dilemma he's in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the points 

being made.  I think, depending on how this case evolves for 

the farmer, the fact is that when things . . . when the collective 

debt bill gets serious and the . . . it doesn't matter, I believe, 

whether one piece is at one institution and two other pieces are 

at another, the collective load will eventually weigh down a 

farmer to the point of needing to address the debt question. 

 

And when the point for addressing debt came about previously, 

then everybody was around the same table anyway, and they 

needed to shake it out and make the necessary adjustments 

collectively. 

 

Hopefully within the new process there will be some measure 

of stability in the leasing program where land is involved, and 

other matters can be ironed out through the regular debt 

process as it has happened before through joint action of those 

indebted.  And there may actually be some value in having it 

all in one hand, in one place. 

 

The down side of all of this, is that ACS has a number of 

programs within its mandate that end up requiring write-offs, 

and so it's a difficulty for that institution as well.  But I think 

the collective load is not different for the farmer if it's all in one 

place, nor is the collective solution more expensive for 

government to have it all in one place. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, but I'm not 

sure you got my point.  My point is that farmer A -- we'll call 

him farmer A -- he has got creditors all over to deal with.  He is 

dealing with Farm Credit; he could be dealing with a bank; he 

could be dealing with a credit union; he could have debts 

coming out of his ears.  And he's trying to settle one after the 

other here.  And maybe he's down to getting these things in 

order.  So he's made his deal with CAFF, and it's in place, and 

he's paying X amount of dollars and cents per year, for so many 

years, and that debt is out of his way as long as he keeps up his 

payment.  But at ACS in most cases it's much different because 

many of the counselling-assisted ones, there's no collateral.  A 

lot of them are operating money with just no collateral.  In 

some cases, they take over a one seventy-eight . . . (inaudible) . 

. . 

 

There's a certain percentage that don't have any 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3109 

collateral at all.  The farmer's got nothing, but he's honourably 

settled that one.  So at ACS he's not maybe too bad there either 

if he can just work it out, because he's only got what he's worth 

and that's it, and The Exemptions Act sometimes leaves him 

machinery so he can kind of keep on.  All I'm saying is, it's 

causing confusion for that at Farm Debt Review Board and in 

the lawyers' offices . . . are just dealing one on one, whatever.  

It's causing confusion because it's dumped the two together. 

 

(1915) 

 

Is there some way that, when that account . . . I understand 

they've been dealing with them and trying all summer to make 

some of these settlements, and legally, till this Bill is passed, 

they weren't even able to take . . . accept proposals.  Because it 

isn't legally there yet.  And so it's caused a real confusion by 

dumping the two together. 

 

Is there some way, Mr. Minister, that the counselling 

assistance, as taken over by ACS, can be a separate account, 

and then you're dealing with ACS and what you already owed 

from them?  That should be the same thing exactly where you 

owed money to the Bank of Montreal, and you owed over here 

to the credit union, and then they amalgamated together.  But 

you'd be dealing with each debt.  One may be a car over here, 

or a truck, and the other one over here could be his land.  I'm 

just saying, is there some way that it can be kept so it doesn't 

confuse the issues for settlements? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- If I understand the question correctly, the 

account will be kept separate in the same fashion it was 

negotiated, so it will not be rolled in with the other accounts.  It 

will be the CAFF account over in ACS as that account; he 

would continue to have his production loan in another account; 

and possibly his livestock cash advance in another or his farm 

purchase program loan in another.  So it is in that sense still a 

distinct loan. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay. That's what I was trying to get from 

you and I appreciate that.  That's fine.  Now I say when it 

comes to settling, the one has been settled with counselling 

assistance, the other one hasn't been.  Just so it doesn't confuse 

when they get to settling because the request I've been getting 

from the people now -- and I may have it wrong, but I'm going 

by what they're saying -- that it's being dumped into the pot 

together when it comes to settle. 

 

If there's some way that they've already settled here and they 

got to settle over here, if they'd not pot those too much.  I'm not 

going to ask you any more questions on it because I think you 

understand what I'm saying. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- And I won't respond at length other than to 

say, at the point where there is a settlement, even with the 

previous arrangement, with CAFF where you may have 

negotiated a repayment term, when it came down to resolution 

of a whole farm debt crisis, then they would come together 

around the Farm Land Security Board table or the Farm Debt 

Review Board table at any rate, so I think there won't be too 

much difference in it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just have 

one question on the way the settlements are made.  And let's 

say, are you going to take the guarantees against the guarantee 

on the CAFF side and leave. . .  let's say it was a production 

loan where there's money in reserve for write-downs and 

interest reduction. Can you give us the assurance that they're 

going to be still kept separate?  Is that going to be rolled into 

one as the member was saying, or is it going to be held separate 

because it's a different guarantee process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the administration of 

the funds will be separate with the guarantees as they were 

previously, so that whatever security was present in each case 

will continue to be identified as it was for those separate 

accounts. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Have you got a figure on the volume of 

dollars of guarantee that you have on hand in CAFF at this 

point? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Presently there are about 750 clients that 

are being transferred with active guarantees, and that represents 

about $35 million in guarantees. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 55 -- An Act to amend The Farm Financial 

Stability Act (No. 3) 

 

Clauses 1 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 56 -- An Act to amend The Personal Property 

Security Act 

 

Clauses 1 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 57 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I move the amendments be now read the 

first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- By leave of the Assembly, I move that the 

Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 54 -- An Act to amend The Farm Financial 

Stability Act (No. 2) 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 



3110 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 55 -- An Act to amend The Farm Financial 

Stability Act (No. 3) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 56 -- An Act to amend The Personal Property 

Security Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(1930) 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to introduce the 

officials who are here with him tonight. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  On 

my right is Stuart Kramer, the deputy minister of Agriculture 

and Food.  And behind him is Ross Johnson, the acting director 

of the administrative services branch.  On the deputy's right is 

Terry Scott, the director of the economics branch.  And on my 

left is Norm Ballagh, the president of the Ag Credit 

Corporation. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'm going to, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, 

just go through a number of the items in the department that I 

think I'd like to have some responses on, and I have a number 

of them. 

 

I want to ask first of all . . . This is no order of precedence; it's 

the way I wrote them down.  First of all, the Horse Racing 

Commission. I want just an outline on how the program went 

this summer and how it's been handled, the process that you've 

involved, the role of the betting for the summer, what has 

transpired to this point.  And I'd like an update on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, two things: the budget 

that's been allocated is the same as the 1992-93, same in '92-93 

as it was last year, but the responsibility and the Act has been 

transferred to the Associate Minister of Finance so this is now 

in a collection of areas of responsibility that the Associate 

Minister of Finance deals with.  So the specifics with respect to 

the operation of the commission this summer I do not have. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay then, we'll ask the minister when 

we get to that.  it's under the Gaming Commission, I would 

assume, then.  Okay. 

 

I have a number of questions about the Beef Stabilization 

Board.  I want to know . . . We started a process of reviewing 

the arrears and going through the process with a special 

committee set up.  I want to know how that's doing.  I want to 

know what you did with the debt.  I don't find it located in any 

of the places in the book.  I'd like to know where you have it 

and whether it's been recorded.  And if it's been written off, tell 

me where that is too. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I think I now understand 

what the answer is to the question, but if the member opposite 

has a better understanding than I do when he's done, I'd 

appreciate his sharing that information with me.  My 

understanding is that the province made allowance for the debt 

several years ago.  That, I understand, means that over here is a 

little box with $100 million sitting in it waiting to knock off 

this little $100 million debt over here which is sitting on the 

books of Saskatchewan Beef Stabilization Board while the 

province has recognized that there is $100 million of 

non-recoverable debt in its books.  So somewhere in the 

province's books is a recognition that $100 million has been 

lost. 

 

The resolution of the allowance with the actual indebtedness 

has not yet been done but the two pieces are allowed for.  The 

Consolidated Fund would show $100 million missing and that 

allowance was made a couple of years ago. 

 

With respect to where the administration of current beef 

stabilization functions exist, it's in vote 25 on page 19, and in 

there is the dealing with premiums on the present tripartite 

programs and the administration of both the existing Beef 

Stabilization Board and the residual Beef Stabilization Board 

functions and tripartite programming for hogs, beef, beans, 

honey, and sheep. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I know that, Mr. Minister, there were a great 

deal of problems in there with administration, and when I took 

over we did a lot of adjusting.  I'd like to know from the 

minister whether that has been completed, whether those 

individuals who have significant . . . What I would like to have 

is the volume of dollars that you still have . . . I don't need to 

know the clients' names; I need to have a volume on 

collectables, what you anticipate collecting, how many of them 

and that information, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Originally, I understand, there were about 

a thousand clients whose accounts needed to be clarified, with 

the total owing of about $3 million.  About a million dollars 

will have been collected when the process is finished.  There 

are 11 clients remaining to be resolved, with a total 

indebtedness of $100,000, and litigation is being pursued with 

those 11 clients. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On the Beef Stabilization Board, I'd like you 

to give me the information about who the board members are 

and that.  You can send that over to me.  You can do that as 

well with the tripartite stabilization board. 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3111 

Could you give me a sense of the volume of dollars in the 

various categories -- the calves, the fats -- can you give me the 

volume of dollars that we have in the fund in each of those 

categories, that I could have that information too. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, in answer to the question, 

there is some detail that one of my officials needs to get with 

respect to numbers.  There are about 1,500 participants in the 

cow-calf program and about 1,500 participation in the 

feeder-slaughter program.  The numbers of dollars are not 

available at the moment though we'll get them in a moment.  

But because there have not been pay-outs on the cow-calf 

program, there is a surplus in that fund, and there is a deficit in 

the feeder-slaughter program. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- If when you get them if you don't mind 

sending them over I'd appreciate that.  I'd also like to have the 

membership in the board that runs the tripartite stabilization . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . well if you've got it here you can 

send it over. 

 

I'll just go on to the next question, the horned cattle trust fund.  

I'd like to know the projects that were provided for through the 

fund and the individuals on the board as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I might ask if the member 

opposite has some more questions while the pieces of 

information he requested are being collected.  There are 

officials seeking information on both previous questions. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I believe, Mr. Minister, there is a beef 

check-off fund too that I'd like to have the same kind of 

information for.  Then while they're looking for that, could you 

give me the . . . in the ag development fund I'd like to know the 

membership on the board.  I'd like to also have a list of the 

projects that are ongoing, a list of the new projects. 

 

And I don't know where this information came from even, but I 

was told today that the ag development fund has been 

established to . . . and by you has been given an additional 

mandate or a new mandate, and I'd like you to talk about that a 

little bit.  I'd also like to have you explain to us how you think 

that this new feed grain assistance program or red meat 

marketing thing that you've got going . . . I forget what it's 

called.  How that . . . it's called PEP (production equalization 

program) or something or other, how that fits into the ag 

development fund.  I know how the study would fit in, but I 

don't know how the other one would fit in.  And so if you 

wouldn't mind providing some of that detail for me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Again there's some information that I'll 

wait for the officials to get on the last question, but I'll answer 

some of it in the mean time.  With respect to the interim red 

meat production equalization program -- whose name you 

should commit to memory -- the purpose of the study, as you 

say, is understood.  It's to establish a future direction for the 

livestock industry.  And as I've said before in the House, I 

appreciate the efforts of the industry to come together to make . 

. . to offer themselves to participate in the joint project for the 

first time with the red meats, looking to where their future is 

going to go, where government investment is most appropriate, 

and what kind of new developments are in the future for the red 

meat industry. 

 

With respect to their relationship to the ag development fund, 

when we terminated the FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment 

program) program, the concern that was raised by members 

opposite and members of the industry and others in the public 

was the concern around the impact not only on the feeder 

industry and other elements of the livestock industry, but the 

slaughter industry as well. 

 

When we met with the livestock industry and their collective 

group that formed, it really created an impetus for the initiation 

of the study.  They suggested that there wasn't adequate 

information to make a judgement on the program.  When we 

went through the department, there wasn't adequate 

information within the departmental analyses about the best use 

of dollars in this regard; and a concern expressed also that as 

long as Alberta was in this game, it was difficult for our 

industry. 

 

And so before we would want to leave the industry to compete 

in that disadvantaged position, we should be sure of the impact 

of that to a greater extent than we were.  And it was through 

their encouragement that they considered the expenditure of 

development dollars that, as in . . . that come out of the ag 

development funds as appropriate to maintain stability in the 

red meat sector while the study was being done.  So it was also 

one of the few sources of funds within the department that 

could be shifted in order to maintain the budget guidelines that 

have been established within the department in spring. 

 

So it was that combination of circumstances with direction 

from the industry and input and the putting the interim program 

together, along with the study, to set the future direction that 

makes the connection of that exercise appropriate for the ag 

development fund. 

 

With respect to a new mandate for the ag development fund, 

there isn't a new, defined mandate at the moment, although the 

previous board had been working on some strategic planning 

exercises.  And when that board was replaced this spring, the 

new board set a small review committee together to look in a 

bit of a visionary fashion at the future as well.  That review 

process is now just in place. 

 

I don't know where the review process that represents the new 

members in the committee will take the ag development fund 

for the future, but in the construction of the new committee, we 

altered it to some extent from what it was before, and the 

review committee may want to alter it again, depending on 

where they feel that this function . . . or how it can best serve 

the public. 

 

It was my inclination, when the new committee was struck, that 

it would be good to have sectoral representation in the ag 

development fund so that the grain sector, the livestock sector, 

other sectors would be represented and that each of those sector 

representers would have a link to the industry, recognizing that 

there are a lot of distracted pieces in agriculture, many 

organizations representing many interests and not much 



3112 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

bringing them to one focus.  And it was my belief that the ag 

development fund would be an appropriate place to bring some 

focus to that. 

 

And so it's my hope that the representative of the livestock 

industry, for example, on ag development would have a strong 

liaison with the other livestock groups.  And hopefully this 

begins to synthesize and strengthen the collective effort within 

the province, both for planning and the use of funds that are 

present in things like the beef stabilization . . . or the check-off 

fund and the horned cattle fund that you spoke about earlier.  

That's my hope, but that was mine.  The question is whether the 

review committee will take it.  And we will leave that in their 

hands to recommend to us. 

 

I believe I have the new members of the board here now before 

me.  John Buchan from the . . . there are 13 members of the 

new board.  John Buchan from the department, Gordon Dorrell 

from Ag Canada, Terese Karwandy from the department, my 

deputy, Stuart Kramer as the chairman of the board, as 

described in the legislation; Dr. George Lee from the U of S 

(University of Saskatchewan), Dr. Wanda Mann from Swift 

Current, Calla Olson from Plenty, Don Russell from Rosetown, 

Dave Sim, from the department; Marie Spinato, from the 

department; Alesa Verreault from Saskatoon; Bob Virgo with 

Sask Wheat Pool in Regina; and Gary Wellbrock from Ponteix.  

That is the new board, and that's where they are presently in 

terms of their review process. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- In the study that you're going to do with the 

red meat, are you going to involve the processing side in any 

way in that study, both as an opportunity and as a place for 

investment perhaps of funds?  I know that there's been some 

discussion in the hog industry in Moose Jaw, and I know that 

there's been a lot of rationalization in the beef side.  Is there 

any of this money going to be allocated to look at whether 

there is an opportunity in the processing side in the meat side? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The hope that I have for the study is that it 

will tell us what is worthwhile investment, what is the proper 

priorization of investment within the limited constraints that we 

have.  As I think I've said earlier in the House, I have very 

much appreciated the energy that the sectors have brought to 

bringing some creative thinking to issues. 

 

As in the hog industry, one of the issues they have brought 

before is the availability of capital for construction was a 

difficulty, and they have proposed some solutions through 

which health monitoring and production monitoring and 

industry support of existing facilities that experience difficulty . 

. . through which processes they may increase their access to 

capital for expansion; the issues of what the opportunities are 

in processed meats, what are the specialty markets, where 

should we be spending development dollars, and how should 

we be using facilities that are here, and how can that link best 

with our other industries. 

 

I hope that the study will bring forward a very strong and broad 

analysis of how Saskatchewan's livestock sector 

can build in some creative directions.  And it would be my 

private hope that in the end this will lead to an industry that can 

function independently of government subsidy and function as 

business working in a competitive market where they can 

effectively compete on their own, which also obviously 

involves that other governments have to stop playing games 

with their programs as well. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I asked you for a list of the projects that 

you've got and new projects.  You can send them over if you 

don't mind.  I'd also like to have a copy of the board 

membership if you don't mind. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I have the Beef Stabilization Board . . . 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay. 

 

And the role of . . . or in your role as minister, where do you 

think that the pork side has a limit and the beef side has a limit?  

We've got serious discussions going on in method of payment, 

and I'm not sure how long that they're going to take to evolve.  

But we've got some interesting opportunities there. 

 

We also have interesting opportunities on the very fact that 

we've had frost in the province in the last week, and that raises 

the awareness on people's minds about the livestock industry 

and its role in the province. 

 

And the reason I raise it is I think it's the most important 

factory in processing that we can have in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  It deals with a movable commodity in a 

capacity to move non-edible protein into edible protein.  And I 

think that we need to focus our attention on that opportunity, 

and in that way develop the processing industry. 

 

And right now I don't think we have enough hogs here to really 

have what other people would consider a competitive packing 

industry in the hog side.  And that's not a criticism. That's an 

evaluation.  And I think that we need to go that way.  And 

that's why I'm asking you the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Let me answer another question before I 

forget, and then we'll get on to that.  With respect to the 

members of the Beef Stabilization Board that you had asked for 

before and the Tripartite Beef Administration, the members 

are: Lynn Grant, chairman; Brian Perkins, Saskatoon; Keith 

Howse, Pangman; Jim McGregor from Senlac; Kathy Warnyca 

from Montmartre; Kathy Martin from Silton; and Gary 

Stevenson from Melfort. 

 

With respect to the projects, I have not yet found the 

membership; and I will forward it to you directly if we don't 

have the information here today with respect to the horned 

cattle, beef check-off.  There is a lengthy list of projects in 

either case which we will forward to you at another time, 

possibly.  And the same for the ag development fund.  The 

projects, the list of files is very long there. 

 

With respect to the industry and where it might go, the 

Saskatchewan livestock sector represents about one-fifth 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3113 

of our grain sector here, and there is clearly room for 

expansion.  And I think it would be the view of most observers 

that if there were no game-playing at borders and with 

neighbouring provinces, that the beef industry production and 

packing would quite well migrate to Saskatchewan in the long 

term because of our access to feed grains and our climate, our 

low cost environment here. 

 

That's also true of the hog industry.  Our hog industry is the 

lowest-cost hog industry in Canada.  And factors like that 

which you describe now where grains become feed in one 

night's frost and generally high supplies of feed grains even in 

normal times tend to make this a place where livestock has an 

advantage. 

 

The practical expansion plans, the analysis that was done in the 

re-evaluation of the red meat sector suggested that without 

interim support, the hog sector would climb by about a half a 

per cent a year, with the interim support they would grow by 

about 4 per cent per year.  So there is a steady growth potential 

in the hog industry in Saskatchewan.  That doesn't get us to the 

kinds of numbers that the hog industry feels they would like to 

achieve.  The goal that Sask Pork had established for 

themselves was 3 million hogs by the end of this century, and 

we're only slightly over a million now. 

 

I think in the beef sector we clearly have a lot of room for 

expanding feeding at home.  Our cow numbers are probably 

relatively static.  They follow a cycle from between 7 or 

800,000 to a million head in a cyclical fashion and that 

represents probably our capacity to graze and feed, and those 

tend to be in smaller herds scattered across the province.  But 

the capacity to feed those calves out is a major growth potential 

here if again we are not disadvantaged by competing provincial 

programs in other areas.  Because we presently are feeding out 

about 220,000 of those about presently 800,000 calves 

produced in the province.  So if we just kept our own, we could 

quadruple the size of that industry, and that's a major expansion 

potential as well. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Just going on from that question about the ag 

engineering branch, and I know that they're interested in some 

of the odour components of agriculture in the hog business and 

in the feedlot business.  I wonder if I could have a list of those 

projects that are being looked at with your ag engineering 

department or branch.  I don't know whether they're still called 

that, but you'll know which one I mean.  And I'd like to have a 

list of all of those projects that they're working on. 

 

I know that I, for example, have one in my constituency that 

raising a thorn in the back of a lot of people.  And I'd like to 

have your review of all of those that are causing a problem in 

the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, first I'll ask a question and 

then give you further input to the last question.  Is the question: 

which expansion projects are presently being evaluated 

environmentally for expansion and facilitated by planners in 

the department through the engineering environment branch?  

Is that the question?  Like how many projects are out there that 

may be an intensive hog 

operation that's expanding or an extensive beef feeding 

operation that's expanding, where the environment engineering 

branch is monitoring or setting out guidelines?  Is that the 

question? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'd like to have it in both cases, where they're 

monitoring an existing one and where they're looking at new 

ones and how they're dealing with it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I'm waiting for some officials to deal with 

that question.  In the mean time I will answer another question.  

Just a supplementary piece of information in the point I was 

making earlier. 

 

If all of Saskatchewan's grain was converted to hogs we could 

produce about 70 million hogs in the province if that were the 

desire.  And if my kids thought my yard smelled before, what 

would they think then? 

 

The membership of the Horned Cattle Board.  Val Kononoff is 

the only member whose term has not expired on that board, and 

the members on the cattle deductions fund have all expired as 

of June '92 and new appointments have not yet been made.  We 

are in the process of receiving nominations for those. 

 

And you had raised the question of the transportation policy, 

and only to say that that is continuing, as you are aware, 

continues to be an issue that is of keen interest to Saskatchewan 

people.  You're aware that every study that's ever been done 

suggests that Saskatchewan is much better served by the 

present method of payment than some of the suggestions that 

come from our neighbours. 

 

That doesn't mean our neighbours are wrong for their own 

purposes because they are well served by taking some of our 

funds if they can change the method of payment and 

facilitating their economies.  The general Estimates that have 

been done in the studies in Saskatchewan say that there would 

be very little impact on production as a result of changing the 

method of payment, even though it continues to be a hot topic 

of debate where the livestock sector tends to disagree with the 

grain sector. 

 

There's a general sense that, and the studies that have been 

done indicate, I think, expansion limited to 4 per cent possibly 

as a result of the change in the livestock sector.  So the studies 

that have been done to date would not indicate there would be 

any . . . in fact would indicate a disadvantage to Saskatchewan 

if that method of payment were changed. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'll wait for those ag engineering observations 

that you have.  I have a question about the livestock cash 

advance.  What impact on the balance between Alberta and 

Saskatchewan on subsidies to the industry does that 12 million, 

I believe, dollars, in an annualized basis, what impact does that 

have on the reduction of Saskatchewan's equal, level 

playing-field have with Alberta? 

 

(2015) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there are a couple of 

categories of things carried out under the engineering 



3114 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

branch.  I know I can think of examples that have come across 

my desk.  PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute) is 

presently carrying out a project to use straw as an 

odour-control method at six sites in the province, on lagoons.  

There are about 30 permits issued annually for intensive 

livestock operations that the engineering and environment 

branch gets involved with.  That is essentially to evaluate and 

to determine whether permitting is appropriate.  And I think the 

site you describe at Swift Current is one of those that's engaged 

in that. 

 

There is an obligation, I think, on the part of those seeking 

approval in permitting to have some public support for what 

they do and to try to deal with that in an effective manner  And 

the environment engineering branch tries to facilitate those 

kinds of actions. 

 

There are probably four to six projects that at any one time are 

being monitored as a result of public complaints.  I know I can 

think of examples that come to my attention, and I don't want 

to mention them because there are individuals that may be 

affected by that, but there are four to six of those that are kind 

of an ongoing basis.  And we can forward the list of the ones 

that are before the department this year with respect to the 

permitting so you can have some idea of what's going on.  I'll 

ask the officials to do that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you be able to give me a list of those 

that have been given permission to relocate?  Now I know 

there's some funds made available, at least there used to be, to 

relocate some of these.  Would you give me a list of all of those 

that have been moved if any? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Can you give us the time frame that you'd 

like information on? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- You mean from . . . till . . . the beginning of 

November till now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- None. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The question on the $12 million on the 

livestock cash advance, is that the number that you used in 

determining the impact or the volume of dollars required to 

service that opportunity, or is it less than that because of the 

change of the interest rate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the estimate of 11 to $12 

million on the livestock cash advance program related to recent 

history but also was a reasonable projection for the future since 

it's an ongoing program and the funds are not short-term funds 

that are used, so that we're working with funds that have been 

borrowed on the long term, and it will take some time for the 

cost of new funds, as old borrowing expires, to have an impact 

on that total cost.  So the reasonable projection would still be in 

the $12 million range for the program, had it remained the way 

it was. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The payments to the ag college were taken 

out of the ag development fund as a . . . well for a few years 

anyway, maybe one or two.  I'm not just sure.  And I noticed in 

my questioning the Minister of Education that that was one of 

the volumes of dollars that 

was written off.  Could you give me the volume of dollars that 

were moved over to the Consolidated Fund and included in the 

debt on that issue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I think I have this straight now.  The cost 

of the building was about $92 million.  Twelve million was 

raised by the university from their own resources and the 

public participation.  The remaining 80 were split between 

Education and Agriculture.  Education took 40 million, and 

Agriculture took 40 million.  Agriculture had made two 

payments -- one of 1.7 million and one of 5 million -- leaving a 

residual of 40 million, since the payments only paid for the 

interest.  So 40 million was written off from our side as well. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And that was put into the Consolidated Fund 

debt load.  Can you give me the date on that.  Is that March 31, 

or was it December 31? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- It's my understanding, Mr. Chairman, that 

that was included in the Consolidated Fund debt as of March 

31, 1992 . . . (inaudible) . . . that's my understanding. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I got another question about debt.  There was 

a land bank debt that doesn't appear anywhere in the book 

either, and I wanted to know where that was.  I asked different 

people.  I've been trying to track it down and I haven't been 

able to find it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, this is now housed within 

Finance.  The best recollection our officials have is that the 

cost as of April 1 it's now in Finance.  The best estimate the 

officials have with respect to cost to the department when it 

was housed in Agriculture was about a $20 million interest cost 

with rental revenues of about 6 million with the residual cost to 

the department at that time, about 14 million. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I've asked I think three or 

four of the ministers already to identify where it is and I haven't 

been able to get to it.  If you're telling me that it's in the 

Department of Finance now, when we'll get to his Estimates 

we'll ask him where it is.  But I've had difficulty tracking it and 

I know what we call the blue book or the budget book, you're 

right, had a $14 million expenditure last year.  This year it 

doesn't have anything, it isn't even mentioned there.  Last year 

it had a debt, a little note on the bottom that it had a debt I think 

of $180 million.  And I haven't been able to find it anywhere in 

order to identify where it went and that's what I have a concern 

about. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, with respect to its specific 

location in the Estimates, it's vote 12, item 1, subvote 1 where 

that presently is.  It's not identified specifically; it's in interest 

on the public debt as a global piece.  There are some footnotes 

on that page with respect to the . . . it's on page 47. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On the general assessment of the lands branch 

and of the Department of Agriculture, lands branch took the 

rent credit and somehow it was deducted on a 14 million 

residual that Agriculture had to pay out.  That would add 

revenue then I suspect . . . and I'll ask the 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3115 

Minister of Rural Development when his turn comes, about the 

interest or the revenue from the land bank leases, and I'll ask 

him that at that time. 

 

Have you still got in the department an Agriculture 

Development Secretariat that deals with the food processing 

side or have you moved that away or is there anything in that 

side that you should talk to us about to see where it's going? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, it's vote 1, item 9, on 

page 17.  It is still in the department.  Again I think as we 

co-ordinate the functions of government now, we hope to 

integrate and strengthen the development functions between the 

responsibilities of Economic Development and Trade and the 

responsibilities that are carried out within our department.  

Clearly it's our object to bring the strengths of the resources in 

both areas together to give us the best development in all of the 

agriculture-related areas.  And that area will again be reviewed 

when we do our departmental review, hopefully within the next 

number of months. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- My personal view, Mr. Minister, is that 

agriculture has for far too long been lowered in its value and its 

value added opportunity in the province. 

 

And I guess that one of the things that I would ask of you is to 

give us an overview of where you think the province should go 

and what it could do in view of the fact that we are a primary 

producer of a significant amount of raw product, and we 

market that. 

 

And I'll just use an example.  There were two programs or two 

groups of people that started cleaning lentils and marketing 

them internationally in my constituency.  One of them was 

financed privately by individuals themselves.  The other one 

was assisted by the rural development corporations and the 

municipality helped. 

 

And I know that the one that the municipality helped had 11 

people working for them over last winter in dealing with the 

lentils.  And it's just one step of the processing cycle, which is 

cleaning and the marketing, and yet it had a tremendous 

amount of influence in that community. 

 

And I was wondering if you could give us an assessment of 

where you see the province going in other things.  And I could 

talk about the Schmitz that live out at Golden Prairie wanting 

to market internationally some of the grains that they have; and 

in the wheat side, in the milled wheat, they sell products that 

have no chemicals -- the name just slips my mind -- organic 

farming and they have a lot of that opportunity there.  And I 

was wondering if you could give us an opportunity to listen to 

what your opinion of this sort of thing is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well it's pretty evident that Saskatchewan 

has a major opportunity for expansion in a number of areas.  

One of the conversations that I had with one of the farmers at 

Melfort on Monday -- that the press didn't happen to want to 

report on, interestingly -- was with a farmer who talks about 

Saskatchewan's benefits; that even when we're producing with 

chemicals, we're relatively chemical free compared to many of 

the products that are coming out of Europe; and that even in  

marketing that idea, that we need to go further.  There are a 

number of initiatives that I've been exposed to in my short time 

here, and many opportunities in the province.  There are some 

energetic exercises with respect to greenhouse production, the 

herbs and spices, number of small fruits for you-pick, the 

saskatoon industry, blueberries, game farming, organic 

farming, as you mentioned; the potential for vegetable 

production. 

 

There's a tremendous opportunity for expansion in the irrigated 

areas, I believe, because the infrastructure investment we have 

there is simply not being well served by traditional agriculture.  

It's very difficult to add up the costs of the irrigation initiatives 

and have them paid off with the kind of ventures that are 

presently being pursued there.  And there are some people 

interested in potato production.  There are people interested in 

this as a seed source for potato production because of the 

northern vigour factor. 

 

And all of the areas of import replacement, whether it be 

through irrigated production or greenhouse production, I think 

a great opportunity to get both economic development and 

good taste on our tables instead of pulpy, colourless vegetables. 

 

You're certainly familiar with the growth in the alfalfa industry 

and the potential there, depending on the market developments.  

When I've met with the ambassadors from the Asian countries, 

they are certainly interested in expanding in some of those 

speciality products and also in the livestock area. 

 

The ethanol production has opportunities, depending where 

that goes.  In the livestock sector, both breeding stock and 

embryo sales, genetic material sales, in that regard, a great 

opportunity; the developments going on with Sask Wheat Pool 

in the development of new crops, crops where we may develop 

new oil products from new technologies. 

 

There is a great amount of energy accumulating around 

Saskatoon in the biotechnology and the application of 

technology to secondary processing between Philom Bios and 

the POS (protein/oil/starch) plant and the new ICAST 

(International Centre for Agricultural Science and Technology) 

institute. The participation of large industry with the province 

in planning new technology development and technology 

transfers is quite exciting. 

 

So I think the future in Saskatchewan is clearly to take the 

existing base of production and transfer it, hopefully, to higher 

value products either by new primary production or by 

secondary processing.  And I think the energy is in the 

province to build on that industry and to continue its 

development. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I just want to say that that's my view of the 

future in the province of Saskatchewan.  And I hope that you 

take some of the ag development fund money that is available 

there and use it in that area to do that.  And it has to be more 

than just the plant side of farming.  It has to be the red meat 

side and even the poultry.  I know that I had people in my 

constituency who were in the chicken wing business and had to 

leave and go to Richmond, British Columbia, because they 

couldn't find enough 



3116 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

chicken wings to supply the market in Saskatchewan.  And I 

know that that's a controlled sector in agriculture, but I also 

know that we should be looking at those kinds of things in 

trying to correct what the opportunities really are. 

 

Can you give me an outline of how many feeder associations 

there are in the province, and breeder associations?  And could 

you give me at the same time the volume of dollars that the 

guarantees of the province are standing behind these loans in 

the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I might, while my officials are identifying 

those facts, mention a couple of industries that I was exposed 

to during the election campaign last year.  In my constituency 

is a farmer who has created a pea burger.  I stopped in there at 

lunch-time and it was a marvellous product, good texture and 

good flavour.  And he was looking for a way of processing it.  

And again, as you had mentioned, we have room for expansion 

in the supply-managed industries, although they are in a period 

of some need to plan their futures as well and in some 

uncertainty with the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and 

Trade) process going on. 

 

There are currently 106 feeder and breeder associations 

together, with about 3,400 members.  The guarantees total 

$32.8 million; 23.3 million for feeders and nine and a half 

million for breeders.  The maximum loans that can be 

borrowed total $131.3 million, which is 934 million for feeders 

and 38 for breeders. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- There has been some discussion about how to 

manage those breeder associations and how to use the 

guaranteed money by borrowing from banks and credit . . . 

banks mainly, because credit unions don't do this.  I know from 

experience that there is a significant pressure from in your 

branch to move to having a certain amount of people active all 

the time in each of the breeder and the feeder associations.  

And I just want to . . . I want to raise it from the perspective of 

the industry.  We met with them last winter and there was a 

good deal of pressure suggesting that a minimum of 10 

members in an association would be the ones that would have 

to be active in order to have them continue and be allowed to 

operate.  And I would hope that the minister would take this 

observation seriously because I'm giving it seriously. 

 

If we take and curtail the activities on a fiscal management 

cycle in dealing with the cattle industry, both the feeder and the 

cow side, we're going to have serious problems if we're going 

to say that this year you have to have a certain amount of 

people in your association with borrowed money.  And what 

you're going to have happen then, Mr. Minister, is it will be 

done just for an exercise in order to maintain the books and it 

won't be expanding the industry like it's supposed to do.  And 

so I would say to you that you need to keep a watchful eye on 

that. 

 

I know that the people in the south-west have a serious concern 

about the minimum volume of active people in the system, so 

take that under advisement and we can talk about it at a 

different point in time.  I just wanted to raise that as a part of 

the things I wanted to mention to you. 

I have heard a concern from the Milk Control Board as well -- 

not from the board but from people in the cream side in the 

industry.  They have contacted me, and these are people who 

have done this for 40 years.  There are people who have only 

begun.  And what we have which is different today in 

agriculture than it was in the '30s, in the '30s people survived 

on the basis that they could take chickens and pigs and cows 

and put it all together on the farm and still maintain their 

life-style because the expectation wasn't that high. 

 

What has happened today is that people don't have that 

opportunity to the same extent, and so when we have these 

cream quotas, which are old cream quotas, we have a very 

important group of people, at least in my constituency, who are 

still of that group.  And I don't know how many there are but 

the point that was raised with me: we've done this for a certain 

period of time; why don't you let us do it till we're finished and 

then take it over. 

 

(2045) 

 

What is significant to these people is that they get a weekly 

cheque or a monthly cheque and that's theirs to have.  And if 

it's put into the dairy industry as a part of the quota, what you 

have there is it's gone in one year with the way the milk 

consumption is going down and the volume per cow keeps 

going up.  It doesn't matter much in the fluid milk and the 

industrial milk side as it does in the impact on an individual 

basis on the small farms in Saskatchewan.  I would say that I 

heard that it's supposed to be closed down in a year from now, 

that there are no more cream quotas going to be available.  And 

I want to raise with the minister that I think that's a serious 

error. 

 

I know that the dairy industry wants to have it out, and I 

understand why.  But I need to have some assurance from you 

that these cream shippers who are now part of very small farms 

-- they're not the big farms -- they're are the very small farms, 

are now going to be jeopardized and I don't want to see that 

happen.  They were there, a lot of them were there before the 

dairy farms were there, and they were the backbone of the 

industry at the time.  And to not grandfather them out, I think is 

a very serious mistake on the part of the Milk Control Board.  

And I just want to relate that to you so that you know about 

that.  But I'd like to have a response from you on that too. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I've also heard the 

concerns expressed by the member opposite from some cream 

producers.  And I was reared milking the cow and turning the 

separator handle too, and that was the clothes money in our 

family when I was growing up. 

 

But the . . . it is in Saskatchewan not a government policy issue 

or a Milk Control Board policy issue that is the difficulty.  

Dairy Producers Co-op is suggesting they no longer wish to 

purchase cream as cream from farmers.  There is a contention 

that people who are purchasing product from DPCL (Dairy 

Producers Co-operative Ltd.) are concerned about whether 

there's a parallel quality with farm-shipped cream to that 

skimmed by the plant.  That's a concern.  I know I've had a 

number of producers express it to me. 

 

Those producers know they can -- as you say -- convert  



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3117 

that to fluid quota but that means a major investment for them, 

for some late in their operations.  I would like to look further 

into that issue to see whether commercially it would be 

possible to convince the industry to continue to deal with it as 

you've said because it is clearly an issue for those producers 

who are still producing cream and are concerned for their 

operations.  They are generally small producers who farm in a 

particular style that is appropriate to them and their families, 

and this would be a major disruption for them.  And I have 

heard those concerns as you have. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'm not going to be . . . this isn't a negative 

comment to dairy producers, but I know that dairy producers 

would have a vested interest in having that moved to the side 

because it becomes a burden to them more than an asset. 

 

I have a question here on . . . one more question and then I'm 

going to let the member from Arm River deal with one other 

item.  And I'd like to have your membership on a number of the 

boards.  I've asked you for some of them, and I'd like you to 

send over the ones for the ag development fund, the Ag Credit 

Corporation, the Horse Racing Commission -- oh no, you said 

you weren't running that any more -- the Milk Control Board, 

the Farm Land Security Board, and the Farm Ownership Board.  

I'd like you to send that over. 

 

And I have one other question on the Farm Ownership Board.  

The member from Kindersley is right in the middle of a large 

concern by a real estate agent out of Rosetown.  And I'm not 

sure just where that's going to end up.  I know that we were 

talking about it.  I think there's roughly about 100 sections of 

land that have been given as opportunities for sale in that Eston 

area and I've had a significant amount of people asking about 

that. 

 

And I'm not sure that the minister knows anything about it, but 

I would like to say that if there is some foreign ownership in 

this project that is moving forward, I think we need to keep an 

eye on just exactly what's happening there so that the 

investment through the Farm Ownership Board doesn't get 

away on us and become involved with offshore money.  If it's 

an investment opportunity to stabilize agriculture, I think we 

need to have an opportunity to discuss exactly what it would be 

in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I wonder if, with respect to those board 

memberships, whether you wish then today or whether I could 

forward those on another day.  I wonder if you could clarify.  I 

wonder, with respect to the board membership whether you 

would want that now or whether I could forward that later. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You can forward it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Okay, for sure, I'll forward it later.  Okay.  

And the Farm Land Security Board and the Farm Ownership 

Board are under the ministry of Justice. 

 

With respect to the issue you raise in the land being assembled 

in the Rosetown area, I have no official information on that.  I 

do not know about what the purpose for that is. 

With respect to the Farm Ownership Board, they have passed 

policy that allows, under a restricted set of circumstances, 

equity investment by non-Saskatchewan corporations.  And I 

want to pursue that with the Justice minister to look into what 

is going on there because I think it's a concern to all of us that 

we want to balance the interests of Saskatchewan farmers and 

Saskatchewan investors and maintain control of our lands in 

our communities.  So it's clearly an issue that I want to pursue 

with the Minister of Justice and the Farm Ownership Board to 

make sure that we are not facilitating actions on Saskatchewan 

land that we will regret in the future. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I just have this concern.  I've 

always believed that a Canadian is a Canadian and that the 

Farm Ownership Board should get to the place where they 

allow Canadians to buy land in the province of Saskatchewan.  

And I believe in that, and I was moving towards that myself, 

one of the last things we were going to do.  And I would 

encourage you that that's one of the questions you need to ask 

the Minister of Justice about in order to determine a direction 

on that.  And if you were going to move on that, this side of the 

House would not have a great deal of difficulty supporting you 

on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Just for your information, the Ag Credit 

Corporation board of directors is under question 28 in the 

information already provided to you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

the other night a few days ago, we were on these Estimates, 

you said you would be answering questions on Farm Land 

Security Board, Mediation Services.  So I have a few questions 

I'd like to ask there, Mr. Minister, and then a few on ACS, and 

we will try to do as quickly as possible.  If there's any problem 

in any, just for time, if there's any questions that can't be 

answered, just say so, and I'll be satisfied to get an answer 

afterwards. 

 

Mediation Services, I just like to ask if there's any additions or 

deletions in any of the staff. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there has been no 

significant change in either mediators who are contracted or in 

office staff.  I suspect the general flow, if you want specifics, 

that could be forwarded if there have been changes.  But in 

general not more than normal cycling of staff would indicate. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Then I'll just ask 

for to send it later.  We'd just like to have the names of any 

staff since November 1, 1991, any staff that has retired or been 

fired or laid off, and any additions, and then plus any board 

members . . . the changes in the board for both Mediation 

Services and Farm Land Security Board. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there is a new board for the 

Farm Land Security Board, but Mediation Services is not 

served by a board.  So that information will be forwarded to 

you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- You'll give us that information later then, 

will you?  Thank you. 



3118 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

Mr. Minister, you had a press conference -- I believe it was the 

end of March -- on the Farm Debt Advisory Committee report.  

I was at it.  And quite a bit of information . . . And I've been 

through the book over and over and I just want to ask some 

questions pertaining to some things in there and the Farm Land 

Security Board. 

 

How many farm foreclosures . . . This is a question we've asked 

you in question period and we've asked you . . . and the 

Minister of Crop Insurance and you didn't have it.  So I'm sure 

when you've got your officials here that we should be able to 

know how many farm foreclosures through the Farm Land 

Security Board since its beginning in 1984 . . . I think, 

whenever it started -- '84 or '85 till today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to clarify before I 

answer the question that it is foreclosure notices we are talking 

about, that the actual number of foreclosures resulting from the 

notices is generally less than 10 per cent of the number of 

notices.  And within the 10 per cent, a number of those are 

voluntary.  But there have been, since 1985 until the present, 

about 9,287 notices which represents 6,915 farms; that's notices 

issued.  And because the notices are the number of mortgages, 

that represents a smaller number of farms. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, just to save us some time here, 

I'm just going to read through a series of questions.  And these 

are not important to the debate tonight.  Because there's been so 

much dissension between the Farm Land Security Board  . . . I 

don't mean dissension, but I mean different figures coming 

from them and then Farm Debt Review Board.  And then you'll 

have a law firm say, I just got the figures from such-and-such. 

 

So I'm going to read off all I want, and don't have to even 

answer them tonight.  You can look in Hansard.  Look in 

Hansard, and as long as I get the answer.  But I want your 

commitment that there's some research done into this because 

I'm going to include the Farm Debt Review Board which, when 

we were government, we always knew exactly what was there 

every day.  So I'm just going to read them off, and then we can 

get onto the ACS questions.  I might have a couple more on 

this one. 

 

(2100) 

 

Okay.  I ask the question: how many farm foreclosures through 

Farm Land Security Board from the beginning until now?  

Now how many through the Farm Debt Review Board, from its 

conception until now?  And how many foreclosure notices for 

each year for both Farm Debt Review Board and Farm Land 

Security Board?  How many since October 21, 1991 till 

December 31, 1991?  And that's through both Farm Debt 

Review Board, Farm Land Security Board. 

 

And then on that moratorium, we had a moratorium for 90 

days, beginning approximately the first of the year there, Mr. 

Minister, until the end of March.  How many in that period of 

90 days?  And then how many in the Farm Debt Review Board 

for all . . . just make it clear that I want this figure for the Farm 

Debt Review Board for all those same questions from . . . it 

was about four I asked there. 

And I'll be satisfied -- don't have to even think about it tonight 

-- if I can just have a written statement from your officials, so 

we know exactly, instead of always this dissension.  Who's 

right?  Farm Debt Review Board, Farm Land Security Board, 

some law firm, or you in this House here? 

 

And as I understand, it's not easy for you to keep it up day to 

day.  But we recommend that maybe you should do, is have 

that on the tip of your tongue when we come in the next 

session.  That at least weekly or a couple of times a month, 

they should be updating you so you know exactly so you can 

tell us, so we can keep up with this serious situation.  I can 

have your commitment to that, can I, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, with everything except keeping on 

the tip of my tongue the most recent foreclosure notice 

statistics because they do change.  And I do want to just 

indicate the one period that you mentioned, the temporary 

measures agreement that was voluntarily engaged in by the 

financial institutions from January to March where the 55 

notices were received compared to 362 for the first quarter of 

the previous year, just to indicate the degree of co-operation 

that the financial institutes exhibited.  Appreciate the question 

and your willingness to receive an answer at a future time. 

 

And clearly we do want to stay on top of the very serious debt 

situation in the province, but appreciate with your co-operation 

that we have today passed the legislation that will help provide 

some stability in that sense and relieve significant amount of 

stress for farmers going through this already very difficult 

process. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right.  Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'll 

accept that, that we could get a document with all these figures 

on it. 

 

And as far as keeping those figures on the tip of your tongue at 

all times, I think that's quite easy.  That was my job to inform 

the premier for many years -- that he knew that every day in 

question period.  So you could have . . . you've got lots of 

back-benchers doing absolutely nothing -- assign one of them 

to keep . . . other than go play golf at $155 a day.  So you could 

have one of your back-benchers, give them a big assignment to 

tell you every day before you come into question period, Mr. 

Minister, what is the farm scene out there? 

 

Don't laugh about it, because you as minister should know 

constantly how serious this farm scene is, and I think it should 

be on the tip of your tongue at all times.  You should be able to 

think about it in your sleep at night.  How many farmers are 

losing their farms out there. 

 

And I appreciate what you're going to do for us here and give 

us all these figures. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I asked you a question, or my 

colleague did the other day when we were on here before, 

about how many court cases.  And we just couldn't understand 

your answer on that.  And we were wondering if you were 

including all the court cases or statements of claim.  How many 

court cases or statements of claim in Agricultural Credit 

Corporation is there out 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3119 

there right now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, my recollection of the 

information that I gave you and read into the record the other 

day -- and you may want to clarify which part of this you did 

not understand -- was that there were 31 cases initiated through 

ACS from the beginning of November till end of March. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- That's how many was initiated at that time.  

How many total would be on the go now?  And I said between 

court cases and statement of claims issued to farmers, period -- 

I don't care what date -- just total that's in the courts or in . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- There are presently 2,298 writs 

outstanding. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay.  Thank you.  That's what we couldn't 

understand the other day.  We thought that was including all 

that.  And I thank you for that correction. 

 

Just the last question.  I've got two questions left on Farm Land 

Security Board, because we want to move along here as 

quickly as possible, because we all realize we're on an agenda 

here tonight. 

 

When the minister of Crop Insurance is waiting patiently to 

talk about a little more GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) and a little more . . . we want to see if he's got a grip 

on things tonight and we're going to move on to that. 

 

In this report from the advisory committee, they talked about 

perhaps a new mandate for the Farm Land Security Board or 

that they kind of alluded to it.  Is there going to be a new 

mandate for the Farm Land Security Board and Mediation 

Services?  And if there is, what is it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite had 

indicated earlier he had spent some time reading the Farm Debt 

Advisory Committee report.  And in that report, the committee 

recommended that there be some integration of the existing 

functions of the Farm Debt Review Board and the Farm Land 

Security Board. 

 

I think I had mentioned earlier, when I believe the Leader of 

the Opposition was in, that I had had a discussion with the 

federal minister about that topic last spring, in March I believe, 

and he seemed to indicate a willingness to participate in a joint 

function, although he said that for the federal government, in 

order to maintain a consistent base of service, all the base 

functions of the Farm Debt Review Board would have to 

remain in place, and to the extent that that could then be 

blended into a joint function for us, that could be pursued. 

 

Those discussions haven't taken place, but now that the 

legislation for our new debt process is in place, I suspect some 

productive discussions can take place with the federal 

government. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I'm quite 

aware of what the report said.  But I just was wondering what 

you were going to do because I'm sure that everything that's 

recommended in that report, that you'd be very careful again on 

what you implement and what 

you don't.  After this here GRIP disaster, I'm sure that enough 

farmers are telling you that be careful on what the group has 

advised and be very, very careful.  So that's why we're going to 

ask you what you're going to do, not what the people advise.  

Because it came out here very clear before that the people on 

that GRIP committee were financially . . . had a financial 

request in there. 

 

And anyway, we won't get into GRIP tonight.  We've been 

through all that.  But what I did want to ask one question.  I 

think in my last question on that topic would be:  it said 

something, if I recall, Mr. Minister -- and it's quite a while ago 

since I did read that report -- it said something about the court 

reports, that maybe that will be doing some other method.  That 

when the panel or the board members of the Farm Land 

Security Board or Mediation Services or whatever, when 

they're through . . . they've been writing . . . the Mediation 

Services are through dealing with that farmer, a report goes to 

the Farm Land Security Board or whatever, then a court 

report's drawn up.  Will that process still be in place or is there 

something different there? 

 

The Chair: -- I'd like to ask the members, if they're in any way 

making it difficult for the officials to hear, the officials in the 

rear, to move over to the other side of the Chamber.  The 

member for Saskatoon Sutherland and the minister just to move 

over.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the court report process 

will continue as it has been.  With respect to mediation there 

are some related functions.  Mediation will be able to be 

accessed on a voluntary fashion before foreclosure notices are 

served as a result of the new legislation, and there's also 

provision in the new legislation that matters can be referred 

back to mediation.  So there's provision in the new legislation 

that matters can be referred back to mediation if it would be 

seen as valuable for resolving issues. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you.  I have some more questions I 

could ask on that but I just ask your commitment, if any 

day-to-day changes that are affecting the public . . . could we 

be notified if they're changing any of their mandates on Farm 

Land Security Board or Mediation Services just so we in the 

opposition know and can tell our constituents thus far on that 

one? 

 

Okay I just have another question back on ACS, Mr. Minister, 

pertaining to general security agreements in Agricultural Credit 

Corporation.  There's a lot of confusion with a lot of people on 

where a general security agreement stands so I'm going to use, 

like we did before, Mr. Minister, just use hypothetical topics 

here.  There's the two different kinds of general security 

agreements, Mr. Minister.  We know a general security 

agreement can be a money purchase with serial numbers, and 

that's a different matter of its own, the same as a lender has and 

ACS has got them.  Somebody buys irrigation equipment or 

buys machinery, that's a money purchase.  And then there's the 

general security agreement at large, Mr. Minister, the general 

security agreement at large, and I'm calling it at large where 

there is no specific serial numbers or just agreements were 

signed for production loans and capital loans and there's no 

specifics. 



3120 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

Now we have a farmer that's in difficulty, behind in his 

payments, can't pay.  There's thousands of them out there in 

this position.  And the farmer in the past, in my understanding, 

with a general security agreement, always had his right to be 

able to sell cattle, buy cattle, buy machinery, trade machinery.  

My question to you is: when does ACS have control of his or 

hers GSA (general security agreement), whether they can sell 

or buy with freedom?  When do they lose control of that?  At 

what point do they lose control of their freedom to buy and sell 

cattle up or down, or trade their tractor off, or sell a tractor and 

buy new, because while the general security agreement is not in 

any problem, that's always been a freedom that they've had.  

Where does the point come when that freedom is not there any 

more? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the lenders apparently 

always have the right under the general security agreement to 

be in control of those processes but they generally waive those 

rights as long as the activity that the farmer is engaging in or 

some other person is in the course of doing normal business.  It 

is only in Ag Credit's case when they have reason to believe 

that a farmer may be selling off assets without intention of 

continuing in a normal fashion on their farming operation that 

they would step in and start to take action. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Are you talking, Mr. Minister, then maybe 

perhaps after they've had a notice given to them or a statement 

of claim or something like that?  Is that what you're saying, Mr. 

Minister, something like that? 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Without giving a short course in farm debt 

law, the understanding that I have is that if a farmer were 

believed by the lender to be disposing an asset that was a 

matter of security for them, and with the general security 

agreement that would apply to many things, except the 

exemptions under The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act, then 

the lender would give notice first of all to the person doing the 

business -- if it were an auction yard or an auctioneer at an 

auction sale, or whoever the business might be -- that they had 

an interest in the product being sold and the commodity being 

sold, which would mean the sales person would probably hold 

the funds. 

 

In the mean time the lender would report to the Farm Debt 

Review Board to give notice that they intended to take action, 

and then at the appropriate time would take action and try and 

recover the value of their security from the results of the sale.  

That's the rough process that takes place when there is concern 

by the lender that some of their security is being sold off or 

eroded. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, thank you.  

Because that's just exactly what I was getting at is auction 

sales.  That seems to be the problem out there, that a person can 

go through the Farm Debt Review Board and you can deal with 

. . . or you can use your lawyer or whatever, or even yourself as 

an individual, and deal with ACS in a reasonable, husbandlike 

manner. 

 

But it seems to be that if a person advertises their machinery in 

an auction sale, then there seems to be no 

deals to be made because they just take it all.  It's kind of 

refraining to me where some people would like to cut down on 

a lot of machinery and still keep farming that there's no 

movement in ACS at that time.  I've had many dealings with 

ACS through the years, where a farmer . . . I can understand it 

if he's quitting farming and there's no more farming operation, I 

can understand that ACS owns all that machinery under general 

security.  I understand that. 

 

But it seems to be a problem if he's cutting down or whatever.  

And if he advertises anything at an auction sale they want it all, 

every last bit of it.  There's no dealing.  They seems to be hard 

to deal . . . Like I had one in Kenaston this summer where an 

individual . . . he was in a . . . he had gone bankrupt two or 

three years ago and he had saved his machinery on The 

Exemptions Act, and when he. . . then he decided this spring to 

quit, to shut it down and just farm the one quarter and he was 

going to rent that out.  Your officials may know the one that 

I'm talking about.  He got a job trucking, his wife was teaching 

school, and he decided to just shut it down.  So he owed X 

amount of dollars and cents.  He put the machinery up at an 

auction sale and thought he could make a deal with ACS.  

There was no way.  They wanted it all or none.  So he had to 

pull the sale because he said I could have kept on with The 

Exemptions Act until that machinery wore out and farmed that 

one quarter for 40 years, but I just couldn't get a good deal with 

ACS. 

 

That seems to me to be a little unfair, when here's the person 

that's maybe going to keep on with a few rented quarters and he 

keeps all his machinery under The Exemptions Act or nearly 

all or whatever he needs, and he can pound out good deals as 

long as he's still going to farm a little bit, but here's a guy that 

is going to get out and start a new life and they don't leave him 

anything there.  That just seemed to me to be not quite 

reasonable. 

 

And I've only got one more question after that.  If you want to 

respond to that, fine. If not, I just wanted to leave that with you, 

Mr. Minister.  Just asking for caution on that, that that seemed 

to be a problem. 

 

The final question is, Mr. Minister, that I've had several 

ministers that are in this government . . . it's not just doing . . . 

and I don't know whether it's the ministers or the staff, and I 

leave this with you, that I've been to your EA (executive 

assistant) and with the request back in April, the first part of 

May, and I've heard zero from him.  I've been to the Minister of 

Energy with the same thing, I never get back. 

 

And I just think, Mr. Minister, when I was in government here, 

and I've been here 15 years, it's always something that's a good 

relationship between MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) and government that whatever the answer is, 

somebody should get back. 

 

Now maybe it's an oversight on the one on your staff but I want 

your commitment that you would contact your EA -- you 

probably know the one I'm talking about -- and give a request.  

Well there's nothing wrong with mentioning his name -- it was 

Ernie Spencer my good friend from Craik that born and raised 

in my community.  And I don't know whether it was someone 

else that 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3121 

restricted him from getting back with the answer or was it an 

oversight.  I would just like your commitment that I'll hear 

from him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it may have resulted from 

the fact that Ernie left my office and joined the departmental 

staff shortly after that time and may therefore have lost some of 

the memos.  And I have some new staff in the office now, 

Gordon Nystuen is there and JoAnn Buhr.  So I had a couple of 

changes in the office staff.  I wonder if you would mind 

sending the request into them because it's certainly my 

expectation that they answer all requests and, in my mind, 

MLA requests come first.  So if you would send the request 

back through the office I would appreciate it so we would have 

an opportunity to answer it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, thank you, Mr. Minister.  That could 

explain, because I couldn't understand why.  And I didn't know 

that Ernie had left your office.  I still thought he was there 

today.  Because I thought a man like him would certainly get 

back to me and I was just a little concerned.  And so I'll have 

the request come to your office in the next day or two. 

 

And that's my last questions.  And I just want to thank you for 

your answers tonight and your staff's co-operation in answering 

some of the questions that they did.  And I thank you very 

much.  I'm expecting to hear of the unanswered questions that 

will be coming to me in writing.  And I thank you very much, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask leave 

to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you.  I would like to ask members of 

the Assembly through you to welcome members of my family.  

I have visiting this evening my husband, Bob, my daughter, 

Amber, and a brother-in-law, Ken Hamilton from Fort 

McMurray.  So I'd ask members to welcome them to the 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

 

Items 1 to 32 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 1 agreed to. 

 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 146 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 146 agreed to. 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Agriculture and Food 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 1 

 

Items 1 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 1 agreed to. 

 

(2130) 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Agriculture and Food 

Agriculture Development Fund 

Vote 60 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 60 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 146 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 146 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Expenditure 

Agricultural Division 

Agriculture and Food 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 50 
 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 

Vote 50 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Agriculture and Food 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 1 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 

Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 146 
 

Item 1 -- Statutory. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan 
 

Statutory. 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like first to thank 

the members opposite for their co-operation in the passage of 

four very important Bills today with respect to the debt 

program for farmers and related matters.  This is welcomed by 

farmers in the farm community, and I appreciate your 

co-operation. 



3122 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

I also appreciate the very positive nature of the discussions 

around the Estimates and thank the members opposite for their 

questions and their willingness to co-operate with respect to the 

receiving of answers and look forward to further good relations 

with them. 

 

I would like now to thank the officials who've been here for a 

number of purposes as well as many of the officials of the 

department who have been on hold in the hallways and in the 

galleries, and thank all of them for their support of this budget 

exercise and the other work of the department, and thank them 

now for their presence and work here.  Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join with 

the minister in thanking the officials for the time that they've 

spent here.  And I know that they assume that agriculture is one 

of the most important industries in Saskatchewan, and I know 

that they attack the concerns that agriculture has with a great 

deal of vigour and I want to compliment them on that.  And 

I've told them before that I will only be critical if they're not 

proactive in their stance in agriculture, and so that's what we've 

been doing here today.  And I wish you well. 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Vote 46 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to please introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have 

with me Mr. Terry Tangjerd, Henry Schappert, and Mr. Walter 

Charabin from the Crop Insurance Corporation. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'm only going to 

ask the page to take this over to the minister.  I promised him in 

question period I'd send over a couple of names, and I knew we 

were doing this tonight, so I thought I'd give it to him at this 

time. 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I have some 

information on the particular file that the member opposite has 

asked for.  I can pass it across.  Basically the information is that 

we made an overpayment of $11,755.90.  It was our error.  The 

contract holder has had that money since March, will be asked 

to pay it back.  There will be no interest until January 1, and in 

all likelihood that amount would be deducted from a payment 

that he would get this fall.  I'll just pass this across. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

have one that's on this . . . it's kind of in the same manner 

where individuals got a good pay-out, or a pay-out -- we'll just 

say a pay-out, Mr. Minister - 

_ in the first payment of the 1991 GRIP and that was from their 

measuring their own bins or just . . . 

In January, I think January 7 was the magic date that they had 

to measure before they get their second payment, they had to 

measure their own bins and have their bin numbers in the 

square, the feet and all that, before . . . The first time there was 

just strictly just taking a guess the best they could how much 

wheat they harvested.  So they were paid as such. 

 

The second time they had to be a little closer because they'd 

have grain in the elevator and they would have maybe the piles 

picked up.  As you understand, Mr. Minister, it's pretty hard to 

guess grain sitting in a Quonset if you took half of it out or had 

a hump in a bin here and all that.  We've talked about this 

before. 

 

So here's this individual that I'm talking about, his name is 

Gordon Spencer from Aylesbury.  And he felt that he was 

fairly close.  He was right on, very close; not like some of the 

ones that were way out.  He was fairly close when he measured 

the bins.  Never did have . . . Crop Insurance never measured. 

 

So he got a bill the second time.  And let's say that's . . . maybe 

by using the $2.86 a bushel, that perhaps he should get the bill 

because he was paid too much the first time. 

 

My question more or less I guess is a request more than a 

question, to look at this policy that when we still have the third 

payment coming -- which he's going to get a lot of money then 

I'm quite sure according to his own figures - 

_ that when a person's short of money, don't make them pay 

that second payment back.  Shouldn't have to pay any money 

back to Crop Insurance until the final payment. 

 

If they've made a mistake or you paid too much, it's only just a 

figure you took of $2.86 a bushel.  And he was a very unhappy 

man when he was getting two something, just a little over $2 at 

the elevator and it did rise to 2.45.  But he's still short 

approximately 40 cents a bushel and still he had to pay money 

back he needed for operating. 

 

And I more or less was wanting you to look at that policy. It's 

not quite like the member from Thunder Creek.  There was a 

mistake made . . . there was no mistake made.  Just look at that 

policy, please, and not have farmers that are short of money 

have to send money back from the first payment and then send 

it back to the second and get it back in the third.  It just don't 

make any sense. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the problem 

we have with changing the policy is that that's a requirement of 

our agreement with the federal government in the 

federal-provincial agreement.  And as I said, in the case where 

it was our error, we would not charge any interest until January 

1.  In the case where it is just the price rise, it's not anybody's 

fault, the price went up and therefore the adjustments made 

after 30 days we charge interest which is also a requirement of 

the federal-provincial agreement. It's one thing I think that we 

need to be talking about as we look at changes to the program.  

I think your point is well taken. 

 

There is a problem however that we could have if the prices 

were to go up again, the final payment might also not be there, 

and then you would have the problem of 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3123 

collecting it some time after that.  That's one of the difficulties, 

but we'll certainly take your point that it does cause some 

difficulty for farmers. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  It's something we 

need to look at.  Because if this person had've had no money, 

he couldn't have sent it back anyway.  He would have just had 

to have the interest charged to him. But he was able to pay it 

and he paid it back.  But at an inconvenience to any farmer.  

Nobody likes to get a cheque and then have to pay it back, 

especially when . . . if the price of wheat . . . and the price of 

wheat didn't go up, that's the problem.  It just hypothetically 

went up.  Maybe the world prices said they were selling it.  

Last spring they thought people were . . . that's why people 

thought last spring that maybe '92 GRIP maybe won't be so bad 

if I get myself a 50-bushel crop like last year.  But it has left 

you people in a disaster, the '92 GRIP, because the crop isn't so 

good in Saskatchewan now and the price of wheat didn't go to 

$4 a bushel.  So it's going to cost you. 

 

And that's why . . . Anyway, Mr. Minister, I'd just like to leave 

that with you, that that's a hardship and not send people a bill 

until after the third payment.  Then you know where they're at.  

Maybe it's easier to pay it back after that than it is in that 

middle one when he knows he's got money coming and he 

knows that the price of wheat was not $2.86 a bushel.  And this 

is only the one name that I bring here because he wanted me to 

bring his name forth.  But we have, like, several hundreds of 

the same all over the province -- I guess thousands. 

 

Anyway I want to go through it quickly because we're trying to 

get as much done as possible.  I have two requests.  One is a 

letter I got from a George Padbury at Aylesbury, also in March 

23, over a problem with his crop insurance.  And I know he 

contacted . . . and I'll just read you a little bit of the letter.  He 

says: 

 

 I am writing you in hopes that you can help me get this 

dispute I have with Sask. Crop Insurance . . . settled.  I feel I 

have not been dealt with fairly.  I have tried to get this settled 

through my agent . . . and the Moose Jaw office for Crop 

Insurance but to no avail. 

 

And I won't get into the details because he said he's had a 

couple of responses since this date.  And then when I got this 

letter on March 23, I contacted Crop Insurance, told someone 

about this, and they said they would deal with him forthwith 

and he's heard nothing. 

 

So to move things along, Mr. Minister, I will see tomorrow that 

this letter is in your hands -- it's the only copy I have -- and just 

ask you with your commitment to deal with this, get your 

officials to deal with this particular situation.  Either he's right 

or he's wrong.  And in knowing how Crop Insurance works, 

Crop Insurance officials will be able to say he's either right or 

he's wrong.  And if he's right, for goodness' sake, get somebody 

to settle it.  Could I have your commitment on that, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, certainly we will look into 

that immediately.  If you can give me the name or the contract 

number we will look into it immediately. 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, thank you, Mr. Minister.  I should have 

had it photocopied and give it to you tonight, but it'll just take 

you . . . If we started talking about it in here a half hour would 

go by so quickly.  And the other case . . . that case also from 

Aylesbury. 

 

And then I got one from Hanley where it involves a problem 

with a Peter Dyck from Hanley.  And it's where a father was ill 

this spring and there was some mistakes made and his whole 

story's in a page here and also a letter enclosed from the agent 

verifying that his story's right.  And he's not getting any place 

with Crop Insurance. 

 

And I'd also like to give you that same letter and ask you for 

your commitment, that you as minister has made under oath in 

this House, that you will see that this is . . . I'm not saying that 

it's going to be to his satisfaction, but at least they're going to 

be dealt with whatever is right.  Either these people are right or 

they're wrong, and if they're right I'd ask you to take care of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We'll give you that commitment to 

look into it.  Certainly it's only fair that they get an answer one 

way or the other on it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Question I'd like to ask you.  Why did you . 

. . tell me directly man to man -- you don't need to ask your 

officials this -- minister to an opposition MLA, why did you 

fire Jim Walters? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The dismissal of or the letting go I 

guess of Jim Walters, however you want to put it, was part of a 

reorganization of Crop Insurance.  The corporation had grown 

very, very rapidly.  With the taking on of the GRIP program, 

the administration of the program had doubled.  The value of 

money we were handling had doubled, and as a corporation 

growing very rapidly we had run into some management 

problems. 

 

We had some rather serious problems in Crop Insurance when I 

took it over, and we needed to reorganize.  We needed to 

change the management structure, and part of that structure, 

Mr. Walters was a casualty of that reorganization. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that Jim 

Walters was a poor employee and didn't do good work?  He 

was there for 20-some years.  Are you saying he was a good 

employee or a poor employee, did good work or what's your 

officials telling you on that one? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the one thing that I 

demand from a civil service is professionalism.  I'm committed 

to, in my departments, to build a professional civil service. I 

demand it from my employees, and I think in return I owe them 

the same courtesy to treat employees in a professional manner.  

And I think that commenting on an individual's work record 

who no longer works for the corporation is not a professional 

thing for me to do. 

 

I think all I can say is that we needed reorganization.  We had 

some problems there.  And certainly without casting any 

aspersions on Mr. Walters' long and distinguished career, it was 

a necessary thing that we had to in the reorganization, to 

revamp our management team at Sask Crop Insurance. 



3124 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I think that the problem was -- 

and you might as well admit it -- that Jim Walters who has 

been there for 20-some years worked under I think three 

governments.  He might have been hired under the Liberal 

government, but he worked through all the years of the Allan 

Blakeney government.  He worked through nine and a half 

years of our government. 

 

He worked for me when I was minister of Crop Insurance for 

three years, and I was legislative secretary responsible for 

another year.  And I don't know of a better individual that did 

his job in a right and proper manner.  You might as well admit 

it because he just happened to be a Conservative and believed 

in Fair Share Saskatchewan and his name went on television, 

and you fired him.  And you might as well get off this here 

business of reorganizing.  You just got rid of him, and you 

bring in some NDP (New Democratic Party) people whether 

they're qualified or not.  Now why don't you admit that, instead 

of giving me this long rhetoric about your reorganizing.  

You've been saying that in this House for a long time. 

 

Because we'll go to Geoff Bartlam and Ron Osika.  Those 

people were not outward PCs (Progressive Conservatives) that 

they showed memberships and flashed them around, like did 

Jim Walters.  But with Geoff Bartlam and Ron Osika, they 

weren't hired even under our administration.  Ron Osika was 

brought in by Gordon MacMurchy.  And he was just an 

excellent man and did his job right and proper and he knew he 

did.  All he did wrong was he was a negotiator for a union 

contract, I understand at one time, and he kind of stood up for 

the union people out there. 

 

So that doesn't go down with you socialist people, that if 

somebody kind of sticks up for a union or maybe against a 

union . . . And whether he did or didn't, he was doing his job on 

behalf of the union people that belonged to the union at Crop 

Insurance.  You'd have no reason whatsoever to fire Geoff 

Bartlam.  That man worked through . . . he wasn't brought in on 

our regime.  He was under there under the NDP, came in under 

them.  And he was there while I was there.  We didn't get rid of 

him.  And you just popped him for some reason or other.  I 

think he must have been seen at a PC meeting or something 

like that. 

 

So you don't need to stand up here, Mr. Minister, and feed this 

here line about this reorganization which turned out to be a 

mess out there anyway.  It is absolutely a sham, your Crop 

Insurance, the way you're handling the situation. 

 

I mean I know Crop Insurance has got a lot of things to do, but 

I'll tell you they can sure blunder up on their mistakes too.  And 

that happens.  That's only human beings.  I mean my goodness 

you say you're running such a wonderful operation.  I've got 

people that got the wrong cheques this spring on their GRIP.  

They were given a few dollars and had thousands more 

coming.  There was a mistake some place.  You've admitted it 

in here.  Your staff can make mistakes no matter who they've 

got, and that's all right. 

 

(2200) 

But if any one of these three people have done something 

wrong, stand up and say so, and say why you fired them, 

instead of fooling around and say they were politically firing 

because that's what they were; they were political firings. 

 

And if you want to say that Jim Walters was politically fired 

because he waved a blue flag and because he let his picture be 

on television while the election was on, that he believed as 

mayor . . . it had nothing to do with Crop Insurance.  He was a 

mayor of the town.  And he had his right to stand up on behalf 

of the town of Melville and say we want some more people to 

move into Melville.  That's nothing to do with . . . and should 

never have fired him for that.  And you did fire him for that.  

And will you admit it, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the members 

opposite make strange arguments.  They go through a long 

litany of telling me that these were not patronage appointments. 

 

And I guess they were probably not some of the patronage 

appointments of the past administration, although there were 

many of them.  And I think obviously they were not patronage 

appointments because, as you pointed out, they were hired by 

governments far removed in previous times.  Twenty-year 

career, the man's . . . People, all the ones that you have 

mentioned were obviously not political appointments, and 

therefore I don't see how you make your argument that they 

were political firings. 

 

I think I would stack the record of our Crop Insurance 

Corporation this year up, I think.  I'm proud of the way Crop 

Insurance has improved.  I think the new management team out 

there, although it's new and is struggling again with a new 

program, is doing a very commendable job.  And I think we've 

done some improvements.  And part of that reorganization, 

unfortunately, sometimes results in people having to make a 

change of career. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I'm not going to prolong it 

because I've made the point, and you have fired these people 

for no reason whatsoever.  Why didn't you give them a chance?  

You got rid of them because you had to make room to bring in 

some of your own colour, and you know that.  You had to bring 

in your own people; rightly so.  But don't go making those 

promises at election time there'll be no political patronage. 

 

Why didn't you get the Minister of Justice to stand up in this 

House and quit misleading the people and say, we have to let 

people go in all departments to get our own people in.  Now if 

you had have got rid of all the Progressive Conservatives hired 

out there, I can see some sense to it; but in Crop Insurance, no 

sense to it at all because there was . . . 

 

I definitely hired people out there from all stripes when I was 

minister of Crop Insurance, with all political cards.  And we 

definitely, absolutely, definitely . . . and I was strong on that.  I 

only fired one person in Crop Insurance, and that was the 

general manager, and he was fired because of insubordination 

because he wanted to retire.  And I didn't blame him.  He just 

wanted out, and so that's 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3125 

the only person that got fired.  And the rest of them, as long as 

they were doing the job, I left them there.  Why couldn't you 

had the courtesy to have done that? 

 

Anyway then, there's something I want to move on to very 

quickly here, is this business of not measuring the bins.  I don't 

know where you got that idea last fall that you could get away 

with not measuring bins.  You wouldn't have this tragedy in 

Thunder Creek right now with the guy that owes $11,000 back 

if you had have been out and measured his bins.  I mean you 

just don't do things like that. 

 

It's just exactly the same if I smashed my car up tonight going 

home.  And I look it over; well it looks to me like about the 

car's written off.  And I want 10,000 for a car that's worth about 

five, so I just phone SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance) and said, send me a cheque for 10,000.  Business 

and the business world doesn't work that way, Mr. Minister. 

 

And if you just try to make it political . . . What you done is 

fired a bunch of adjusters last fall that you thought were 

political appointments and didn't measure the bins, and you're 

going to cause yourself one awful, big trouble out here.  You're 

going to have . . . The auditors are going to pick up this person 

and that person and miss about 40.  It's terrible out there that 

one person's going to get measured.  And it's not his fault.  He 

feels like a crook if he owes the money back.  What's this man 

from Thunder Creek going to feel like, Mr. Minister, with all 

this measuring going on? He's done the best he can.  And then 

all of a sudden there's a mistake made, and you admit it on your 

behalf.  If you had had a Crop Insurance adjuster measure those 

bins last fall and the same thing right across this province . . . 

 

The farmer from Swift Current can chirp away all he wants, but 

I don't think he's been farming for a few years.  I don't think he 

understands crop insurance, but I can tell you that you're 

making one awful mistake by not measuring bins before you 

pay.  You have somehow or other got to get the bins measured.  

You wouldn't think of paying out a crop insurance claim 

without measuring those bins.  It's always been, ever since 

1962 a man could not collect until his bins were measured, and 

the grades -- sent the grade away. 

 

You didn't say to the farmer, what grade do you think it is?  

Well he said, I think it's no. 1.  And then the adjuster said, I 

think it's no. 2, or the farmer may say, oh I think mine is no. 4 

-- I'll get paid more money.  You can't do it that way.  They're 

not qualified.  Every sample was always sent away and some of 

the people around you know that.  The samples were sent away 

and I hope to goodness Crop Insurance is still doing that. 

 

And then in GRIP '91 I admit that you had to measure those 

bins, and it was costly.  But are farmers not worth that extra 

cost?  Everything you people have done is just cut back so it 

hits into a farmer's pocket-book.  You don't care.  That's maybe 

the wrong word for me, that you don't care.  You got your 

message from the front row.  You're being told by the Premier 

and the Minister of Finance, you and the Minister of 

Agriculture have been told that you've got to tighten up on 

these farmers and make sure this 

doesn't cost so much money. 

 

Now the question I want to ask you, we'll take a scenario that 

you must have used.  The '91 GRIP would have paid X amount 

of dollars out to Saskatchewan farmers under a certain 

circumstance.  In the same circumstance what would '92 GRIP 

pay out to farmers, excluding the crop insurance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we don't have those 

numbers.  We haven't had . . . We don't even have one year's 

numbers to work with.  We don't know what '91 GRIP is going 

to pay out because we don't have final numbers.  So we don't 

know even what '91 is going to pay out last year, and certainly 

don't know what the '92 will pay out in '92.  So it's different 

circumstances and different yields.  It's very difficult to have 

that analysis. 

 

I just want to make a couple of points about the measuring of 

the bins.  I think our government would sooner pay 6 or $7 

million into the pockets of farmers rather than into measuring 

bins.  I think that's one of the changes we made to the program.  

We said if we can do away with the bin measuring, we can 

save money that will go into farmers' pockets rather than into 

administration.  And I think that's one of the reasons we've 

made the changes. 

 

The members opposite, when they defend the old program even 

in the House here, have pointed out to me that some certain 

farmer didn't fertilize his land, and then they're suggesting that 

we should be out checking how much fertilizer each farmer is 

using.  So not only under the old program would we have 

ended up with bin police, we would probably eventually ended 

up with fertilizer police and then spray police, and eventually 

all the money would be going into the program and none 

getting through to the farmers' pockets. 

 

And I think, when you have tough economic times, that's one 

of the things you have to do, is design programs that pay 

money directly to producers rather than into the administration 

of a program. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- That's a real line and you know it is.  There's 

just absolutely no facts or foundation to what you're saying at 

all.  You know that in 1991, when the GRIP came out, that the 

officials said with this type of a crop, so many tonnes of wheat, 

and there was an average, and they had a dollars and cents, 

what it could pay out to the province. Surely to goodness 

before you go change a whole program that you would have 

looked into what it would compare to, how much less the 

farmers were going to get.  Because we know that your Premier 

and the Minister of Finance and your Minister of Agriculture 

said the program is too rich.  Well did you go and change a 

program to '92 thinking, not figuring it out that they're going to 

get more or less? 

 

It has to be less on the same circumstances.  We know, Mr. 

Minister . . . I'm a farmer and I know if wheat only ends up at 

$2 a bushel, that's going to be a bigger pay-out.  And if it goes 

over $4, it isn't going to be any.  But you must have figured 

out, here's the guarantee on the '91 GRIP.  It was guaranteed; 

every farmer in Saskatchewan was guaranteed between their 

wheat and their GRIP program, here's how much money.  Well 

now you must have taken 



3126 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

that same type of a crop . . . you know what the bushels were 

last year in Saskatchewan.  You know what the scenario was 

with the departments of Agriculture and Crop Insurance used.  

Your officials, if you didn't fire them all, they would be able to 

tell you, and I think you've got a couple or three very capable 

people with you, that could tell you what the dollars and cents 

for the '91 GRIP is going to be. 

 

So in comparison to that same type of bushels harvested, you 

should be able to say what the '92 GRIP is.  Because the 

Minister of Agriculture, he had no problem standing up in this 

House, said I can tell any farmer right to the dollar what he's 

going to get out of revenue.  See if you've got the magic figure.  

See if you're smarter than . . . as smart as the Minister of 

Agriculture.  Because he said, oh I can tell you.  See if you're 

as smart as he is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, I'm probably not as smart as 

the Minister of Agriculture.  He's a very clever man. 

 

I think, Mr. Chairman, that there is no guaranteed pay-out as 

from the point of Crop Insurance.  You could say the farmer 

had a bottom-line guarantee but there is no way of predicting 

the exact pay-out from '91 GRIP.  This is where . . . a year later 

already, and we still can't predict exactly what we're going to 

be paying out in '91 GRIP because we don't know the final 

prices of the grain yet.  And each year as the crop yields vary 

up and down, then the pay-out varies that we make to the 

farmers, depending on price and on yield.  So it is almost 

impossible to say what, in a particular year, it's going to pay 

out.  I say we don't have 10 years of data, all we have is one 

year which we don't even know what that pay-out is going to 

be.  I can tell you that in certain circumstances, the pay-outs 

would be equal, in certain circumstances, the pay-outs might be 

less under the new program. 

 

What I can tell you is that pay-outs to farmers only come from 

one place.  They come out of premiums.  And if you have 

larger pay-outs to farmers means you have larger premiums 

from farmers and you have larger premiums for provincial 

governments.  And if you have programs that distort the 

acreage that is seeded, if you cause shifts that don't reflect the 

market-place, that means greater pay-outs to farmers who don't 

follow market responsiveness -- who grow the wrong crops for 

the conditions -- and that means ultimately higher premiums 

for other farmers.  It means higher premiums for provincial 

governments.  It means higher premiums for the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan and the taxpayers of Canada. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if you only realize what 

you're putting on the record.  Because we have the Minister of 

Agriculture responsible for the GRIP program, he's saying that 

we don't know for sure . . . he says one time we know for sure 

what the '92 GRIP's going to pay. And then when his Bill was 

up here in the House the other day in his Estimates a while ago, 

we had to get him to admit that we won't know what the '92 

GRIP final is going to be until January '94. 

 

And then you said, well the '91 GRIP's no good because you 

don't know.  It's exactly the same as the '91 GRIP.  You don't 

know exactly . . . we know the dollars and cents the farmer's 

going to get.  You know exactly because if he's 

insured for 125 bucks an acre, between the wheat and the GRIP 

he's going to get 125 bucks an acre.  Your program doesn't do 

that. 

 

All the GRIP program is, is whatever . . . it's just a gamble in 

the price of wheat.  It's got nothing to do with good 

management or whatever at all.  I mean we've been through 

that, I'm not going to get into that any more. 

 

But you said that money comes to pay the farmers from 

premiums.  Well, sir, I'll tell you, what a joke.  To say that 

money all comes from premiums . . . here we got the Premier 

of this province, the Minister of Finance, Minister of 

Agriculture say taxpayers can't afford it.  Now you're saying it 

comes from premiums.  Make up your mind for goodness 

sakes.  Where does the money come from? 

 

The member from Estevan has told you and told you and told 

you and tried to get commitments out of you people who don't 

answer questions, but I got faith in you, Mr. Minister of Crop 

Insurance, that maybe you can stand up here and say, yes, just 

like you said a few minutes ago, crop insurance is funded by 

premiums, not that you go pay out a billion dollars in 1991 or 

1992, and the poor taxpayer can't afford it.  For goodness 

sakes, '91 GRIP was figured over a 10-year program, the 

premiums to cover itself. 

 

And now you say you can't have '91 GRIP because the 

taxpayer can't afford it.  Now you get up here and say 

everybody knows that it comes from premiums.  Make up your 

mind.  Which way is it?  Is it from premiums or taxpayers?  

Which way is it? 

 

(2215) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, it's obviously from 

both.  There's only one place premiums can come from.  That 

money goes into the pot.  It doesn't come there miraculously.  It 

comes from farmers, and it comes from the province of 

Saskatchewan and from taxpayers.  And that's how the money 

gets in the pocket of the farmers who take out.  The farmers put 

some in and the taxpayers put some in.  That's the only way 

you can get money in the pot. 

 

The '91 GRIP, the old GRIP program, stripped of its bells and 

whistles that were given in just before the election to make it 

look attractive, was a program that was not adequate.  It was 

also not actuarily sound.  I think when the minister -- and some 

of the members opposite will know this -- when they were 

selling the program, they were saying that it was probably 

going to a basket approach in a year of two because it wasn't 

actuarily sound in the way it was. 

 

And you can't draw money out of a fund and say well there's a 

big pool, a big hole there and a big deficit, but don't worry 

about it because it'll come back out of premiums.  Well 

certainly it will come back out of premiums -- higher premiums 

for farmers, higher premiums for taxpayers.  That's the only 

way the money will get in the pot to cover the deficits. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- You said that so many times in this House, 

Mr. Minister, that the taxpayers are the farmers. 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3127 

Well of course the farmers should be paying the premium.  If I 

insure my house, I don't get my neighbour to pay for it.  You 

don't get some worker in the city of Regina to pay for the crop 

insurance premiums. 

 

Crop insurance has always been . . . It started in 1962.  And it's 

always . . . when I took over crop insurance, we had, after a 

series of many good years . . . and it was a tremendous fund 

built up.  But we had so many poor crops in the early part of 

the '80s that we soon were calling on the federal insurance fund 

to cover the losses. 

 

But you people misrepresenting the people of Saskatchewan 

saying . . . and you made all the non-farmers think oh . . . I've 

got a letter from somebody the other day that heard me 

debating in the House here when I challenged somebody that 

write in to say they're against '92 GRIP, write in to say they're 

against or in favour of it.  And why.  Well they wrote me a 

letter and yes, I got a letter.  But the only reason they were in 

favour of the '92 GRIP, it's going to cost me, the taxpayer, less 

money. 

 

Well that's coming from this rhetoric from you people.  You 

keep saying the taxpayer.  Tonight you say the premium.  It's 

the premium, but then you said, well the farmers are taxpayers.  

They're the taxpayer that's got to pay the premium, for 

goodness' sakes.  You got that choice for crop insurance, 50 to 

80 per cent coverage.  I mean I just don't understand. 

 

You keep talking about all these . . . I'm going to let some of 

my colleagues ask a question here. I want to get off of this, so 

I'm just going to ask one final question.  You don't seem to 

understand that the farmers are not with you on this '91-92 

GRIP.  They're not believing you about crop insurance being 

run in a right and proper manner.  Were you at Melfort the 

other day?  Were you there, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, I was in Melfort, Mr. 

Chairman, and I believe that the farmers are not all happy with 

the new program.  Some of them are displeased with it.  Part of 

it, I think, is because of they're comparing it to a program that 

they weren't going to get anyway.  They're comparing it to last 

year's program where the price was set low in the fall before 

the election where the federal government picked up 25 per 

cent of their premium before the election and where the 

premiums were going to go up substantially higher this year 

than they would have when they were last year.  The program, 

we had a bumper crop last year, and the program still run on a 

deficit, which means higher premiums for farmers. 

 

Again you're quite right, the farmer pays higher premiums.  He 

also pays higher taxes because he's also a taxpayer.  So do all 

the other taxpayers have to kick in.  That's the way the 

premiums work.  Part of it's paid by the farmer, part of it's paid 

for by the taxpayer.  We do want . . . you're right, when you 

buy insurance for your house, you want to buy insurance that 

covers your house.  But you don't also want to pay a premium 

that's worth half the cost of the house every year to get you 

covered. 

 

And that's where the old program was heading.  Because if it 

doesn't result in market responsiveness, if it distorts the crops 

that are grown, then the premiums go higher 

and higher and higher.  And you don't want to be into a 

program where people are allowed to burn their houses down 

because if you do, your premiums will go up and up and up.  

And I think that's the logic of this. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I understand, Mr. Minister, I understand the 

logic of it.  And last year, in 1991 we had one of the biggest 

crops on record and the farmers collected an awful pile of 

money.  They collected a large sum of money.  If we had have 

had a 1988 crop it would have been a tragedy for somebody to 

have to pay.  There would have been some insurance funds 

have to be drawn on it.  But that's exactly what it was for, for 

emergencies for farmers. 

 

We didn't get a 1988 crop.  But you people were frightened to 

death that over the next four years that your Minister of 

Finance isn't going to be able to balance the budget if you had 

one 1988 crop in those four years, so we better toss it to those 

farmers.  So don't you tell me that you done it because the 

premium is going to be too high.  Because on the 1991 GRIP it 

was for a guaranteed price for farming, the same as they got 

across the European and according to the GATT agreements 

and the United States of America.  The farmers have to know 

where they're at. 

 

And you took that guarantee away from them.  You just 

stripped them of their guarantee.  That's the difference between 

the concept of you people and us.  We believe that the farmer 

had to have a guarantee between the price of GRIP . . . between 

the price of wheat and GRIP.  They have X amount of dollars 

and cents, and you left them out there, I'll tell you. 

 

If this here . . . we don't know the consequences of this frost.  

And if there's farmers out there that haven't got any coverage, 

there's going to be thousands of farmers that haven't got enough 

coverage compared to '91 that are going to lose their farms and 

there's going to be tragedies.  I'm looking to absolutely be a 

disaster on your government. 

 

We should be sitting here laughing to ourselves in opposition.  

We should be saying, it's great.  Because we should say, well 

that's going to get rid of the NDP.  But that's not what my 

motive is.  My motive is for those farmers.  I love people and 

I've been working for them and try to help them.  And your 

1992 GRIP is not helping anybody. 

 

And I'm not going to ask any more questions.  But I'm making 

this comment when I sit down that our colleagues, four of them 

are at Melfort.  I had people from my riding, I've talked to other 

people have been there.  And out of whatever amount of people 

was there, there wasn't one in that crowd that they could find 

that thought you people were doing right, especially when the 

type of legislation . . . So don't think you're standing up here, 

got farmers pleased.  They're very unpleased right across this 

here province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I have a number 

of questions.  Thank you.  I have a number of questions, and I'd 

like to start by asking questions about how many contracts 

there were in 1991 under each of the programs in the 

combination of crop insurance and 



3128 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

revenue insurance, those farmers that had revenue insurance on 

their own, and also just the people who had just crop insurance.  

I'd like to have those figures first of all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the numbers for '91, 

there were 48,548 who were in GRIP.  I assume that's a 

combination.  There were 208 who were in revenue insurance 

only.  There were 2,932 who were in crop insurance only, and 

there were 3,750 who were in livestock feed insurance only, for 

a total of 54,944 customers in 1991. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you mind, I didn't have a chance to 

copy that all down while you were giving that to me.  Would 

you send those numbers over, and while you're doing that, 

would you also provide for me the volumes of contracts that 

are in the various categories in '92 GRIP too. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think . . . do you not have those 

numbers?  Did we not send those question numbers over at 

some point?  We'll send them over; I just don't know if we have 

two copies.  You might have to make a copy.  Okay, we'll send 

the '91 over. 

 

The '92 total GRIP, that's a combination, 40,582.  Crop 

insurance only, 5,088; and revenue insurance only, 1,900.  We 

don't have . . . (inaudible) . . . We can get that for you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On the contracts that were issued, do you 

have any numbers that relate to the volume that would have 

used the Crop Insurance service centres versus agents?  Have 

you got any numbers on the volume that individuals preferred 

to go to the Crop Insurance service centres rather than the 

agents? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Basically all of the customers went 

through the agent.  There may have been a small number, as 

low as 1 or 2 per cent, that went directly to a CSO (customer 

service office) office but basically all the customers this spring 

went through the agent system. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

wanted to pursue a little bit along the same lines of questions 

that we were dealing with in question period this afternoon 

with respect to the final payments for the GRIP '91 program.  

You've had a little bit of time to reflect on question period. 

Maybe you've been able to look at it a little bit differently. 

 

What we were getting at this afternoon in question period was 

the GRIP '91 pay-out formula.  We recognize with the board 

grains that the pay-out obviously is going to be in January or 

February of '93.  We recognize that as a result of the fact that 

the calculations from the Wheat Board have to be done and all 

of that sort of thing and that's why that is the time frame. 

 

What we were asking about in question period that you didn't 

pick up on was the pay-outs on speciality crops. We were . . . 

and speciality crop growers in my area were advised through 

the Kyle office that -- Kyle customer service office -- that the 

pay-outs on the speciality crops, final payment GRIP '91, were 

going to be made in August 

or September, probably September. 

 

And the reason was that they could . . . the reason they could be 

paid out sooner than the board grains is obviously there doesn't 

need to be a calculation by the Canadian Wheat Board.  The 

crop is essentially sold, the volume of production has been 

determined in large measure, I would suspect, by the trade, so 

now farmers find themselves in the position where they had 

been told by the customer service office in Kyle that they 

would be getting a payment on their specialty crops, not on 

their board grains, on their specialty crops in August or 

September, right now.  And now they find themselves in a 

position where they've gone out, made arrangements for 

financing, all that sort of stuff, based their cash flow 

projections on a GRIP '91 pay-out on the specialty crops in 

August or September.  Now they're being told by your officials 

now that that isn't going to be the case. 

 

I'm wondering if you could clarify that for us and also explain 

to us the reasons why that change was made. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the pay-outs are 

under the federal-provincial agreement.  We make pay-outs 

based on numbers given to us by the national grains bureau, 

and we were certainly hoping to have those numbers because 

they can be, as you say, calculated as soon as their grain is all 

sold and the crop year is finished.  We do not have those 

numbers, and I will be pressing the federal government to 

forward those numbers to us so that we can make the payments 

as quickly as we can. 

 

(2230) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's all well and good, but 

the problem still remains.  The problem is that officials from 

your customer service office in Kyle have been telling these 

folks that they can expect a payment, and now they're having to 

go back and tell exactly the same folks that they can't expect 

their payments.  And so there are some serious problems 

obviously.  They're wondering what's going on here. 

 

They were promised the pay-out, so they went out in the spring 

and based their cash flow projections and their banking 

arrangements on anticipated pay-outs in August or September, 

and now they're not getting that pay-out as they expected.  And 

obviously if they're going to have to wait until January or 

February, I think they'd appreciate knowing that. 

 

I'm wondering if you'd take it upon yourself to clarify the 

situation for farmers.  Make some definite date, and if it's going 

to be January or February, let them know it's going to be 

January or February.  But right now it's sort of up in the air, 

and you're saying well we're waiting on some numbers from 

the grains bureau.  Well maybe that's true, but I think you have 

to be a little more concise than that, particularly based on the 

fact that your officials have told them they're going to get a 

pay-out sooner than that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Again, trying to clarify it, the 

situation is . . . I can't promise the farmers any pay-out because 

I can't make a pay-out until we get the numbers from the 

national grains bureau.  And I think if the member 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3129 

opposite would help me by writing a letter to Mr. McKnight 

and urge him to hastily get us those numbers, I think it would 

be helpful. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well I'd be happy to write a letter to Mr. 

McKnight on that, but I'd also be happy if you would provide a 

little bit of direction on this thing for your department officials.  

It's your people that you have direct responsibility for that 

made those . . . or provided that kind of information to the 

farmers out in my area through the customer service office in 

Kyle.  And if the information was incorrect, I think the very 

least you can do is clarify the situation, put out a news release, 

whatever, suggesting that there may have been some 

misinformation been given to farmers with respect to pay-outs 

for the speciality crops, when they could expect their final 

payment, and you're waiting on the information based from the 

national grains bureau, at least so they have an idea where 

they're at. 

 

The call that I received today was from a number of . . . from 

one single farmer on behalf of a whole host of farmers, 

specialty crop growers, in the Kyle, Elrose, Rosetown, 

Kindersley, Eston areas.  Basically all were receiving or 

hearing the same information coming from that one office.  I 

don't know whether that's the only office either, Mr. Minister.  

That's the only one that I'm aware of.  There may have been 

other offices that have been giving out that same information, 

and I think at the very least a news release from your 

department would be in order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well certainly, Mr. Chairman, we 

will be . . . certainly like to keep our customers informed as we 

can.  It's a little difficult. We were expecting those numbers to 

come to us and we don't know . . . I could issue a release, and I 

guess we can try to inform them that we are waiting for those 

numbers.  I can't give them any guarantee as to when they'll be 

here. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well can you give us the assurance, Mr. Minister, 

that you will make an effort to clarify the situation with those 

specialty crop growers as to when the pay-out structure is 

going to be.  Now I realize you're going to be waiting on the 

national grains information, but can you give us some 

assurance and the specialty crop growers of the province that as 

soon as you get that information, you will be making a pay-out, 

or are you going to wait until January or February, the same as 

board grains? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we will certainly 

commit to make that payment if we get the numbers.  The 

information that we're getting from the national grains bureau 

is that we may well not get those numbers until January, and 

certainly we're working on trying to get that number sooner so 

that we can make this pay-out sooner because farmers certainly 

are in need of the cash. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well I'd certainly agree with you there, Mr. 

Minister, and we'll take that as a commitment from yourself 

and your department that if the national grains bureau is able to 

come up with the information sooner than January or February, 

that you'll be making an immediate pay-out on the specialty 

crops. 

I think that also may extend beyond just specialty crops.  

Probably canola would fit into that situation as well.  Perhaps 

even . . . well no, I think feed grains, I don't think we could 

expect it to be in there.  The Wheat Board would have to make 

some calculations.  You might want to look at that situation as 

well.  But certainly canola and then the whole host of specialty 

crops that are grown in the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, I think any crop that is not 

sold by the board, including canola, flax, and rye and all the 

rest.  If we can get the numbers, we can make the pay-outs. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So you'll give that commitment, then, to the 

speciality crop growers and any information that you receive 

from the national grains bureau on the production levels, you'll 

be able to make your calculations then, and then the farmers 

will be able to expect payments as soon as possible after that, 

even if, with respect to the board grains, if it's different time 

frame than the board grains. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes.  Certainly we will attempt to 

do that.  And if and when we can get some firm answer from 

the federal government on when the numbers are coming, we'll 

also pass that information on so that farmers can plan on when 

they're likely to get the cheque. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I think that's 

helpful.  And I would also perhaps just like to pass on a piece 

of advice.  I think it's important that this be dealt with.  I think 

there's millions of acres of grains here that we're talking about, 

flax, canola, and all the speciality crops.  So there's certainly a 

large percentage and a big chunk of money that would be going 

out relative to the '91 program on this. 

 

And I think it's critically important that the situation be cleared 

up because, as I've said, there's people that have made their 

financing arrangements, and at least if they have something to 

be able to go in and say to their banker, look, we anticipated it; 

we were advised that it was going to be August, September.  

We were anticipating it.  I understand now that there's been 

some change in that.  The minister is suggesting as soon as the 

information is available from the national grains bureau there 

will be a pay-out but I don't know when that's going to be and 

neither do you. 

 

And that's fair.  But at least they have some indication that they 

can sort of take into their banker and say, well here's the 

circumstances.  It didn't work out the way we anticipated it was 

going to work out, and as soon as that information's available 

the minister has said there's going to be a pay-out and we'll be 

able to meet our obligations as soon as that happens. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Okay.  We will make that 

commitment. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, in 

light of the kind of crop conditions that we've had this past 

year, which is certainly unusual in many cases -- although I 

guess in Saskatchewan you can always say that most years will 

predictably be unusual in some way -- but there certainly have 

been some curves thrown at 



3130 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

some individual producers this year that might require some 

specific attention. 

 

My direct question here is that, in the past, programs have been 

extended in emergency situations.  For example, at one point 

the 80 per cent coverage was increased to 100 per cent in order 

to alleviate some emergency problems.  Has your cabinet and 

yourself any intentions of moving into that kind of a program 

this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I think, as the member 

knows, we are now negotiating with the federal government to 

try to come up with some sort of money to help in the worst 

disaster areas -- drought, and now including frost areas. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Am I to take it, then, that the only condition 

under which farmers could expect that type of assistance would 

be on the basis of getting money from Ottawa? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That would certainly be the 

intention at this time.  We're certainly . . . As you know we 

haven't even really assessed the full damage of the frost.  We 

know that it's certainly going to be widespread, but we don't 

know the full impact of it at this time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I can appreciate that, Mr. Minister.  But in all 

fairness to the producers out there, if a disastrous situation is at 

hand, preparing ahead has to be the better part of good 

planning.  You've got to be prepared, I think, a little bit.  And 

obvious, I think, at this point Mother Nature has shown you 

that there are problems out there that have to be taken care of. 

 

My next question -- and I'm not going to dwell on the 100 per 

cent because somehow I think you've got to get that going -- 

but my next question is: where do you stand at the present time 

on write-offs of crops.  For example, it used to be five bushels, 

and I think it probably is right now.  And at one point they 

reduced that to three, and in some cases they said . . . Or I 

guess I got that in reverse.  Instead of having to write it off at 

three, you increased it to five. 

 

And maybe even in those circumstances this year where there 

is no hay crops, very much, and some of these crops might be 

coming at seven or eight or nine bushels, and there are 

livestock herds out there that may find themselves short of 

feed.  Is there any consideration to increasing those write-off 

yields and writing those crops off and allowing producers some 

advance notice so that they could go and turn these animals out 

and let them graze? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, as a matter of fact 

I've been discussing some of those very things with my 

officials today.  One of the things that we've done in some of 

the frost areas, the crop deteriorates very quickly as feed value 

in some of the places where it's had heavy frost, and it needs to 

be put up for feed within four or five days.  If it's going to do 

that, we are telling the producers in those situations to go ahead 

and leave test strips.  We're looking at moving adjusters into 

the areas and so on. 

 

And one of the things that certainly we can look at is the 

minimum allowable for write-offs.  And we haven't come to a 

decision on that but we are certainly looking at it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that comment.  

But here again we return to one of the oldest problems that 

Crop Insurance has provided to farmers and that is the 

uncertainty of the program, the uncertainty of what can be done 

and what will be accepted to be done and still be paid. 

 

You say to a farmer, leave a check strip.  So he goes out and he 

rips up 80 acres of crop and the check strip is ruled to be a half 

a bushel over what Crop Insurance says is the base line.  And 

then the farmer loses all of that field for all intents and 

purposes because he's used it as feed, and he's off on his 

judgement.  And he takes all that risk on himself when in fact 

Crop Insurance has to almost guarantee that inspectors will be 

out there to look at these crops and make a ruling immediately 

on those that are borderline.  It's easy on a crop that's, you 

know, totally shot.  But a lot of these crops are going to be very 

borderline and that decision is going to be an extremely 

difficult management decision to make, and I'm suggesting to 

you that the people need to have more, especially now probably 

than ever before, some assurance that they are making the 

proper management decision because every little thing you do 

wrong now ends up losing you your farm.  There's just no room 

any more for any mistakes of any kind.  And so putting the 

onus of responsibility onto the farmers to discover or take the 

chance on whether or not this crop is going to be over or under 

a particular line is just too much to ask. 

 

And I wonder if you can't commit to the farming community 

that you could get your people out into the fields and have 

them look.  I'm sure you have a whole background of 

individuals who have been trained in the crop insurance area 

that you could draw on as people to put back into the work 

force to do some immediate adjusting.  We happen to know of 

several individuals that were employed last year that I don't 

think would be too unhappy to be called on to do a couple of 

weeks work in an emergency situation.  Could you give us an 

answer on some kind of a commitment in that area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we have 

something over 500 adjusters who are out working right as we 

speak, I guess.  The problem being that the area that was hit by 

frost was very large and, as I say, some of the feed value of the 

crop deteriorates very quickly, so it requires very rapid 

adjustment.  We are in the process of hiring some additional 

staff but the check-strip system is really the only alternative 

that we have, given the time lines to work under, but we're 

certainly struggling to adjust and to help and assist the farmers 

in every way we can. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I refer again to the past 

because that's the only guide we have to work from.  And there 

was a situation at one point where an awful lot of crop was in a 

questionable state.  And what was assured to farmers at that 

time was that Crop Insurance, while they had to have 

guidelines, would be very flexible in the use of those guidelines 

if farmers, in fact, were fairly close. 

 

(2245) 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3131 

In other words, if they were off by a half a bushel or a bushel 

and the crop was already basically used as a feedstuff, it was 

sort of agreed that the adjusters would be allowed to have a bit 

of a blind eye and allowed some flexibility to not be hard and 

fast on that line. 

 

Now I know that's kind of an awkward position to be in to say 

that you're going to have a line that isn't a line, but at the same 

time it does provide the flexibility that a lot of farmers need in 

order to make that choice.  What do you think about that idea? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly we're trying to be as 

flexible as we can and we'll certainly ask our adjusters to use 

common sense.  I think one of the things that's somewhat 

different than the past is our federal-provincial agreement binds 

us much more tightly now than we have been in the past.  We 

cannot make some of these changes without the agreement of 

the federal government, without hanging the province up for 

some huge costs.  And that all takes some time to work through 

the system.  But certainly we want to work and be as flexible as 

we can. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well with all due respect, Mr. Minister, I 

seem to have a bit of an idea why it comes in at minus D, or 

whatever, on the rating chart, because farmers are simply going 

to grade your record on performance and that performance is 

going to be graded on some commitment to them. 

 

And I think you have to make some commitments in these 

tough times to take the onus of responsibility for management 

decisions off of the heads of farmers who are put basically with 

their backs to the wall. 

 

I want to get on to another question.  If, in fact, these frozen 

crops are in a harvestable state yet, and come up with rather 

good yields but of very poor quality, we could find ourselves 

with an awful pile of frozen damaged grain that will have no 

immediate markets.  That type of grain -- as you as a farmer 

with a farm background will know -- often times, if it can't be 

sold this year it can be held over to a second year, and in the 

second year, if a decent crop comes, then you can blend these 

grains off and you can make them marketable that way. 

 

Unfortunately for the individual caught with those kinds of 

grains, he has no cash flow, and yet they are valued by Crop 

Insurance so he has no cash flow.  They will be valued by the 

revenue portion of the GRIP program and they will, of course, 

have no revenue again.  Is there any contingency plan for those 

types of situations to provide some kind of emergency 

assistance to these farmers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well one of the things that we 

would certainly be calling for is the reinstatement of the cash 

advance program which would help in that situation.  I think 

that's a problem.  The member opposite will know that, of 

course, under crop insurance that the grain is prorated by grade 

so that it takes a larger volume of grain to bring up your 

allowable yields under crop insurance. 

 

But certainly that is a problem that can happen.  It may not 

necessarily happen.  We may be able to move some of those 

low-grade grains, but it certainly is a situation that has 

happened in the past.  We do our best to deal with the situation. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Now, Mr. Minister, the cash advance program 

is certainly a good program and we welcome the federal 

government doing that for us.  But -- and I think that I speak 

for a lot of farmers when I say that -- the reality being though 

that you have to pay back the cash advance as the quotas open 

and if you don't supply the grain to that quota, irrespective of 

the fact that it's damaged by frost and not considered 

marketable, you are responsible then as a debt to the Wheat 

Board, and they at that point start to charge you interest on 

your account if you don't deliver some grains.  So that program 

in itself isn't going to solve the problem that I was discussing 

with you. 

 

I want to get on though with another question because I don't 

think . . . you can respond to this if you want, but I don't think 

you have an easy answer at the moment. 

 

In the South, as you will recall last spring, there was a serious 

drought situation, and the seriousness of that drought situation 

resulted in the fact that we had uneven germination.  We have 

two and three crops growing basically in the same fields, at 

different stages of development.  Now we have some of that 

crop that is ripe and prepared to swath. 

 

The farmers that I have heard from today through my 

constituency office are very much concerned as to the 

management decision, again with regards to crop insurance, as 

to which crop they should attempt to harvest.  Approximately 

half the crop is ripe, and the other half is in two other stages.  If 

they make the management decision to harvest the first crop, 

they will be destroying the second and third ones.  Is Crop 

Insurance going to give them some kind of indication of a 

ruling that would be acceptable to Crop Insurance as good 

management practice if they take the first crop?  Or must they 

now wait for the second one and try to capitalize on the 

majority or the bulk of yield? 

 

What position should they take?  Or what decision should they 

take is what we're asking you because they are afraid that if 

they make this decision, they might find themselves ruled 

against by Crop Insurance as having made the wrong 

management decision and have their yields prorated according 

to what was destroyed by that wrong decision. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly as a Crop Insurance 

Corporation, we are not in the business of telling farmers how 

to make a decision.  Those choices will have to be made by 

farmers.  We will certainly be not ruling that one or the other is 

better.  I think the only time that Crop Insurance will discount 

farmers for bad farming practices is when it's blatantly obvious 

that there was no attempt made to farm in a reasonable manner. 

 

There certainly would be . . . I foresee no problem whatsoever 

in the farmers making a choice as to how to best harvest that 

yield and then depending on the whether one choice or the 

other may be the wise one.  But I don't 



3132 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

think, as Crop Insurance, we would be making any attempt to 

judge which way a farmer should go. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I have a question that relates to 

the probability of a pay-out under revenue insurance in those 

areas that have been impacted by frost at this time.  We'll take 

an area like Kindersley, which is a large area.  And I think that 

they're probably about 50/50 with durum and wheat.  And can 

you give me the impact that . . . and I'm not going to use this as 

an example out in the country. 

 

What I wanted to know was, what impact the lowering of the 

grade and the volume, because of that, will have on the revenue 

insurance payment because they have less grain to market?  

Can you give me the probability, not on the price side, but on 

the volume dollars . . . by referring to price, I mean the price 

per bushel.  Could you give me an idea on the volume of 

dollars that that area would be reduced by the very fact that 

they had frost in that area so that we would know?  It'll impact 

less in the canola areas because the margin is less.  But on a 

general sense, in wheat, what would it do in a given risk area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure exactly 

what the member is after.  I think the revenue insurance 

payment will be based on the grade across western Canada.  So 

the frost should have, assuming a constant price level, have no 

influence on the pay-out under the revenue program. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, then I'll ask the question a little 

different.  If a given area like Kindersley which has an average 

in durum of 35 bushels to the acre, if that is the average across . 

. . and they would have a drought -- we'll ignore the frost -- if 

they had a drought and they had 10 bushels to the acre, would 

there be a variable change in the volume of dollars accruing to 

that area that would have been there if they would have hit the 

average or if they would have hit the 10 bushels?  Can you give 

me that difference in the revenue insurance portion of what we 

have for GRIP today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Again the yield will not have an 

effect on that revenue payment.  The revenue portion of the 

payment would be the same regardless of whether he had 10 

bushels or an average crop.  The Crop Insurance, if he had 10 

bushels, the Crop Insurance portion would kick in and it would 

be a payment out of Crop Insurance. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, I understand that.  Then there is not 

going to be an impact because of the volume change.  But is 

there going to be a variable if you have a grade variable in that 

area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Because the grades are . . . the 

pay-out is determined on the price of all the grades. So if the 

frost is widespread as it is, that will likely mean a higher 

revenue pay-out in that area.  If the frost is local, it would have 

no influence. But as widespread as it is, it will likely make the 

revenue pay-out higher. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Why would the revenue payment be higher if 

it's a broad-based one?  I'm not sure that I understand you. 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The revenue pay-out is based on 

the average pay-out of all the grades of grain.  So if we have 

frost and we have less, our average price will be calculated out 

. . . we'll calculate it out at a lower value and therefore there 

will be higher pay-out to bring it up to the IMAP (indexed 

moving average price) prices. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- It'll be higher because you got to go up to a 

grade 2 standard on the volume, okay, on the quality. 

 

Okay, there have been questions asked by the member from 

Thunder Creek and Arm River about certain incidents that 

happened.  But I think it's far more general than the specific 

ones that they've talked about.  We have and I've talked to quite 

a few people who have had quite a payment in, well Christmas 

time of '91, December '91, they received a bill or a statement 

that included a bill or some of them had next to nothing. 

 

And now they have sold either their grain, or they have a 

portion left over.  And here's what a lot of people are telling 

me.  And I'm going to use my own as an example because I 

have . . . and this is actual.  The adjustor came out, and it was 

32 bushels of wheat average, 92 on our oats and 40 on our 

barley.  We had no quarrel with the barley.  We had no quarrel 

with the adjustor on the oats.  And on the wheat we said, well 

we figured it was a little high, but we'd leave it at that.  But 

what came down from Crop Insurance . . . and that was in 

October or November whenever the adjustor came out.  And it 

was earlier because we feed our oats and our barley. 

 

The crop insurance in March set out a statement that said our 

average on our wheat was 35, going from 32 to 35.  Our oats 

was 98, and our barley was 40.  We had no quarrel with that 

because we had agreed with what the adjustor said. We fed the 

oats, so we can't prove to you that you're wrong on the oats.  

When we hauled our wheat in it was 29.  So what you have . . . 

and our average is 26. 

 

So you're six bushels out on your estimate.  On 1,000 acres 

that's a significant amount of money.  And yet when we went to 

Crop Insurance in March and asked them what we owed them, 

it was just like the member from Thunder Creek said.  They 

told us that they were expecting to pay us a payment which was 

the difference between 32 and our yield. 

 

(2300) 

 

And when we got to that point, no they said, no 35 is what 

you've got in there according to our calculations.  And so we 

had to pay an additional premium in order to have GRIP for 

'92.  We had to take that difference that we had gotten the 

cheque for in December.  We had to plug that in.  Plus we had 

to do an additional amount of money in lieu of that. 

 

Now that has happened in a significant amount of places.  And 

I raise this as a point where I believe that you need to take 

some very serious consideration about how you handle the 

interest in relation to those kinds of individuals who have had 

that happen to them.  Like they . . . a lot of the people were 

given . . . and that was a good thing to do 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3133 

to give them an opportunity to stagger their payments so that 

they could do it that way.  That was a good idea. 

 

But what in fact is happening is those people will be paying 

interest on money that they should have received in March and 

in fact they had to pay it out in a premium load.  And that is a 

very difficult thing to explain to the customers in these crop 

insurance areas.  And there's lots of those like that and I'm not 

raising it to be contentious, I'm just saying that this is a point I 

want to make. 

 

The second thing that I want to make as a point is this.  Using 

my example of 26 on an average and if across the province last 

year there was a 26-bushel average roughly -- 26 or 27, and 

we'll just talk about wheat -- if that was the average and there 

was one bushel over on 20 million acres, let's just for practical 

purposes, because it's late, talk about the 30 million acres that 

are seeded.  If it was 26 bushels an acre average and there was 

one bushel over, that one bushel at $4.15, if it's one bushel over 

and you don't find that bushel, is $128 million worth of wheat 

that you shouldn't have paid for. 

 

If it's one bushel under the farmer loses.  You follow me?  And 

that is an extremely important part of why it's necessary to have 

the . . . the more accurate a measurement -- well that isn't the 

right way to say it -- the more accurate you can become in the 

measurements the more accurate is the payments and the less 

risk there is in having the customer out of his pocket or the 

corporation out of his pocket. 

 

And that way you can save taxpayers' dollars if you're more 

accurate.  And that's the point I want to make and that's the 

point that I've tried to make in talking to you about having 

adjusters go out.  And I don't call them bin police.  I say that 

$128 million, that's 30 million acres at one bushel times four 

fifteen, and it would be more on durum so it's relative, but 

that's a significant amount of money to put at risk either to the 

farmer or to the corporation.  And I think I'd like to have you 

respond to that because I think it's a very important part of 

what your responsibilities are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Just I guess responding in to a 

particular case.  I don't understand why the yields would have 

been higher after they were back in the office unless the 

adjuster made a mathematical calculation error. 

 

I guess all I can say about the measurement . . . and it's a bit of 

a moot point because under the new program it won't be 

necessary other than for crop insurance and to determine 

yields, to do measurements.  In your case an adjuster measured 

and was out by 3 bushels. 

 

We did a declaration later in the year which we think . . . and 

we're doing audits on both of them to see which is more 

accurate.  And I think either case it's a very difficult thing to 

determine exactly the amount of grain, whether it's . . . 

particularly early in the year when you have all the grain there. 

And then you're absolutely right; it's huge dollars involved.  I 

think overall for the province it tends to balance out, but 

certainly it's big dollars also for a farmer, and an individual 

farmer doesn't balance out.  And we certainly are . . . you 

know, if we can find proof, we will certainly adjust them.  And 

I realize the problem you say 

where the oats are fed and then it becomes very difficult to 

correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What I was going to raise with you, if you're 

prepared to go down the percentage from 35 to 29 on the 

wheat, we'd be prepared to adjust that on the oats too.  But I'm 

not sure that you'd be willing to go along with that. 

 

I have a question on people who have been excluded from 

service by Crop Insurance.  And I have had two cases in my 

constituency where individuals have been caught for not doing 

the right thing as it relates to crop insurance.  The one case the 

family have come to me on a number of occasions and have 

asked to be reinstated.  And I would make an observation about 

that; and I think that members of the corporation will know of 

the family who I speak, too.  They've had a long history of 

being involved there. 

 

I want to just say this. At some point in time somebody's . . . 

each person serves his sentence for the injustice that has been 

rendered, and the court makes a decision -- and they did -- and 

now it's time to go on. 

 

And I guess I would say that at some point in time, with close 

supervision and very accurate observations made to these 

individuals, it would probably be a good policy to start 

reintroducing these back into the system. 

 

And I can . . . Well I'm sure your Crop Insurance people know 

who I'm talking about.  But that is a significant impact on that 

one particular family to be excluded from all involvement in 

crop insurance.  And I think they've been out for at least three 

years already.  And I think it's my view, at least, it would be 

time for you to maybe re-evaluate and put them back on the 

list, but make sure that there's supervision in the details 

involved in it.  Could I have a response to that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We do allow some people back in, 

and we look at the circumstances. 

 

Our biggest problem with people being out of the program is 

for non-payment of premiums and so on.  And it is a real 

problem because people who are unable to meet premiums, 

some of them through no fault of their own or certainly no 

intention of their own, get locked out of the program which 

then puts them in really serious problems because they don't 

have the coverage.  And yet we have a problem with our 

federal-provincial agreement and so on, and in fairness to other 

farmers and good business practice, to allow people back in 

without paying their back dues creates a problem for us. 

 

But certainly your point is well taken, particularly in the times 

we're in, and if it's a case of some wrongdoing, I think normally 

if they pay up the back dues that they would be accepted back 

into the program.  But your point is well taken that we don't 

want to keep people out of the program that could well be in it 

and could be good, productive farmers. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What I will do is I will provide you with the 

name after and then we'll work it through the system and see 

how far we get. 



3134 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

I have another question.  It relates to forage insurance and 

particularly this year in the south-west.  I know that there's a lot 

of pastures there was almost no growth at all.  It's been really a 

strange year.  I don't think I've ever seen it.  It seemed like it 

put everything into it last year and nothing grew this year.  So 

I'm not just sure why, but there are significant losses, I believe, 

that are out there.  Have you got the adjusters working on that 

at all?  I haven't noticed any around, nor have I heard of any.  

So I was wondering whether this was something that you were 

going to do in the next little while, or when you had planned on 

doing it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Those measurements should be 

going on right now, I believe, and the forage and the pasture 

clippings, we're doing those right at the present time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you have an idea when people should 

be thinking about getting some payments for that?  Because the 

reason I say that is now is probably the . . . their shortage of 

forage and winter feed, the farmers would be able to use that 

money to buy frozen fields of grain in lieu of that at this point 

in time, especially along the west side.  I think it would be a 

particular asset to cattlemen if that was a possibility.  And I'd 

just like to have a response on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We have to get, in order to make 

those pay-outs, get all the information in so that we can 

calculate the area averages.  It'll probably be October before we 

get cheques out.  Last year we had a problem with it in that we 

were deducting the total premiums from crop insurance and 

GRIP from their pay-out and left them with nothing with which 

to purchase forage.  This year we will take off the premiums 

for the forage insurance only so they will at least have a cheque 

with which to buy some feed. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- In our going through the information that you 

provided to us, there is an observation that I want to make, and 

that is that you retired officially, and in other ways, a 

significant amount of people.  I didn't count them but there 

could be 25 about in various areas.  And as I went through the 

volume of these replacements, what you did is you changed the 

name of the area of responsibility and then you raised the 

wages. 

 

I'm just going to make a point on Jim Walters for example.  He 

went from 61 to 73,000 -- 12,000 increase.  Another one here, 

you went $14,000 increase.  You've got another one here from 

37,000 to 48,000; from 37 to 48 on that one again.  Have you 

got on hand the volume of dollars that it took to re-supply the 

individuals in the locations that they are in the job descriptions 

that you gave us?  You gave us these job descriptions and you 

said this is what they were and this is what they're being paid 

now.  You changed their name and increased their wages.  I 

think I only found one that went down.  Would you be able to 

give me the volume of dollars that it cost to make that transfer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly we can.  We don't have 

that particular calculation made.  We can make it just by, I 

think, by calculating the total management salaries before and 

after.  I think I just want to point out that we did do more than 

change the name.  I think that 

was part of the problem that we had at Crop Insurance.  The 

corporation had grown and we didn't have certain skills -- 

accounting, comptroller, computer skills, and those sorts of 

people that we needed.  And we had to pay a little higher price 

to get those qualifications that we needed. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I'm not completely sure that that's the 

whole answer.  However what I will conclude with is your 

questionnaire.  When are you expecting this to be completed? 

 

(2315) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- On the questionnaire we sent out, I 

think we got back about 12 or 13,000 of them.  We're past the 

date for cut-off.  We're now analysing the data.  They're being 

key punched in now.  It probably will take about a month to 

analyse the data from the questionnaire.  We sent out a 

supplementary one on forage which is not come in back yet. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I have had a significant amount of 

individuals talk to me about the service that has been provided 

by these agents.  And I feel fairly strongly that they have 

provided a very, very good service to the community.  And I 

just wanted to say that I expect that that's what the data will tell 

us. 

 

But I'd like to have the minister's commitment that we would 

receive the information from this and be able to take a look at 

ourselves.  And when you do this, do you take it from various 

areas?  Can you analyse the value of an individual agent in a 

certain area because of . . . and I don't want to know who it is, 

but where you know that the agent maybe hasn't been doing his 

job.  Can you isolate that in your data to give us the 

information on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, I think we can supply you 

with the information when we get it processed.  We don't have 

it on . . . we have RM (rural municipality) numbers which will 

give us an idea of an areas, but we don't have on individual 

agents. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 4 

 

Mr. Martens: -- There's consideration that I'd like Crop 

Insurance to take a serious look at on -- the water-fowl and 

wildlife damage.  I really believe that some of the monies could 

be used in premium rather than direct payment, that the Crop 

Insurance Corporation could use . . . or the agency supplying 

the money, whether it's Ducks Unlimited or whoever, in certain 

circumstances could provide to the Crop Insurance Corporation 

a benefit from the premium side.  And then individuals could 

put a rider on their crop insurance contract that they would 

supplement that by also having an opportunity to -- just like 

you add a rider on your fire insurance or whatever -- put that in 

there, and then the premium load would be coming from two 

places, not only from the farmer, but from the individual. 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3135 

That way you would know who was involved.  You could 

insure it before the fact and not have to deliver the money after 

the fact.  And I think that that has a far better value than trying 

to do it $2,500 here and $2,500.  It really doesn't amount to 

anything, and yet if you were to do it beforehand, the 

individual could help contribute in that instance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We certainly take that into 

consideration as one of the things I think we need to look at in 

Crop Insurance and in co-ordination with other departments.  

And one thing we're trying to look at with the North American 

water-fowl plan, where we try to get some of the money that's 

going into conserving wildlife to help compensate the farmers 

and to maybe take some marginal land out of production and 

cut down the damage to farmers who are farming. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- One of the things, Mr. Minister, on that.  It 

isn't only the water-fowl that cause the damage.  In the North 

it's elk and along the Qu'Appelle it's bear.  You could do a 

number of them.  But then the farmer . . . you would know 

beforehand who you were insuring and who you were not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's a good point and we will 

certainly take it into consideration. 

 

Item 4 agreed to. 

 

Vote 46 agreed to. 

 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Vote 161 

 

Item 1 -- Statutory. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 46 

 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 46 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 46 

 

Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 46 agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- That concludes the Estimates for the 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation.  The minister 

would thank his officials? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to 

thank my officials for coming in and helping me through the 

questions and staying this late at night.  I certainly am grateful 

for their assistance. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too want to 

thank your officials and thank them for their information and 

also appreciate very much the opportunity to receive the 

information that you've promised to us.  Thank you. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Granting Leave for Member to attend Conference 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, I'm going to move a motion: 

 

 That the hon. member for the constituency of Cumberland, 

on Thursday, August 27 and Friday, August 28, for the 

purpose of attending as an observer at the first ministers' 

conference in Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, on behalf 

of the Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs, be 

granted leave of absence. 

 

I move that, seconded by the member from Swift Current. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:29 p.m. 

 

 


