




















































Hansard: August 27, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3137 

 August 27, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 9 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 84 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 

Act, 1984 

 

The Chair: -- I'd ask the minister to please introduce her 

officials and ask the other members to come to order. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have with 

me to my right, John Edwards.  He's the assistant director of 

financial systems and policy services from the Department of 

Community Services. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Good morning, 

Madam Minister, and to the officials. 

 

Most of the provisions of this Bill are of a housekeeping nature 

and we don't have a great deal of concern or problem with.  

The one area that we have some questions about though is with 

respect to fine revenue.  I'm wondering if the minister would 

care to comment on the amount of additional revenue will be 

raised as a result of this Bill. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, this is an important 

change and it's important to make clarifications of what the 

understanding is.  This applies only to Saskatoon and Regina 

because a number of years ago Saskatoon and Regina withdrew 

the escort services and transferred that to the provincial 

government.  And a few years ago, under the former 

administration, the charge had been pegged at $320,000 

annually that would be paid to the provincial government. 

 

This year in our budget we changed that to have full cost 

recovery.  And under the analysis of the Department of Justice, 

that increase would be about . . . up to $450,000 annually to 

each of Saskatoon and Regina.  So the increase would be 

somewhere between the difference of 320,000, which it was 

previous, up to 450,000 which we have now. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And the amount of revenue loss then for each city 

then, Regina and Saskatoon? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The transfer of that cost would be 

equivalent to the difference to the Saskatoon or Regina 

municipal governments. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

I have a question under the section 14 here.  It permits a sliding 

scale is what it's about, and perhaps that will get your mind on 

what I'm saying. 

 

It is my impression that people who can't pay their taxes, in 

whatever jurisdiction, are normally people that have a problem 

getting money.  And if you impose an even greater penalty on 

people that are having trouble with 

their financing, I don't think that that's necessarily an 

encouragement for them to pay, but only puts them into deeper 

trouble. 

 

Now I know that you could argue the thing the opposite 

direction in certain circumstances where interest rates are very 

high in the banking systems, and people might in fact be 

reinvesting their money rather than paying their taxes because 

they're earning more money by investing it somewhere rather 

than to pay their taxes. 

 

At the present time, though, interest rates are relatively low 

throughout the whole world as far as that goes, particularly 

here in Canada, throughout those vehicles that most normal 

people might invest their money in.  That being a fact, then I 

see no encouragement for people to basically be sort of playing 

the system or sort of cheating on the system by holding back 

their taxes to invest their money to make more money. 

 

That being out of the way then, what we're doing is 

discriminating against those people again who are in that first 

block that I described, those people that are having financial 

trouble.  If you slide the scale upwards and cause them even 

more trouble, it is my belief that they'll have even more trouble 

paying their taxes. 

 

We find in municipal circles . . . and I don't know how far this 

Act really extends here -- if this is just for the big cities or it's 

going to apply to all municipalities.  And I hope you'll clarify 

that -- but the reality, no matter who it affects, would be the 

same.  And we find though in our local municipal situation, a 

lot of times we can get people even to pay their taxes if we 

might go into some kind of an agreement where we will cancel 

some of the extra costs that build up.  And we, I believe, have 

had that power in the past to do some of that sort of thing and 

that has encouraged people to sort of clean up at least part of 

what their ability to pay is.  And the public purse of course 

doesn't get everything it should, but at least it isn't out 

everything the way it might be you know if you pushed the 

issued too hard.  So I'd like your comments on that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, this is not new.  

For many years municipalities used penalties as an 

encouragement to make sure that property owners would pay 

their taxes.  And you're quite right about the fact that in the past 

they would invest their money rather than pay the taxes 

because the returns were better. 

 

But that doesn't change the fact that municipal governments 

need this tax revenue in order to operate, and there has to be 

some ability for them to pressure the property owner into 

paying those taxes.  It's a long-standing part of their operations 

to apply penalties to tax arrears.  It's been there for many, many 

years. 

 

The sliding scale has already been used in many municipalities, 

and what we have here is simply allowing that sliding scale to 

be put into the municipal Act.  I would like to make a comment 

that this is still optional.  Municipalities don't have to use a 

sliding scale, and it is totally within their jurisdiction to decide 

what kind of penalties they want to apply. 



3138 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

So they have to take into account the ability of their taxpayers 

to pay arrears.  This does not obligate them in any way to 

charge a certain scale of penalties at all.  It's simply allowing 

municipalities the latitude to collect the taxes in the best way 

they can.  And if they need to apply penalties on arrears, then 

they have that ability. 

 

What you're saying is that municipalities should finance 

property owners for back taxes and that's unfair.  

Municipalities provide services and they need revenue in order 

to do that.  So there is no obligation on the part of 

municipalities to finance property owners for their taxes.  And 

the fact that in this Act, one other part of it, the minister has the 

right to set the maximum of what the penalties can be -- so it 

isn't about to get out of hand and it is a way of achieving a 

balance between the property owner and the municipal 

government's right to collect taxes. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Madam Minister, with all due respect, 

the notion that penalties are necessary was not the proposition 

that I was challenging.  The ability of municipalities though to 

use discretion in how it is applied, that ability must be 

maintained, is what I'm trying to say.  I'm glad to hear you 

suggest or say outrightly that this is an optional program. 

 

First of all, I have a few questions, and I think for the 

expediency of time, if you have a pencil I'll just give you two 

or three and then you can answer them all at once and we'll 

save a little time on this. 

 

Do municipalities and municipal jurisdictions have the right to 

cancel arrears still after this Act is put into force?  You said we 

have the option to use the sliding but we don't have to.  My 

argument there is that in some municipal jurisdictions, 

especially in smaller communities in Saskatchewan, the reality 

is that if you take a small amount of the taxes that are owing 

and allow a person that can pay that to pay that and cancel his 

arrears, he might pay it. 

 

Otherwise he's going to dump his property on you, and as a 

municipal jurisdiction, you end up owning property that you 

have absolutely no sale for and no use for.  And it is going to 

bring you in no revenue.  And the chances of selling it to 

someone else just doesn't exist today in today's market.  So if 

you can cut a deal with a taxpayer that he can afford to pay and 

you have that option, you're better to take some dollars rather 

than no dollars.  And you're not subsidizing the taxpayer, 

you're simply saving what you can out of a bad situation in a 

recession. 

 

(0915) 

 

With the interest rates having dropped, the opportunity for 

people to play the system as they used to simply doesn't exist 

any more.  Having been in the municipal arena for some years 

myself, I know that at one time the rates were quite low and 

you could invest your money higher than what the tax penalties 

were.  And obviously everyone did that to some extent. 

 

It only could apply though for a certain period of time because, 

as you're well aware from your municipal background, the 

threat of losing your property soon 

becomes a very big reality because municipalities do take the 

appropriate action very quickly.  And if the taxes aren't 

properly paid or some settlement agreement come to, the 

property is put into jeopardy.  And if it's a valuable property, 

obviously even though they're playing games with the 

investment money, they soon will either pay their taxes or lose 

something that's more valuable.  And no one that has anything 

of value is going to deliberately lose it. 

 

So we haven't had a big problem as a result of people playing 

games.  Our biggest problem with non-taxpayers is genuinely 

people that don't have any money.  And if you over-penalize 

people that don't have any money, I think you're just going to 

possibly make the problem worse.  So I'm glad to hear that it's 

optional.  I believe though that the sliding scale upward being 

in place, it ought to be advised to municipalities not to use that 

route unless they find it absolutely necessary. 

 

You made reference to the fact that other jurisdictions are using 

this principle.  I wonder if you could table for us the results of 

your studies in those jurisdictions and what their success rates 

have been. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- First of all, to the point that do they have 

a right to negotiate it.  Yes of course they do. 

 

A municipal government is autonomous, and it is totally within 

their jurisdiction to decide how to collect their revenue.  And 

they don't have to apply a penalty on arrears at all if they don't 

want to.  And they know best who the property owners are and 

what their ability to pay, and I don't think it's up to the 

provincial government to make those decisions for them.  So it 

would be presumptuous of us to make those decisions at this 

level when the people at the local government level are the 

ones providing the service and understand the situation 

firsthand about the ability of their property owners to pay. 

 

So yes of course, they have the ability to negotiate.  If they 

want to make an agreement that if they may the taxes -- and we 

have done that often in Melfort -- if they pay their taxes on a 

set system, then the discounts . . . or the penalty on arrears will 

be diminished. 

 

You asked about have we done any surveys.  Well I was 

speaking from experience.  Melfort for many years have had a 

system where they have applied a penalty on arrears, and it's a 

sliding scale.  And we've used at least for 10 years, and it has 

worked very well to clear up arrears.  In fact, I think when it 

was instituted we cleared up just about half a billion worth of 

arrears in about three or four years. 

 

So it does work.  Many municipalities use it.  They use their 

discretion.  They don't want to have tax title property dumped 

into their books.  And it is best left in the hands of the people at 

the local level; local municipal governments are responsible 

people, and they are the best ones to decide how to use a 

sliding scale. 

 

The Chair: -- This is a Bill with 16 clauses spread over six 

pages.  Would members agree to go page by page?  It's agreed. 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3139 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Pages 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Before we move on 

to that, I'd like to thank the officials for the last piece of 

business.  And we appreciate the co-operation. 

 

Bill No. 85 -- An Act respecting Fire Prevention and 

Certain Consequential Amendments resulting from the 

enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have to my 

right, Henry McCutcheon, is the executive director of 

community development, Community Service department.  To 

my right and behind me, Richard McCullough is a Fire 

Commissioner from the Department of Community Services.  

And directly behind me is Lian Schwann, Crown solicitor from 

the Department of Justice. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, this is a fairly comprehensive Bill.  And we discussed 

it a little bit after second readings last time.  And I'm just 

wondering if you've had time to do any research on the issue of 

fire personnel and fire equipment crossing international and 

provincial boundaries. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, yes, we looked 

at it but it can't be covered in this Act.  It has to be something 

that is done locally as an agreement between municipalities that 

are across borders from one another.  So it's under the local 

jurisdiction.  It can't be covered by this Act. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, what effects 

would that have on insurance for those people and for the 

equipment that they use if they cross into another jurisdiction? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- This Act does not cover those 

circumstances.  This covers protection and suppression of fires 

only.  The circumstances that you're talking about would have 

to be covered between the local municipalities and the insurer 

that they use as underwriting their coverage. 

 

So it would depend on how they negotiate with the company 

that they're insured with whether or not their firefighters or 

their equipment would be covered if they cross their . . . out of 

their jurisdictional boundaries. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, is there any 

provincial insurance in which the government is involved in or 

is this all just a private matter? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- It's on an individual matter.  It depends 

on what company they want to insure with and they would 

have to negotiate that as part of their agreement or part of their 

package with the insurer. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, would you 

mind explaining how the taxes on fire insurance premiums 

work then. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- There has been no change in that.  It's 1 

per cent on all fire insurance premiums sold in Saskatchewan, 

on coverage sold in Saskatchewan.  It is allocated to the 

Consolidated Fund as was recommended in the Gass 

Commission.  And it is, through the Consolidated Fund, paid 

back to training and programs in the Department of 

Community Services to cover costs in the Fire Commissioner's 

office. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, does the government 

have any rules and regulations dealing with fire equipment, fire 

personnel going into another jurisdiction whatsoever that 

would prevent a community from making arrangements to 

cover into another community?  I'm thinking more than just 

from one municipality to another but from Saskatchewan into 

Manitoba or Alberta or across the international boundary. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I'm not sure if this is what you wanted in 

your question.  The 1 per cent that we levy on insurance 

premiums paid back to the Consolidated Fund and through the 

Consolidated Fund to the Fire Commissioner's office is used to 

help communities with their interjurisdictional agreements.  

And also through the EMO (Emergency Measures 

Organization) office and support, those kinds of initiatives, if 

they want to jointly own equipment or pursue intermunicipal 

agreements, then the money . . . there is money allocated to 

support those initiatives.  But that is the extent to which we get 

involved in trying to encourage or support or promote any 

other type of agreements. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam 

Minister, the Act also deals with the sale, distribution, and 

installation of smoke detectors and fire prevention equipment.  

I'm just wondering about the qualifications and who sets out 

the qualifications necessary to certify someone for this, to be 

able to install it or inspect it. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Two remarks to that question.  The 

national fire protection association sets the standards for all 

equipment that is used or sold in the area of fire protection.  

And also the industry itself who is selling this equipment also 

has an interest in maintaining the standards so they have 

pushed for those regulations as well. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well if they're industry standards, 

Madam Minister, or if they're set on a national code, but it's our 

fire commissioners that enforce it, is it under this Act that they 

are given that authority to enforce it?  If it's not a provincial 

statute, I'm just wondering how they enforce a federal statute or 

an industry-wide standard which is not a law. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The standards as set by the national 

association and through the provincial legislation, we apply 

those standards through regulations. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So in actual fact then the province has 

passed legislation or regulations dealing with those standards 

and making them law in this province.  We're 



3140 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

accepting the recommendations of a body outside of 

Saskatchewan that these are the proper standards that should be 

applied. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes that's true. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, on one of the clauses 

here it talks of exemptions to any land, building, structures or 

premises or persons, that the Fire Commissioner can exempt 

certain things from having to be done to meet fire code 

regulations.  I'm just wondering, what's the criteria for this, 

who makes the decisions, and are the same standards applied to 

everybody.  If an exemption is given to building A, will the 

same exemption be given to building B? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The intent in this clause is to grandfather 

certain buildings so that there isn't a large expense right away 

on some of the buildings that don't comply with the National 

Fire Code at this point in time.  It's left to the discretion to 

decide, as a matter of safety, which ones will and which ones 

can't.  But it's difficult to roll over with this Act and to enforce 

compliance with a new set of standards on some very old 

buildings.  And it would put a fairly large burden on a lot of 

property owners if we didn't allow some latitude and some 

flexibility in that area. 

 

(0930) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well I agree, Madam Minister, and that's 

why I brought this up.  Because I can think of a number of 

occasions where a building -- while not ancient by any means 

-- is an older building where some renovations are being 

proposed for those buildings, and yet to meet current fire codes 

very extensive alterations have to be made, and in some cases 

making it impractical to actually renovate that building.  It 

makes it cheaper to build a whole new building. 

 

And I'm thinking of some of our institutions.  When you look at 

hospitals, I believe the current standard, the current code calls 

for 8 foot hallways in hospitals so that beds can pass in either 

direction.  And yet in some of our small, rural communities 

those hospitals have hallways that are narrower than that.  But 

if you only have 10 beds in the hospital, in the case of an 

emergency, I don't really suspect that you're going to have beds 

travelling both directions.  They're all going to be going for the 

exit, rather than running back and forth. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I think it's in this kind of a situation 

where some considerations need to be given for some 

exemptions; that you could still renovate within that hospital 

without having to meet all of the current standards fire code 

regulations. 

 

I can think of one hospital that had hallways that are 7 foot 6 

wide.  They were short 6 inches.  And yet they had to gut the 

entire interior of the hospital to meet the eight-foot hallway 

standards.  And this was a very expensive proposition.  And the 

net result was that a new hospital was built because of this.  

And I think in those kind of particular circumstances, that's one 

of the areas where exemptions should be given some serious 

considerations. 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, 

the National Fire Code provides more flexibility than what we 

have now, because through regulations we can make certain 

exemptions that would place an undue hardship on certain 

buildings.  However, if you're renovating and there are certain 

standards that have to be applied, those will be applied. 

 

But we also have the ability to look at equivalency.  So if the 

National Fire Code says it has to be 10 sprinklers for whatever 

square feet or something and there is another option or 

equivalent option that they can use instead, it allows that 

discretion at the local level. 

 

The main thrust here is to make sure we have protection of life 

and property.  And you have to be able to allow some 

flexibility in latitude in some situations in order to achieve the 

same results.  You can go at it from a number of different 

ways.  So we want to be as flexible as possible but still 

maintain the standards. 

 

And secondly, what we look for is equivalency so that if the 

code says that it has to be this way, we can look and see how 

another way that you can achieve the same results. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, in the case of the 

hospitals, the small rural hospitals that are doing some 

renovations and yet have to meet these eight-foot hallway 

standards, perhaps something else could be done to allow 

access . . . I mean egress. 

 

If you had another exit put in place, perhaps that would meet or 

suffice the standard.  It's when you have to tear one whole wall 

out that doesn't need to be moved in your renovations, and that 

harms the structure because that may be the walls that are 

supporting the roof, I believe it's a very onerous burden on the 

institution when it has to do that.  If some other method such as 

another exit being put in would suffice, then I think that should 

be given some serious consideration. 

 

One of the other concerns that I have with the fire codes and 

fire regulations is the inconsistency between the fire code 

necessities and those of the Department of Health or some of 

the other government departments.  When a person is putting 

up a new building, the Department of Health inspectors will 

come in and say, you have to do A, B, and C.  So the owner 

will meet A, B, and C.  And then the fire inspector comes in 

and says, no you can't do that; you have to do it this way. 

 

So I would like to see all of these organizations get together a 

little bit so that one guy goes in there and says, you do A, B, 

and C and that meets the Department of Health regulations, that 

meets the fire code regulations.  And so people will have a 

better opportunity to know where they're at.  They don't have to 

do the jobs two and three times and waste a whole bunch of 

money that in the end costs the consumers and the taxpayers 

money, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, 

to the first comment that he made regarding hallways in the 

older rural hospitals.  That's exactly the situation that we're 

trying to prevent.  Right now under our 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3141 

current regulations there is no flexibility; under this new fire 

prevention Act there would be.  And this is a benefit of this 

new Act, to address the situations that you have just described. 

 

To the second point that you made, on the making sure that 

different departments have the same standards so that the 

owner isn't caught between two conflicting standards, we do 

whenever possible do that.  Of course there are instances when 

things drop through the cracks and there may be occasions 

when there has been two conflicting orders given.  But to the 

greatest extent possible, the Fire Commissioner's office is 

involved in all the plans.  And they do co-ordinate and 

integrate their decisions with all of the other departments, like 

the Department of Health and Education and whatever other 

department is. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, when a person 

makes an application for a permit to build and they have to 

meet the public health safety standards and they have to meet 

the fire standards -- and in a lot of cases I believe it affects 

more so in the liquor industry where you have to meet the 

Liquor Board standards also -- if when the blueprints are 

submitted, rather than keep sending it back and forth between 

Regina and wherever it's going to, if they would circulate 

through the offices, go from the Fire Commissioner to the 

Health to Liquor Board, so that everybody gets a say; or have 

three people sit down together and do the job, I think would be 

much more efficient and much less time involved in it than the 

way the current method is being done. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well from my experience with the city of 

Melfort, that's exactly what happens.  It does be . . . The 

blueprints are sent from one jurisdiction to the next or one 

department to the next.  And it is done in a one-step process.  

There may be occasions when that doesn't happen.  But my 

past experience, when we've had building programs in the city 

of Melfort, that is exactly the process that has been used. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, perhaps I have 

an unusual case or something.  But this fellow was complaining 

to me about the process, that he had to change things a number 

of times to meet first one group, then the next group, and then 

so on. 

 

When a Fire Commissioner goes into a building or onto a 

location and orders some changes to be made, who pays for all 

those costs? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The owner of the property pays for those 

changes. 

 

The Chair: -- The Bill has 44 clauses divided into 11 parts.  

Are the members agreed to proceed through it part by part?  Is 

that agreed? 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 44 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would 

like to thank the minister and her officials for coming in today 

and providing us with their answers and for their co-operation.  

Thank you. 
 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I would like to thank the members 

opposite for this Bill and the other Bill, for their questions and 

their co-operation.  And I would also like to thank the officials 

for coming in this morning. 
 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 84 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 

Act, 1984 
 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 85 -- An Act respecting Fire Prevention and 

Certain Consequential Amendments resulting from the 

enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I don't want to interfere with the process 

but I would like leave to introduce guests. 
 

Leave granted. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to you and 

through you to the other members of the Assembly here to 

introduce two very special guests, Geno Prete and Georgio 

Piscitelli.  They are business people from other parts of 

Canada.  They're in a number of business ventures and I have 

met with them this morning. 
 

They're interested in enhancing the grain trade to Italy and 

we've made some contacts with the Canadian Wheat Board of 

their behalf.  I very much appreciate their interests in 

promoting business between Italy and Canada, and want to 

welcome them here and wish them all the best in their 

endeavours. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

(0945) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Community Services 

Vote 24 
 

The Chair: -- I will ask the Minister of Community Services to 

begin by introducing her officials. 
 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To my left I 

have deputy minister Frank Bogdasavich; to my right I have 

Ron Styles, associate deputy minister; behind me and to my 

right is Ron Davis, executive director of 



3142 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

financial assistance and policy services.  And directly behind 

me is Don Harazny, director of administration; and behind me 

and to my left is Keith Rogers, executive director of culture 

and recreation. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

welcome to the officials this morning.  I think I'd like to begin 

by saying that the prepared questions that were put together by 

our people that were sent on to the minister were answered in 

an exemplary fashion by the officials of the Community 

Services department.  And here, I think, is an example of what 

other ministers should have done. 

 

And I think that had they done that, we would have found that 

there would have been . . . this process in Estimates would have 

went a lot quicker with a lot of other departments.  They were 

done in a most professional manner, and I think they should set 

the standard for other departments.  I don't believe that there 

was any attempt to purposely misinterpret questions, as other 

departments we saw tried to.  I think it's incumbent upon other 

departments to look at how these questions were answered.  I 

think it's quite important to say that we think that the 

information provided was very, very well done. 

 

In other departments we found that when they didn't want to 

answer the question, they simply misinterpreted the question.  

And we could have accepted, I think, if they would have just 

stated they didn't want to answer the question and didn't want 

to provide the information, and we would pursue it here.  But 

when we find when we asked rather simple questions, I think, 

that when a department deliberately makes an effort to 

misinterpret the questions, we find ourselves in opposition, I 

think, being a little bit suspicious of their motives. 

 

So with all consideration to your department, Madam Minister, 

I think that the questions were done very well and we 

appreciate the answers very much. 

 

Having said that, Madam Minister, it appears that my job to ask 

questions here this morning will go rather quickly and maybe 

disappointingly easy for you.  There are a couple of areas of 

questioning that I wanted to pursue with respect to the 

questions.  Maybe they weren't answered in what we 

considered a complete fashion although they were done, for the 

most part, very well. 

 

Madam Minister, in question no. 1(a) you have said that the 

ministerial assistants don't have job descriptions.  I wonder if 

you would be so kind as to provide that for us. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, we will provide the employment 

history and description.  We'll provide you with the contracts 

for the minister's staff. 

 

I want to say that the staff that's working in my office are very 

well qualified and suited to their positions.  Two of the people 

came who had worked previously for SUMA (Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association).  One has an extensive 

educational background in environment.  And they all are 

experts in oral and written communication, and interpersonal 

skills are excellent. 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Moving on to the 

second question that I have is with respect to the arts and 

multiculturalism consultant.  Your department has down-sized 

in an effort to save money.  Could you explain to us how you 

can justify letting people go and, at the same time, hiring . . . 

setting out a new position of arts consultant. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  The Department of 

Community Services did down-size its staff after the budget.  

But since then we have taken on from the Family Foundation 

the cultural and recreation and heritage organizations or 

branch.  So there was a need, when that part of our department 

was expanded, to also take on more personnel who had 

expertise in that area. 

 

So the positions that you're talking about were positions that 

were required because of the expansion of the Department of 

Community Services into the arts and multicultural branch. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, I wonder if you would provide 

us with information with respect to the dismissal of Katherine 

Gagne and the hiring of Trudy Jackson.  We see in our 

questioning that Ms. Jackson does not appear to have any 

qualifications or employment background related to this 

position, and we'd appreciate if you'd explain this, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, there was a person, Katherine 

Gagne, was employed on contract with the department.  The 

contract was terminated as there was a right to do.  And the 

department did hire Trudy Jackson.  And her employment 

history is available to you and we'll be sending it over to you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The next one is 

with respect to the employment of Mr. John MacMillan.  He 

was replaced with a Mr. Carl Friske.  I wonder if you could 

provide us with the same information on those folks. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. MacMillan was on contract, and the 

contract was terminated.  Mr. Carl Friske is with the 

department.  And a release of the information regarding his 

background will have to be provided by Mr. Friske.  And he 

has not provided that, but we'll seek approval from him to do 

so. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Could you provide us with some information on 

Mr. John Edwards?  And apparently he has some additional 

duties and what are those involving? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes during the reorganization of the 

department after the budget Mr. John Edwards took on more 

duties and responsibilities and it was a reclassification of that 

position. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- We'd appreciate it if you would provide us with 

the details of that, please. 

 

In the secondments that you have listed did the department 

involved, namely Executive Council, Gaming Commission, 

and Social Services, reimburse the Department of Community 

Services for the salaries and 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3143 

expenses involved as the Provincial Auditor has recommended 

and the Minister of Finance has now stated to be government 

policy? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Regarding the secondments to the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Commission and Social Services, the 

department was reimbursed for those salaries at the date that 

the secondments started.  In regard to the Executive Council 

secondment, a policy was established by Executive Council on 

June 1, 1992, and on that date the reimbursement to the 

department started. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  In regard to the use of lease space, 

Madam Minister, would you undertake to have your staff to be 

a little bit more specific in regard to the purpose of this space, 

that the general category of office space doesn't really tell us 

what's going on.  We'd like you to indicate what particular parts 

the department are actually occupying that space. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I have that 

information here and I pass it over to the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- In your answers to your department's questions, 

there was a category of program travel.  I wonder if you could 

explain what program travel is. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Program travel, Mr. Chairman, is field 

work that department staff have to undertake in order to do 

their job.  It's something that's required because of the nature of 

the services that they provide.  And as I said, program travel 

and field work are interchangeable in their nature.  It's as 

simple as that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- In response to the question, you said that the 

communications budget can be obtained by adding together the 

specific codes identified through your communications 

department.  Will you provide us with the relevant spread sheet 

showing these codes? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, Mr. Chairman, 

we will get that information over to them.  We're collecting it at 

this point in time and we'll pass it over as soon as its available. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- You list a northern tour in your travel 

explanation.  Can you tell us the purpose and results of that 

tour?  I understand you're quite proud of the results in that area. 

 

(1000) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.  That is a 

good question and we are very proud of what's happening.  The 

northern tour took place in February.  We went up to some 

communities on the west side of northern Saskatchewan.  

There were four communities; we visited with their councils.  

The Minister of Social Services went with me.  We wanted to 

see firsthand the quality of life and some of the problems that 

were being experienced by those communities. 

 

It was a very useful exercise.  From that exercise, we 

determined that La Loche was indeed a community that needed 

some very special attention, and we have set up a 

program to deal specifically with La Loche.  We'll pass that 

information over to you, because I think it does set standards 

and a new way of doing things, and it's going to be very 

successful in La Loche. 

 

We also at that time determined that there was a need -- a great 

need, a pressing need -- for further water treatment services and 

other services related to renovations and building of new 

homes in those communities.  And as a consequence of that 

visit, we have established a priority for building and renovating 

homes from Sask Housing in those communities as well as 

providing the beginning of new water treatment services and 

sewer services. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  You also list a trip to visit the North 

West Credit Union in Buffalo Narrows.  We'd appreciate it if 

you could explain, Madam Minister, what the Minister of 

Community Services was meeting with a credit union . . . and 

the results of that meeting. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  This is a bit of an 

error in how it was communicated.  I never went up to Buffalo 

Narrows to visit the North West Credit Union, although they 

did come down to visit me. 

 

There is a concern.  The government in the past has allocated, I 

believe, $2 million to maintain the reserves in that credit union 

because it's in a very fragile position, and it's just in the 

embryonic stages, just beginning its business up North.  And 

they were concerned that we were going to be withdrawing too 

much of that money out of their credit union and they would 

not be able to survive. 

 

We have had negotiations with them and we have assured them 

that the government will maintain that deposit with their credit 

union in order to maintain its viability. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, with respect to the community 

builds program, just hours before the end of the fiscal year your 

department paid out $23 million in that program.  And we 

wonder . . . I think it's an area that a lot of people would 

suspect was used for political expediency.  And I wonder if you 

would care to comment on that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes I would, because I think that area is 

very important. 

 

First of all I will say that I'm well acquainted with the 

recreation facilities grant program that the former government 

had in effect, and I'm also well acquainted with the municipal 

capital fund that the former government did have in effect over 

two years ago.  And they unilaterally decided to demolish . . . 

or to eliminate those programs and turn them into the 

community builds program. 

 

A lot of communities had contracts under the recreation 

facilities program with the Government of Saskatchewan prior 

to July 1991.  And they had established a building program on 

projects on the basis of those contracts.  When the former 

government decided that their budget deficit was ballooning, 

they decided to change those contracts and spread them out 

over a four-year pay-out 



3144 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

instead of when they were obligated to do so, without 

consultation with the communities affected.  Their pay-out on a 

lot of their projects that they had undertaken was now going to 

be paid over a four-year spread instead of in the year and under 

the terms that they had thought they had negotiated with the 

provincial government. 

 

Because of the pressure on the finances of the province, it was 

determined that we would have to forgo the community builds 

program in this budget year.  But it was simply not fair for 

those communities to be left with the obligation of trying to 

finance projects that had been promised a pay-out in the last 

year from the provincial . . . from the former administration.  

So we decided yes, it was our obligation and it was a decent 

thing to do, to pay out before the end of this . . . the last fiscal 

year, all the obligations that the former government had made 

to the communities on the recreation facility program projects. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, you've indicated that one credit 

card has run up over $30,000 in expenses since November.  

Other departments provide us with a breakdown of those 

expenditures and we wonder if you would also provide us with 

the information on that particular card. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We would be pleased to provide it over it.  

When you look at that credit card and see the charges on it, it 

does of course stand out.  But it is a central department credit 

card where all the charges for travel are charged against.  So 

there is no one person in charge of it, and all the charges 

against it are here.  And we pass that information over to you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, your department has a rather 

huge quantity of audio-visual equipment listed, mostly 

attributed to use in presentations.  I'm rather astonished that 

your department would be engaged in such a high volume of 

presentations that you would need this kind of quantity of 

equipment.  And I expect that most of it was purchased under 

the previous government, so obviously it's a concern that 

crosses the various jurisdictions. 

 

And I'm wondering whether or not, as Minister of Community 

Services, you might take it upon yourself to meet with other 

departments in the government and perhaps establish some 

kind of a pool where the equipment can be signed out as 

needed, rather than have the . . . each department having this 

sort of equipment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, to the member opposite, we do have 

a lot of audio-visual equipment.  Most of it, or all of it, is over 

two years old.  And the reason we have accumulated this in the 

department is because of the amalgamation of the department 

over the last two or three years.  There have been changes, as 

you know.  The former administration started those changes 

and this year they were continued by taking on the culture and 

recreation branch.  And so because of that process, a lot of the 

audio-visual equipment has come along with it. 

 

The point that you make regarding the pool is a very good 

observation and we'll investigate that and see if it will work.  I 

will make note of it.  Although we have 13 different locations 

where this audio-visual equipment is used and 

it is there because it is convenient at certain strategic positions 

around the province, and the staff who are using it need it in a 

timely manner. 

 

So if we can find a way of facilitating that and providing more 

efficiency in the system, we certainly will pursue that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Question no. 32 

wasn't answered at all, Madam Minister.  We've been receiving 

spotty success with that request with other ministers.  Some of 

them have, however, been quite forthcoming.  The point of the 

request is simply that we can receive information about the 

various departments.  I don't think it's a way to try and heap 

criticism on any of the departments; simply so that we can 

understand how they work. 

 

As I said, other ministers have been forthcoming with that 

information and I wonder if you would commit to giving us 

similar information. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, we do make that commitment.  We 

think you have a valid point and we will endeavour to provide 

that service through the library. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  There's a couple of 

other questions that I would like to pursue now.  It's with 

respect to the ward system.  It's my understanding as a 

committee member that the recommendations will be coming 

forward some time later this fall, I believe perhaps for the next 

session. 

 

We have seen in recent days that the SUMA has suggested that 

the government take into consideration the fact that they may -- 

in fact they do -- want the ability to opt in or opt out of the 

ward system.  And we're wondering . . . I guess particularly 

opting into the ward system.  They want the opportunity to 

choose.  I think it's a reasonable request and I wonder if the 

minister would comment on that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, 

we established an all-party legislative committee last winter to 

hold hearings and to examine all aspects of bringing in a new 

ward system.  The recommendations of the committee were 

incorporated into the new Bill. 

 

The point of discussion that you are talking about is whether it 

should be mandatory or not for Saskatoon and Regina to 

transfer to a ward system.  Both the mayors of those cities have 

expressed the opinion that they thought the provision for 

mandatory obligation by the cities to transfer to wards was not, 

in their opinion, something that they had much concern with.  I 

understand what the president of SUMA is speaking about.  It's 

a matter of local autonomy and it's a principle more than 

anything else, and I respect that. 

 

We are not bringing the ward system in, as you know, in this 

sitting.  We are re-examining it.  If we can come to some 

compromise on those words we will endeavour to do so.  I 

respect the fact that local governments are autonomous and 

they at their own local level have the right to make those 

decisions. 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3145 

The other new part of that Bill that had to have further 

discussion came about as a request from the mayor of Prince 

Albert to look at multi-member wards, which was not part of 

the committee's recommendations.  And so in order to give 

communities, especially the cities, time to have a look at that 

and respond, we delayed bringing in that and we feel that next 

spring that Bill will be here after further consultation with the 

cities involved.  And we feel there is a compromise with the 

president of SUMA regarding the word "mandatory".  We'll 

look at it. 

 

It was put in there primarily because they had plebiscites in 

those two cities, and there was an overwhelming response by 

the citizens of Saskatoon and Regina to bring back the ward 

system, and it was based primarily on that plebiscite that we 

put the word mandatory in.  But if it is offensive we'll try to 

find better wording that would still maintain the principle of 

autonomy. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, as a member of that committee 

I recall the submissions that you speak of from the mayor of 

Regina and the mayor of Saskatoon.  While they may not have 

any objections to the mandatory provisions of it, there are 

certainly a lot of people that do.  As the current mayors they 

may not; future ones may. 

 

And that's why I think there's a concern on the part of SUMA 

that they would like the mandatory obligation within the Bill to 

be removed.  And I think that there were a number of people 

that provided submissions that would support that contention. 

 

And certainly in opposition it is our opinion that all 

jurisdictions should have the opportunity to operate within a 

ward system or without a ward system.  So that's certainly the 

position that we would have in that respect. 

 

The final series of questions that I have is with respect to the 

perceived electoral problems at Sled Lake.  I've spoken with 

you about this situation.  I wonder if you would care to provide 

us with an update on that, if there's any information that's 

available on it. 

 

I understand that it's a dispute between basically two parties in 

the community.  It's gone so far as going to court; there's been 

some court action.  One of the parties has incurred some 

substantial cost associated with it.  I understand your 

department has declined to help with the expenses of that legal 

action.  I'm wondering whether there's any consideration being 

given to reviewing that situation or reviewing that decision. 

 

(1015) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, first going back 

to the ward system.  I couldn't resist making one more 

comment on that.  It is ironic that now the members opposite 

are demanding that there should be an option.  When they took 

it away, there was no option.  And I'll remind the member 

opposite that there was a great outcry, especially from 

Saskatoon and Regina, when the former minister, without any 

consultation and with absolutely no pre-warning, simply said 

ward systems are gone. 

 

And now we are trying desperately to bring them back, 

and we appreciate your help on this but maybe if you think 

back in history, you'll understand where the problem is and 

maybe take some onus to taking responsibility for the problem 

that we have today.  This is not a debate, but I wanted to get 

that on the record. 

 

Secondly, to the issue of Sled Lake.  Yes, there is a problem.  

Our officials have been working with the people up there.  It is 

important that we maintain a sense of allowing the community 

as much as possible to sort the problems out.  We don't want to 

intervene to the point where we're seen to be taking sides. 

 

We are supportive.  We are consulting with them.  We will 

provide you with an update of the situation.  We believe it has 

to be resolved by the local people at the local level as long as 

they are doing so under the jurisdiction of The Urban 

Municipality Act, which we are governed by. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  We were getting 

along so well until that last little comment on the ward system, 

and I think I have to respond to that.  I think while there may 

have been a mistake made in the past -- I think lots of people 

recognize that that may have been one example of a mistake 

that was made -- I think that there's no reason to suggest that 

we have to take all of the blame for what's happened in the past 

with respect to that. 

 

I think that a new dawn is starting here with a new government, 

and I'm sure you and your department want to get off to a 

flying start.  And so I would encourage you to accept, I would 

encourage you to accept the recommendations that SUMA is 

putting forward in that area. 

 

I now would like to, I guess, take the opportunity to thank your 

officials for coming in this morning and helping with the 

questions.  Once again, a very, very excellent presentation that 

you people have put forward, and we appreciate your help. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the comments 

and the opinions of the members opposite.  We do look 

forward to co-operating with them and providing them 

whatever information we can provide them in the future as 

well. 

 

And I want to also thank the officials from our department.  

You made comments about the excellent services that they do 

provide.  They are very professional.  They're a wonderful 

group of people, very expert in their field, and this department 

is very fortunate to have them. 

 

So I appreciate your comments about the department and, on 

behalf of them, I thank you. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 34 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 24 agreed to. 

 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Community Services 



3146 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

Nil vote. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Community Services 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 24 

 

Items 1 to 27 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 24 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Community Services 

Vote 66 

 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Community Services 

Vote 162 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 162 agreed to. 
 

(1030) 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Community Services 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 24 
 

Items 1 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 
 

Vote 24 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Urban Affairs 

Vote 162 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 

Vote 162 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 51 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 

Vote 51 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

Vote 22 
 

Item 1 
 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We had a couple of 

questions we wanted to deal with on the Municipal Board. We 

had received a complaint in our office that . . . 

The Chair: -- Excuse me just for a moment, if I may, as the 

officials are leaving, on behalf of the Assembly to thank the 

officials for their assistance in the Estimates thus far.  Sorry to 

interrupt you, the hon. member for Kindersley. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We have received a 

complaint in our office with respect to some of the actions of 

the Saskatchewan Municipal Board members.  And it's with 

respect to an allegation of board members operating a 

stained-glass business out of the offices of the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board. 

 

And we're wondering if you could provide us with any 

indication if you're aware of it or not.  And we certainly don't 

think it's an appropriate place to be carrying on any kind of 

business other than the business of the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board. 

 

I wonder if you are aware of any of the allegations and whether 

they've come to your attention. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- If what you said was true, of course we 

would be very concerned because it would be inappropriate.  

But what you have heard and what you have simply said is not 

true.  There is one person who is employed by the Municipal 

Board who does stained glass as a hobby.  But that person does 

not run the business out of the Municipal Board offices.  That 

person does the work of the Municipal Board at the times when 

that person's there. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well what we say is indeed true.  Whether the 

allegations are true, I don't know.  That's why I'm asking you.  

We had received a request to ask some questions about this.  

It's suggesting that a couple of board members are essentially 

carrying on a business within the Municipal Board offices. 

Essentially that was the basis of the complaint, that they were 

using the telephone, fax machine, things of that nature to 

conduct ongoing affairs of a business. 

 

And I think it's incumbent upon yourself to look into that 

complaint and allegations to see if there's any basis for those 

allegations.  We would certainly agree with you that it's 

inappropriate use of the facilities available, and I would 

appreciate your commitment to the Assembly that you will 

provide us with information relative to this to see if there is any 

basis for the allegations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, we will investigate that complaint, and we will report 

back to the member opposite of the facts that we have been 

able to determine regarding the nature of which you're speaking 

about. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Vote 22 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 22 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3147 

Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 22 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 22 

 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 22 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like thank the 

members opposite for their co-operation, and I would like to 

thank the official, Mr. Graham McNamee, who is the chair of 

the . . . I'm afraid I didn't introduce him when we began.  Mr. 

Graham McNamee is the chairman of the Municipal Board and 

I would like to thank him for his presence here today. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

thank you to yourself and your officials for coming in this 

morning and dealing with these matters in a very good fashion.  

Thank you. 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair joins with the minister and the critic 

in thanking the official for his assistance, as well as the 

minister for introducing him before we thanked him. 

 

(1045) 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Natural Resources 

Vote 26 

 

The Chair: -- Will the minister please introduce his officials to 

the members of the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With 

me today I have Douglas Cressman who is the deputy minister; 

Alan Appleby, assistant deputy minister; Dick Bailey, the 

assistant deputy minister.  At the back of the room I have Ross 

MacLennan, executive director of the operations branch; Bill 

Marr, director of management services branch; Don MacAulay, 

director of parks branch; Hugh Hunt, director of wildlife; and 

Shelleen Vandermey, director of contract services. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  And I 

too would like to welcome the officials here.  And I say to the 

minister right off the bat that the Estimates as far as Natural 

Resources are concerned, I'm not sure that we will finish this 

morning.  But I can say to the minister, I think quite frankly, 

that he can kind of relax and enjoy the morning as much as any 

minister will. 

 

And that is simply because although there are a couple of 

contentious issues, my main interest in Natural Resources is the 

interest in natural resources.  And what I plan to do this 

morning is get some answers from you, but then spend some 

time in a general discussion of some of the issues.  So it's not 

that it's going to be particularly confrontational, I do not 

expect. 

To begin with, Mr. Minister, you received 34, to be precise, 

global questions.  And I just want to . . . I don't intend to spend 

any time on that at all.  I just want your commitment that those 

34 questions have been answered and that they have been 

answered fully in so far as you're capable of doing.  Would you 

confirm that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- To the best of my knowledge, Mr. 

Chairman, we have answered all the questions as fully as we 

could. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you then, Mr. Minister.  What I 

propose to do is not spend too much time on clause 1 as is 

normally done, but rather go through and instead of having a 

general global discussion first, we are going to be quite specific 

this morning.  And as we go through on a line-by-line basis we 

will discuss those issues on that particular line. 

 

The question that I have first, Mr. Chairman, deals with the 

precise question on line 4.  So perhaps what we should do is 

just go through clause 1 and then we'll pick it up there. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Item 2 agreed to. 

 

Item 3 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, this particular line begs a 

particular question because I notice that under 

communications, on personal services, the person years in 

'91-92 were 7, and '92-93 the estimated is 7.4.  That's less than 

a half-person year more, yet the amount spent on personal 

services is two hundred and twenty-two and a half million 

dollars -- thousand, pardon me -- as opposed to two hundred 

and eighty-two and a half. 

 

Why would that big difference be there as opposed to only a 

half-person year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- On the Estimates book from as 

near as I can tell, it's the same number of person years -- 7.4 

and 7.4. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- All right, Mr. Minister.  I have a photocopy of 

that and probably the 7.4 then has been omitted on that one.  

Well I guess it still begs the same question.  If it's 7.4 in each 

case, we're still looking at approximately, well precisely 

$60,000 less. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Actually, although the number of 

positions is the same, some of those positions are vacant.  And 

we intend to hold them vacant through the year to keep the cost 

down. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- How many of those positions would be 

vacant? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- It's equivalent to about a person 

and a half, although it will work out . . . some people will be 

coming in and leaving, so it's a matter of holding those 

vacancies at different times of the year open.  But it amounts to 

about a person and a half. 



3148 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

Item 3 agreed to. 

 

Item 4 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

under Parks we notice something similar that in '91-92 we had 

20 person-years as opposed to 19 now.  However the amount of 

money budgeted for Parks is $79,000 less.  Could you explain 

that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Basically what happened there is 

we deleted two people in that branch but we transferred one in.  

So one salary is gone completely. The other one, there's a 

different level of salary and that would probably make up the 

difference. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So then, Mr. Minister, it's a combination of 

one getting more, one getting less.  And the difference is still 

$79,000. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's right.  We cut one position 

completely.  The other one we cut and then we transferred 

someone else in, what was at a lower rate, so that's why the . . . 

that gets the 79,000. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What effect, Mr. Minister, is this going to 

have on the Parks' operations in terms of quality service and so 

on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Hopefully have very minimum 

effect on the service.  It was a planning position.  And since 

we're spending less money on our capital budget, we had less 

need to do planning in those facilities. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

during this session we have passed legislation that is in effect 

going to give Saskoil, a major corporation as was indicated, the 

power to attract more capital and to be more competitive in its 

production of and research in gas and oil development. 

 

I'm wondering if you have any plans, as a natural resource to be 

developed, to provide financial assistance or some kind of 

incentive programs that would be equally as good for the 

smaller, independent operators in the province to kick start to 

their industry and to get them back on track into the exploration 

and development of the petroleum and natural gas industry. 

 

There are also a couple of major players internationally in the 

petroleum and gas industry that still are active in the province 

and of course some program that would kick start the industry 

should also include them, I should think.  And I'm just 

wondering if you have any plans in that direction at the present 

time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, gas and oil doesn't 

fall under my department.  It falls under the Department of 

Mines and Energy.  I can attempt to get some information from 

that department and forward it to you.  I wouldn't want to make 

a statement on behalf of my colleague in that area. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I certainly will also 

be pursuing this matter with the Minister of Energy 

and Mines. 

 

But when I saw the title, Natural Resources, I presumed that 

gas and oil fell into the category and didn't want to take any 

chances on missing the opportunity to ensure you and your 

cabinet and your colleagues right across the board that there is 

a tremendous amount of concern about this particular natural 

resource and the lack of incentive that seems to be out there to 

get it going. 

 

And so we want to be sure that every base is covered in this 

direction because we do find this is an essential part of our 

economy, not only so much for the whole province but more 

particularly for myself and my constituency, and it's very 

important down there that we keep this part going as well as 

those things like deer hunting and those other natural resource 

things like our parks and those kinds of things.  We have to 

cover all the bases here.  And there's a lot of concern in that 

area, so I hope you will pass that on for me. 

 

Item 4 agreed to. 

 

Item 5 agreed to. 

 

Item 6 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, we all know that wildlife in 

Saskatchewan is an integral part of our province and our way 

of life and that there's many, many millions, over a hundred 

millions of dollars that comes into the province as a result of 

wildlife.  And most of our residents in one way or another 

participate within our wildlife programs -- 85 per cent or 

whatever, I think your booklet indicated.  So it has a dramatic 

effect. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, was one of the reasons why we were 

heading for a confrontation in terms . . . as far as the critical 

wildlife habitat amendment Act was concerned.  And we 

averted that situation and I complimented you for that the other 

day. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, I would like an update from you, if you 

could, in so far as I recognize that over the last number of years 

wildlife in this province has really mushroomed -- good 

management skills and so on.  But obviously Mother Nature 

had an important part to play here with the tremendously mild 

winters that we have had in Saskatchewan over a long period of 

time. 
 

And I'm just wondering now if you could -- for the benefit of 

the viewers and so on -- explain to us where the population of 

wildlife . . . and when I say population of wildlife, I'm referring 

to the more common categories like white tail, mule deer, 

antelope, and . . . basically we'll start with those three.  Where 

are they at right now in terms of population? 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Just a few numbers to give you 

some idea of where we're at.  The white tail population is at 

about 250,000 now.  That's down from 500,000 in the '50s, 

largely attributable to loss of habitat over that period of time.  

Mule deer are at about 70,000.  I think the low for mule deer 

was as low as 5,000, so that is very high.  Antelope, we are 

now at . . . or over 30,000.  That's the highest it's been in this 

century, so those populations are 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3149 

very high. 

 

I guess with those populations of those game animals, we are . . 

. try to attempt to manage them.  They impact on farmers.  You 

can only have so much wildlife that is feasible in regards to the 

amount of habitat you have that will sustain them.  So we have 

to try to maintain our populations so that they fit within the 

habitat.  And too much populations . . . too large populations 

can create problems such as disease and so on. 

 

We find that our tools for managing game populations is 

hunting seasons, and we're not all that successful at being able 

to manage the populations.  What we find is that Mother 

Nature is a much better manager.  And when you get warm 

winters, the populations tend to explode on you and you have a 

very hard time to control it just through our management 

techniques.  And if you get some hard winters come along, and 

then Mother Nature brings things back into balance. 

 

So we want to . . . we constantly monitor and try to keep the 

populations up.  We don't want them too high though because, 

you know, they outgrow their habitat.  So that's part of our plan 

is to increase habitat and then to keep the animals in balance 

with the habitat. 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I notice that you 

did say that we had a great increase in the population and 

therefore it was going to have impact on farmers.  Yet when we 

come down to point 13 we will see where your department is 

not supporting the farmers that are bearing the brunt of this 

increase in population. 

 

White tail, you say, is up to 250,000.  From what was the low?  

You indicated what the high was in the '50s of 500,000.  And 

although it's coming up, you're telling me now that because of 

the loss of habitat, you're saying now that you would not 

anticipate that that population will ever get back up to 500,000; 

is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think with the white tail, it has 

been a fairly downward trend from 500,000 to 250 although we 

were down as low as 200 and bounced back to 250,000.  But's 

it a general down-trend of population.  It always look like a lot 

more deer, but that's because of the loss of habitat.  But when 

you confine them to a small area, then it looks like a huge 

increase in population but in reality it's fairly constant. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What about in the North, Mr. Minister?  Does 

that apply to the northern bush area as well, or are we talking 

primarily in the southern farming areas? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- What we're look at in the North 

now is relatively high densities for that area although they tend 

to be a very low density.  It's a large area, and you have a low 

density of wild life.  That's the natural . . . habitat dictates that 

that's what happens up there.  Right now we have high 

populations for that area although it's still a very sparse 

population. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, could you give me an idea of 

how much money that you are taking in now in terms of 

selling licences, and what is your licence structure?  In other 

words, what are you doing, for example, to see . . . 

 

And I know one of the problems that you're experiencing, for 

example with antelope; you're telling me now that we have 

30,000 antelope in this province.  And last year I can attest to 

that during the hunting season.  I mean antelope, it was just a 

matter of picking out the biggest one that you could find, at 

least the first week of the hunting season.  My hunting 

colleagues on my side who are less astute in their timing went 

the following week after the blizzard, and there wasn't an 

antelope to be found in south-western Saskatchewan; they all 

went to Manitoba, pardon me, to Montana and came back after 

the hunting season was over. 

 

But what are you doing in terms of management and to . . . I 

suppose the term is to entice people to become more active in 

hunting.  By lowering the licence fees or by perhaps giving a 

non-trophy licence along with a trophy licence, this kind of 

thing?  Could you give me your thoughts on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We have done a number of things.  

I guess first of all the total numbers, our budget for total game 

licence fees is $5.65 million.  We did some things.  We reduced 

the fee for non-trophy animals.  We took antelope off the big 

game draw so that you can go in and just buy a tag.  We 

changed some season structures which allow hunters to hunt 

several animals at the same time or several different species at 

the same time which should increase the take.  And one thing 

we introduced last year was the youth licence where youth 

could get a deal on a licence, and that I think got a lot of our 

young people in the field hunting. 

 

Just as to what you could pass on to your colleagues, that 

hunters who don't get things always have excuses why they 

don't get them. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- That's a point well made, Mr. Minister.  Mr. 

Chairman, Mr. Minister, I'm glad that you made that 

second-last comment which dealt about the enticing . . . or the 

special deal for youth because that's the next issue I wanted to 

bring up and that is the hunter . . . firearm safety, hunter 

education program that was begun back in 1960.  And I noticed 

here that there have been 125 students that have gone through 

that hunter safety program.  And I know as a previous 

instructor on that program that it's very, very vital to have that 

type of training for our young people, not just so that they get 

the fundamentals of what a firearm and where you're pointing it 

and so on and so forth, but the respect for firearms that these 

children, well these youths, would then develop and continue 

on in their later life.  Because we are well aware of the lobby 

against firearms and so on that exists in this country -- and not 

without reason when we think of some of the episodes that are 

happening. 

 

So what I want to do, Mr. Minister, is first of all recognize that 

firearm accidents . . . we had 106 in 1960 and only 19 last year 

which I think is a credit to the program itself.  Now you may 

have some more up-to-date information than I have on this, but 

what I'm trying to do here, Mr. Minister, is to suggest to you 

and encourage you not only to continue with this program but 

to enhance it in 



3150 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

whatever way that you can and also to make the public aware, 

more aware let's say -- not just the hunting fraternity, but the 

public at large -- aware that you're taking this thing very, very 

seriously and that we have a good program in place and that it 

is having tremendously positive results. 

 

So you may want to respond, Mr. Minister, but it's just a word 

of encouragement from me to you to continue that program and 

perhaps even enhance it.  So if you want to respond, that's fine, 

and then my member from Maple Creek will have a few 

questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, the member opposite is 

absolutely right; the program is excellent.  It's a program that's 

won international awards from the National Rifle Association a 

few years ago.  It's run entirely by volunteers such as yourself, 

and it does an excellent job.  And I think we need to expand it 

and to improve our hunters' safety and their attitudes when 

they're in the field.  And I think it's doing a great job and we 

intend to continue it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

was speaking to some people from the wildlife federation who 

expressed to me some concern that they a few years ago also 

had lobbied the government to increase the licence fees in the 

province for the purpose of having those additional monies 

channelled towards assistance to farmers and ranchers, 

property owners who suffered damage from wildlife. 

 

The people that have spoken to me said that somehow this 

money has now been channelled into general revenues and that 

they are not directly finding their way for the purpose that they 

were intended.  I wonder if you can confirm that that in fact is 

what is happening, and if you could commit to the wildlife 

federation that this inequity will be corrected. 

 

I also will ask another question, if you don't mind me putting 

two together, so that we can save a little time on this.  I 

understand in conjunction with youth hunting, that the age 

limits have been changed from 12 years to 16 years for young 

people that are going to be allowed -- now I could be wrong on 

this so you can correct me. 

 

If this in fact is true, I wonder if that might be reconsidered.  

Because I think under the proper supervision and with these 

new programs that my colleague has just outlined, they have 

certainly proven to be capable young hunters who are properly 

trained and enjoying getting out with their dads and getting 

some of this male bonding that is so important in parenting 

these days when folks just don't seem to have enough time to 

spend with their families. 

 

So I wonder if you could reconsider that program or update us 

on how it's worked anyway. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, just in response to 

the first question.  The money . . . 30 per cent of game licence 

fees go into a separate fund called the fish and wildlife 

development fund.  It was never originally intended to 

compensate farmers.  The fund was intended to enhance habitat 

for fish and wildlife, and most of the wildlife money goes into 

purchasing habitat land and the 

fisheries money goes into programs to enhance fisheries. 

 

Now we have used portions of that money -- and there are 

some statutory limits as to how much can be used -- we have 

been using some of that money in the department.  And I guess 

when it comes to tough times and when those fish enhancement 

programs, for example, are set up, they need ongoing work to 

keep them up and running.  And it doesn't make much sense for 

us to cut our budget in the department and let the programs 

collapse that we've already got in place to use the money to do 

new programs. 

 

But certainly we have had concern expressed by some of the 

wildlife federation and particularly the fisheries people who are 

concerned that not enough of that fund is going directly into 

habitat formation for which it was intended. 

 

I think something that . . . you know, the suggestion is that 

there is certainly a possibility that we should be looking at 

some of it for damage to farmers because that is really the main 

source of habitat for much of our wildlife. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  If you could 

comment on the age thing after I ask you . . . follow up on your 

answer to the compensation and the 30 per cent that's going to 

the fish development. 

 

One of the complaints that I had in fact directly concerned that 

30 per cent that's going to development of fisheries.  And the 

complaint went as follows, that that money seems all to be 

going to the Qu'Appelle Valley fishery.  I don't even know 

where this is, but apparently there's a fishery in the Qu'Appelle 

Valley that's hatching eggs, and the money's going into that. 

 

The complaint I got was that that institution was in effect 

before this program came about and should not have qualified 

for the assistance that's going there.  Perhaps you could 

research that and get an answer for those folks as to why 

money would be going there when they thought it should be 

going some other places for new development and expansion of 

that particular part of the industry. 

 

The compensation to farmers issue is extremely important, and 

I think that if in the end result we are going to have habitat for 

wildlife in the true sense preserved, this is the key area. The 

most critical area of all of the province of all of the needs for 

wildlife preservation is the ability to compensate where 

excessive damages occur. 

 

If you don't solve that problem, we have a natural build-up of 

hostility towards wildlife by property owners, and they will 

continue to fill in sloughs.  They will continue to drain out 

areas.  They will do that simply to get rid of the problem that 

they feel that they have with these excessive damages. 

 

If they are paid for the damage and they are relieved of that 

problem, a lot of property owners love wildlife more than the 

people that try to protect them in any other way.  And they 

would love to keep them, but they just can't afford the financial 

losses that keep going.  And so gradually that animosity 

towards those animals and wildlife starts to build up, and they 

start to do just 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3151 

anything they can to get rid of them or destroy them. 

 

So I think that's critical.  You have to work on that.  And I want 

to pass that message on.  But I want a comment upon the ages 

and that 30 per cent problem. 

 

(1115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- In response to the age of hunters, 

that hasn't changed.  Hunters, youngsters of 12 years of age 

will still be allowed to hunt under supervision.  There have 

been some changes of age limits in regard to federal 

regulations and gun law, but that does not affect our hunting 

age here in Saskatchewan. 

 

As regards to the money from the fisheries, there's about 

585,000 that goes into fisheries programs; 205,000 of that goes 

into the provincial fish hatchery at Echo Lake which provides 

fish for lakes all across the province; and another 45,000 goes 

into a wall-eye nursery at Edenwold.  So that's the numbers on 

those. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

was wondering about the big game season in . . . there's a slug 

zone, a slug-archery-musket zone around the city of Moose 

Jaw and extends over here to Regina.  I believe it's still -- is it 

20 still on the designation? 

 

I live in that zone, and I think your officials are familiar with 

my query probably that we have an abundance of white tail 

deer.  I know requests have been made in the past to try 

something, whether we extend seasons or we up the bag limits 

or do something rather than turn it back into a rifle zone, which 

doesn't seem to wash with most of the landowners.  But we're 

sort of . . . they're just piling up and it's becoming to be a real 

problem with some of us.  So do you have any comments on 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, the slug zone I think is done 

mainly as a safety factor.  We have looked at several ways to 

reduce herds in problem areas.  One of the things that we are 

doing is depredation hunts.  We're trying to run those in 

conjunction with the regular hunting seasons this year. 

 

So if you know you have particular problems in your area, we 

can try to work with you to see if we can help reduce the 

populations by use of depredation hunts or maybe some of the 

other things that we're doing that I mentioned earlier will help 

to get more people out and reduce the populations. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  That suggestion 

has been made before and I guess one of the problems I have 

with it is that the connotation of a depredation hunt doesn't go 

down well with the 35,000 urbanites that live next door to us in 

Moose Jaw.  It's a term that doesn't engender itself to good 

wildlife management in my view. 

 

I think in talking to a lot of landowners and sportsmen who do 

like to hunt in that area -- and there are a lot of bow hunters 

because of its proximity to the urban areas and a lot of 

primitive weapons and that type of thing -- that if we probably 

try a longer season might be a better answer than trying to 

designate part of that zone as being 

over-populated and try and get a permit and round people up 

and go in there and sort of do a mass killing.  Most of the 

people that do hunt in there, because it's on foot, it's roads and 

trails only, a lot of people have long-established relationships 

with landowners in order to gain access and that type of thing, 

that you tend to find probably more trophy hunters in there than 

you would anywhere else. 

 

I think if more people had the opportunity to access that herd 

we might control it rather than getting into this other area.  I 

just don't think that . . . for instance I, as the MLA for Thunder 

Creek who's at times got 200 of these things in my alfalfa field, 

want to be part of a depredation hunt, thank you very much, 

and I don't think you would either.  Because that just doesn't 

have savoury connotations to a lot of my friends in Moose Jaw.  

So I prefer we try something else before we get to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes the depredation hunts we're 

trying to do this year is to do them in hunting season and 

certainly try to be sure that no game gets wasted and so on.  

Now other years we've tried them later on in the year and 

you're right, the public outcry is pretty great and we don't want 

to resort to depredation hunts unless it's an emergency. 

 

As to the length of the seasons in that zone, there's a primitive 

weapon season open from Labour Day to the end of October.  

The regular season opens again on November, I think, 15 to 

December 7.  So basically for the whole fall other than two 

weeks, there is a season in that area.  So we are extending it as 

much as we can to try to  . . . And we're certainly willing to 

work with you.  If you have any other suggestions as to how 

we can help to control the population, we're certainly interested 

in them. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My question 

deals with wildlife preservation in and around our parks.  I'm 

thinking particularly of the Moose Mountain park which I 

believe, Mr. Minister, has probably contacted you on this -- the 

Moose Mountain water resource management group.  Their 

interest is in having a wildlife preserve made out of the park to 

relieve some of the hunting pressure that does take place within 

that park, to maintain a stable wildlife population within that 

area.  And I'm just wondering if you've given -- you and your 

department -- have given any consideration to doing this. 

 

I realize that there would be some other things that would be 

affected.  You would have to perhaps have some buffer zones 

around it for the wildlife.  You would have to do some things 

within the park system to maintain the environment for the 

wildlife.  At the present time I believe that there's also cattle 

grazed on the west side of that park in a good portion of it.  

And in actual fact, this grazing keeps some of the areas cleared 

off so that grasses do develop and grow, which allow the 

wildlife to live in those areas and to feed in those areas. 

 

But at times, certain parts of the year particularly, there is a 

significant amount of pressure, hunting pressure, within those 

parks and perhaps a preserve should be considered to relieve 

some of that pressure.  Has your department given any 

consideration to that, Mr. Minister? 



3152 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  We've just 

completed a wildlife . . . not a wildlife, a vegetation survey of 

that park.   And part of the discussions there rose the thought, 

the possibility, of a game preserve within the park.  So that 

certainly has been discussed.  And there are ongoing 

discussions with the wildlife federation and the aboriginals in 

the area.  So it is something that is under consideration.  And 

again, we appreciate any input from the member that would 

help us to arrive at some conclusion there. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm 

pleased to hear that there is some discussion going on.  There's 

one other stakeholder in the group though that needs to have 

some consideration.  And that is those farmers around the area 

who could be impacted by an increase in that wildlife 

population.  But I think it's a consideration that should be given 

some due . . . Take a serious look at it and just see what can be 

done.  Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Item 6 agreed to. 

 

Item 7 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

want to talk a little bit about the fisheries now, the reports that 

one gets back from many of the people who are going up north.  

Now I noticed that, for example, for the last eight or nine years 

there's been a steady decline, a downward trend in terms of the 

number of fishing licences that have been sold. 

 

And I'm just wondering . . . I realize that last year we sold a 

certain number -- I think 165,000 licences were sold last year 

which is the same as was sold this year, I understand.  So 

whether that downward trend has bottomed out that we've 

levelled off . . . But I'm wondering what reason you could give 

why this downward trend has been in place? 

 

And I just want to make the comment that when I hear people 

coming back from the North for example -- Dor Lake is a 

good example -- the fishing has been less than spectacular this 

year.  And I know that there's a dramatic lowering of the level 

of water in that lake.  But I know also, when I talk to some of 

the residents and some of the businesses in La Ronge, for all 

intents and purposes, they're telling me that recreational fishing 

is pretty well finished. 

 

I mean it used to be that when you pulled into La Ronge, 

there's that creek flowing through.  I have stopped there in 

years past, many years past, dropped in a line and caught my 

supper there.  And that's a thing of the past. 

 

So could you comment, Mr. Minister, what you perceive the 

current condition and perhaps the future trends for recreational 

fishing in this province?  And we'll get into the commercial 

later on.  But address the issues of the licences and the levelling 

off and the amount of recreational fish available. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, I think with regards to the 

falling of licences, we're hoping that it has levelled off. 

There may be a number of things that could influence that.  I 

think the recession is on.  I think we've seen that across the 

board.  People have a little less money to spend and are not 

travelling as far and so on.  Certainly fishing quality has 

dropped in terms of a lot of the lakes. 

 

I think real access into the North really only began in the '50s 

and '60s and for a period of time there was excellent 

trophy-type fishing in a lot of the lakes.  But as time went on 

and fishing pressure builds up, the populations drop.  Some of 

the . . . particularly the sort of trophy fish that you can catch, 

drops.  And you see people flying back farther into the North to 

get to some of the real good, quality fishing. 

 

I think we still have . . . it's still a great resource.  We still have 

great fishing up there.  And we have, you know, a great 

recreational area, not only with the fish but just the beauty of 

the area and so on.  And I think it's something we need to 

market. 

 

But we also have to try to maintain balances of fish populations 

in the lake.  We don't believe the lower lake levels are having 

any significant impact, although the drought in the last few 

years certainly has lowered the level of many lakes and may be 

having some effect on fish populations. 

 

(1130) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well certainly lower water levels affect the 

way streams flow and fish moving and so on, so that impact 

would be there.  I'm not suggesting, Mr. Minister, that we're at 

the stage where the codfish are in Newfoundland and so on, 

that we have to do something dramatic as that.  But the quality 

of fishing for recreational fishermen, I would suggest to you, is 

definitely down. 

 

Now at one point in your annual report you suggest that you 

have pretty well sold 165,000 fishing licences last year . . . no, 

this year, because it's a '91-92 annual report that I'm holding 

here -- 164,938 angling licences were sold.  Then prior to that 

on page 5, the recreational fishing industry involves more than 

200 anglers.  Now I don't know if you're telling me that there's 

35,000 that are fishing without . . . unless it's under 16 years of 

age or whatever, or maybe seniors are also those that might be 

involved. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, aside from that, the point that I'm wanting to 

make -- and I'm going to get into that age-old argument -- is it 

the commercial fishermen or is it the recreational fishermen?  

But you say now that recreational fishing contributes $200 

million annual in economic activity, and they take 4 million 

kilograms of fish.  The recreational folks take 4 million 

kilograms of fish.  The commercial industry, fishing industry, 

takes 3 million kilograms of fish. 

 

So what you're saying by that is that the commercial fishing 

industry actually takes out fewer pounds of fish than does the 

recreational angler, and that it adds $5 million to the primary 

producer.  I'd be interested for comparison purposes if you'd be 

able to tell me what the economic spin-off . . . so that we have 

a comparable 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3153 

figure because the $200 million annual from recreational is not 

just your fishing licences but the whole thing.  And the $5 

million is just to the primary producer himself. 

 

What would be a corresponding figure, in your estimation, as 

far as economic spin-off activity on the commercial? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, I think . . . we don't have . . . 

there are no studies done that we can come up with any 

concrete numbers although we think the spin-off would be 

probably three or four times.  So the 5 million would be 

multiplied by three or four.  That's the closest estimate that we 

could come to. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I suspected that, Mr. Minister, but most 

economic activity spin-offs that I'm aware of are in the range of 

six, seven, eight, so there's a very low economic spin-off on the 

commercial fishing, other than to the primary producers. 

 

Mr. Minister, what can we do . . . Like white fish that are 

caught up North, they usually wind up getting put on a truck.  

They're gutted and beheaded probably by the fishermen 

themselves, but very often -- perhaps not even that -- they wind 

up in Manitoba and they wind up in Chicago. 

 

What is the impediment to having more of the value added 

activity being done in Saskatchewan to perhaps aid that 

primary producer, the fisherman, and allowing him to do some 

of this?  Now I know that there have been co-ops and so on.  

There have been attempts at this in the past.  Are you thinking 

of anything along this line to keep more of the value added in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The fish business is a very tough, 

competitive business.  We found the best return is selling into 

very tough markets in the States and so on, and the economies 

of scale to the plant in Winnipeg make it tough to compete.  

We have I think about eight dealers who process locally and 

sell in Saskatchewan.  And we certainly are looking at 

proposals all the time. 

 

I think the northern people are very interested in developing 

something to further process the fish and I think the 

opportunities that are probably the best are some niche market 

that we can produce some distinctive Saskatchewan product 

that we'll be able to market.  Because in competing with the 

huge companies and the distance we are from markets, fish 

processing on the sort of scale that we have here is a very, very 

tough and competitive business. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question 

regarding the marina at Sask Landing and I was wondering 

whether you could give me an update about that. 

 

I notice that there were . . . New Careers were building floats 

out there and I'm not sure where they were going to be placed.  

And they weren't at the Sask Landing Park; they were in a little 

town called Stewart Valley where New Careers have a 

location.  And I'm not sure whether they were building them 

for the Sask Landing Park or just where. 

Would that be a project that you would be anticipating doing 

this winter?  If so, I'd like to know about it, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The project at Sask Landing is a 

marina project.  But where it's at is basically the basin has been 

dug out and left there.  This is a project that we're certainly 

excited about in terms of utilizing the resource we have at 

Diefenbaker Lake and getting a harbour at either end and 

would really enhance the sailing possibilities and so on of the 

lake. 

 

Right now we just don't have money in the budget.  We have 

those New Careers projects that are probably not related to this.  

We're working with the local people now to try to determine 

the least cost way that we can sort of stabilize and be able to 

make use of the basin that's already there and keep the options 

open for future development, which we certainly would like to 

do when we have money available. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, it probably 

would be a step in the right direction if some of those floats . . . 

There's one area where the boat launch is that people have an 

opportunity to tie up their boats and that sort of thing.  But in 

the park where people have their overnight camping and where 

the marina dugout is and in the daytime pass park at the west 

side, at none of those locations do they have a place to tie up 

their boats. 

 

If these options were made available to the people in the area, 

I'm sure that there would be some innovative ways of making 

available an opportunity to tie up boats.  Now what they do is 

they just get them, tie them to a branch, and let them float 

there, and they walk up in the mud.  And this is a new lake and 

you have to understand that they sink in the mud this far.  That 

sort of thing is just not conducive to any kind of long-term 

sailing or any of those kinds of things. 

 

If even temporary locations were made so that until the money 

is available, we could sure use some of that there.  I think even 

people from the area would perhaps contribute if that was an 

option that would be available if they could do that.  And I 

know that a permanent structure like you have at Outlook . . . 

or Elbow, I should say, is very expensive.  And I think there 

could probably be cheaper ways of doing it if it could only be 

done in an innovative way until the marina is built. 

 

When you get the marina built, it still won't solve the problem 

in those other two locations where they have the swimming 

area and beach area and where they have the surfing, wind 

surfing.  It won't help in those areas because they still have to 

go five or six miles to get to where the marina would be.  So it 

would be an important part in addition to the kinds of things 

that are there. 

 

The reason I say it, is that the volume of people who use it 

locally could be extremely enhanced because of that 

opportunity.  And I think that the local people would be 

interested in getting involved with that sort of thing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, we certainly appreciate the 

suggestions.  And that's basically what we've been talking 

about with the local people, some way to do a low 



3154 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

cost way to get this thing operational as quickly as we can.  

And I think the local people there are very enthusiastic about it.  

They've been working very hard raising money and so on.  And 

we wish we had more money to help.  But certainly that's the 

sort of thing that we will be working with them to do 

something to get it operational and get at least some place to tie 

up their boats, and in the future try to complete the project. 

 

Item 7 agreed to. 

 

Item 8 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

forestry is big business in Saskatchewan.  I think your own 

information tells us that there's a quarter of a billion dollars 

essentially that rolls into the economy of Saskatchewan 

through the forestry program. 

 

And I'm only vaguely, I guess, familiar because of my role in 

the previous four or five years on the resource caucus.  But I 

know from the many, many meetings that we have held, that a 

topic that continually came up was the management of our 

forest reserves that are fast becoming depleted, perhaps faster 

than we're using them.  And of course I know that there's a 

whole host of reasons and pressures on governments to 

facilitate that simply because so many people are making their 

living off of those products. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Minister, could you give us an update in 

generalized term -- whether it's Weyerhaeuser, whether it's 

Meadow Lake, whether it's Carrot River, wherever -- the 

FMLAs (Forest Management Licence Agreement) and so on 

that you're working with as a management tool, what in your 

opinion is the situation in the near future in so far as being able 

to supply the trees, the lumber that are going to be necessary to 

maintain the status quo?  In other words, to maintain the 

numbers of jobs that are currently dependent on the forest 

industry. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think we believe -- and this is 

always a bit contentious -- but we believe we're harvesting our 

forests in all areas at a sustainable, or even less than sustainable 

rate, so we think we can maintain the same level of harvest.  

The east side of the province, we've had some . . . in the past 

we've had some harvest that has not been quite sustainable.  

We've depleted some of the reserves there slightly.  We have 

probably room for further expansion in that particular area, and 

we need to get our plan together there a bit because we don't 

have . . . Simpson Timber has left and so on.  And so we need 

to rework that land a bit. 

 

I think basically we think we're harvesting in a sustainable or 

even less than sustainable manner in many areas.  The jobs is 

another question I think, because the technology keeps 

changing on us, and it's a world market we're competing in.  

And you can produce the same amount of product from a new 

mill but it employs less people, so that's always a problem. 

 

But as far as the forest harvesting itself, you know, we're 

studying it.  We've got an integrated forest management plan or 

survey going on at the present time.  We've got a model forest 

project that we've just been able to get from 

the federal government where we're going to look at forest 

harvesting, so we have to continue to look at these things.  It 

take 100 years for a forest to regrow, so we don't have the 

experience that can say a lot of these things very definitely.  

But we are hopefully not going to harvest it any faster than its 

sustainable rate. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I take some assurance on your comment 

there that you are actually under-harvesting right now, that it is 

sustainable.  Mr. Minister, is that sustainable harvest usable 

timber, accessible areas that will be competitive, that will 

actually be on a competitive basis for the companies that are 

involved? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think our plans are at least 

20-year harvest plans.  The companies that are here, we believe 

are here for the duration.  We don't think we have anybody here 

that's trying to make a quick dollar and leave. And that's part of 

the plan, is to harvest, not to go out and just harvest around the 

mill and do the economical stuff and leave the rest.  It's 

harvested in blocks and they are responsible under the lease 

agreement to manage the entire block. 

 

So we believe that we will be economically sustainable as well 

as sustainable from an environmental point of view. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  What prompted my 

previous question is you can go 100 miles from Prince Albert 

and you start running into Weyerhaeuser trucks all over the 

place.  This is what the competitiveness . . . obviously the costs 

increased. 

 

But so what you're telling the people in Big River, what you're 

telling the people in Hudson Bay and what you're telling the 

people in Carrot River and Prince Albert is that yes, their 

facilities will remain open because the harvests are of a 

sustainable type of nature.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We certainly think the companies 

we have are competitive based on the market.  Things happen 

in the forestry market which may make them uncompetitive in 

the future.  But by and large, we think we have the fibre that's 

available to keep them open.  And we think they will be 

economically competitive and therefore should be able to 

remain open. 

 

There are some particular plants, I think the plywood mill in 

Hudson Bay, it's at a 10 to 15 years wood supply and then they 

may have some problems getting wood unless they can shift 

over to hardwood or some other thing.  But basically, by and 

large, we believe we will be economically competitive and that 

we will have the fibre available to do it. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, I'm the last one that would make 

a comment that would jeopardize competitiveness of 

companies and so on.  But the one thing that concerns me and a 

lot of people that I know is when I head up north to do some 

fishing or to do some hunting . . . and to be specific, I'm talking 

to an area now between Smoothstone Lake and Dor Lake, in 

that area -- I'm still talking forestry here -- that by the 

Smoothstone River. 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3155 

I don't know if you're familiar with it, but the Smoothstone 

River on the west side of it before the logging road actually 

crossed the river and continued on to Dor hill and so on, Dor 

mountain, was one of the best moose hunting areas that I had 

experienced up to that point.  Now when I drive on that road, 

not only are there no moose there, there are no trees. 

 

And what I'm getting at it is the clear cut.  As an individual, it 

bothers me when I drive by what used to be a lush, green forest 

and now actually a rototiller . . . not a rototiller, but a double 

disc has gone over that.  And literally sections of land are 

completely clear cut.  There's nothing there.  Now I know that 

the story that we're given all the time and were given when I 

was in government as well, is that this is proper forest 

management, that you can plant trees and you'll have a much 

more organized forest regrowing.  But I want you to put on 

record, Mr. Minister, what your feelings are in that type of 

forest management. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well we, as I said, we're constantly 

looking at our forest management practices  and these . . . 

certainly the sort of clear cutting, and we call patch cutting now 

because we keep it to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Call what? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Patch cutting.  We cut smaller 

blocks all the time, so we are trying to get away from large, 

clear-cut blocks.  The sustainability we believe is there.  The 

esthetics of it are not great, and it's a problem.  We're certainly 

concerned about it.  And as I said, it always makes you a little 

nervous because it takes 100 years to know whether we were 

successful in our replanting totally, or 50 years or at least 20 

years.  So we have experience in the past where reforestation 

has worked in the forestry cover. 

 

That's one of the things we're doing is the integrated forest 

management plan, which is looking at . . . not only looking at 

the forest and all the industries that are in the forest -- trapping 

and the recreation, the hunting and the commercial fishing and 

tourism and so on -- so that we're not taking out the lumber as 

the only industry in the forest.  Because we want to have a 

balance between all those industries.  And they all have 

economic impact.  And we want to balance off the balance 

impact.  So we're looking at doing that. 

 

I think the forest practices that we use -- the clear cutting or the 

patch cutting that we use -- has one advantage in that we use all 

of the fibre that's there.  We use the hardwood and softwood 

and we make use of all the resource.  And if you go to selective 

cutting you get into more roads which are harmful to the 

environment. You get into wasting a lot of a particular species 

as you trap one species down to get the other one out, and they 

go to waste, and so on. 

 

So you have to balance all those things out from an economical 

point of view as well as from an environmental point of view.  

And certainly clear cutting, for the best of my knowledge we 

think we're sustainable, we think we won't harm the 

environment.  But we're certainly always concerned about it 

and are monitoring it very carefully. 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Could you explain to me, Mr. Minister, why 

clear cutting is better than . . . and when you say patch cutting, 

what size are we talking as opposed to the sections that I was 

talking about before.  I was glad of one comment that you 

made, Mr. Minister, that you are now using hardwoods and 

softwoods, thanks to the paper mill that was built by 

Weyerhaeuser in Prince Albert area. 

 

But getting back to the specifics, what makes clear cutting the 

best alternative in your mind right now, besides such things as 

efficiency for the operator? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, I think some of the 

advantages of patch cutting as we do, and I think just as an 

example, I think NorSask's patches are now 25 hectares, or 

about 40 acres is their average size.  And we're trying to work 

with local people to set up local boards to help determine, you 

know, how big the patches should be, where the roads should 

be, and how big buffers to leave around water sources and so 

on. 

 

I think the advantages I mentioned earlier, so you get to use all 

of the wood; you build less roads when you do patch cutting.  

And depending on the species, there may be certain species and 

certain conditions where selective cutting is more appropriate.  

But for an example, with the aspen, if you go in and cut out the 

big trees you open it up and the forest is damaged.  If you go in 

and do a clear cut or a patch cut, it will regenerate itself. 

 

I think one of the things that we need to bear in mind in 

Saskatchewan, we don't have old growth forest.  In a natural 

state, if we didn't put out fires, lightning would strike and our 

forests would burn about every 30 or 40 years.  And then it 

regenerates from being destroyed by fire and regenerates itself 

in mixed wood stands basically. 

 

It's not like some forests where you have over a hundred years 

you have one species that grows up and then dies off and then 

another species grows in.  Our sort of natural state is the forest 

to grow up and then be burnt every 30 or 40 years.  And so in a 

lot of ways, the patch cutting that we're doing emulates nature 

in that way. 

 

And as I say, it's as . . . you know, you build less roads which 

causes less destruction.  You waste less fibre because you're 

able to use all the fibre.  And the other thing of course, which 

you don't ignore, is the economics of it.  The only way that you 

can selective cut and not waste and damage large amounts of 

timber is to use horses and, you know, that becomes a question 

of whether or not that's economically feasible. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I want to jump 

ahead, if I may, because this ties in, and that is to section 14 

which is the reforestation.  And that's basically what we've 

been talking about a little bit here, the rejuvenation of the 

forest. 

 

I notice that you've pretty well doubled the budget for 

reforestation from seven twelve up to a million five. 

 

Is this your proportion?  Is this what the Government of 

Saskatchewan is investing in reforestation?  How does this 

compare, let's say, with the increase that companies will 



3156 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

now be asked to apply to the same problem?  Is this 

proportionate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Over the past number of years 

we've been shifting the responsibility for tree planting over to 

private industry.  But in this year I think we will plant about a 

million trees; the industry will plant about 10 million trees.  So 

it gives you some idea of the amount. 

 

The industries plant trees.  There's a fund that they pay into; as 

they harvest trees, it goes into a fund.  And they are responsible 

for keeping on their lease the sustainable . . . keeping their 

lease sustainable.  So they have to plant all the trees that are 

necessary.  And what we're spending is in addition to that on 

areas outside of leases and fire burns and that sort of thing. 

 

And even the doubling of the budget, it's still probably not 

adequate, but we're trying to keep a sustainable forest.  You 

know, you can have all the good plans in the world of how to 

harvest and be sustainable, but if you don't follow through with 

the tree planting obviously it's not going to work. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, a little while ago we were 

talking about fires.  You were talking about fires as being one 

of the ways in which forests rejuvenate themselves.  And I 

know that last year, although the numbers of fires were down, 

the fires were large and they were costly.  Now I notice that 

you have reduced rather substantially for this year your 

fire-fighting budget.  Is this in anticipation of fewer fires or 

lower service? Or how can you anticipate what the future is 

going to hold? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We tried to develop some 

efficiencies.  We've had in the past number of years some dry 

weather and some droughts and so very high forest fire 

seasons.  We think this year we're going to bring our forest fire 

fighting in on budget.  We've had a little help from Mother 

Nature with a cool summer, and it looks like we're going to 

come in on budget unless something drastic happens in the near 

future. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I guess I'll leave it at that.  But, Mr. Minister, 

you can say that now.  But this thing was prepared how many 

months ago?  Certainly before you knew that we were going to 

have a relatively cool summer.  I hope you're right in your 

assumptions. 

 

Mr. Chairman, perhaps what we should do is go down to . . . 

and I'll get back up on item 13. 

 

Item 8 agreed to. 

 

Items 9 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 13 
 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

wildlife landowner assistance has gone down to $402,000 from 

$495,000.  That is a $93,000 drop for landowner assistance.  I 

don't know if this is another attack on rural Saskatchewan or 

why you're trying to save that amount of money particularly . . . 

and pursuant to the discussion that we just had prior about the 

tremendous number of wildlife and the depredation done by 

wildlife 

to farmers.  And yet at the same time you are now choosing to 

cut that much assistance to farmers who are bearing the brunt 

of this additional wildlife that they are experiencing right now. 

 

Mr. Minister, my question number one is, why that cut?  

Number two: is there an alternate source that farmers will be 

compensated for, this perhaps through another area you're 

fairly familiar with which is crop insurance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I certainly have some concerns as 

well, being a farmer, as to problems that wildlife create for 

farmers.  And we've attempted, in very tough times, to allocate 

as much money as we could.  A part of our decision was to -- 

with some of the depredation hunts and so on -- was to attempt 

to reduce the problem rather than to continue to pour into 

trying to compensate people for damages. 

 

And we are undergoing a program of working with farmers as 

much as we can to come up with some . . . help them to come 

up with solutions to prevent some of the damage rather than 

just to pay compensation for it afterwards.  And there are, as 

you may know, provisions in crop insurance to cover wildlife 

damages. 

 

Item 13 agreed to. 

 

Items 14 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 17 -- Statutory. 

 

Items 18 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 26 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Parks and Renewable Resources 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 26 

 

Items 1 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 26 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Parks and Renewable Resources 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 26 

 

Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 26 agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- If the minister would like to thank his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I certainly would like to thank my 

officials.  They've done a great job.  And also the opposition 

for questions and suggestions that they've made. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I too would like to 

join the minister in thanking his very capable officials for their 

assistance, and to the minister for being quite frank with us this 

morning.  Thank you. 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3157 

The Chair: -- Thank you to the minister and the critic and . . . 

the critics and the officials for their assistance in Estimates this 

morning. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 

 


