




















































Hansard: August 18, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2651 

 August 18, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Changes to Health Care 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

direct my attention . . . would like to direct my question to the 

Minister of Health.  In her absence I will direct it to the acting 

minister, then.  I suspect the Minister of Health will be here 

shortly, Mr. Speaker.  So in the interim I'll ask this question to 

the Acting Minister of Health. 

 

We must, Madam Minister, continue on in our discussion that 

we were on yesterday about the so-called health model, the 

new health model.  And I want to begin, Madam Minister, by 

correcting one falsehood which is that people have been led to 

believe that the districts that you are proposing are actually 

smaller than the districts proposed by the Murray Commission.  

And I ask you, Madam Minister, will you admit today that 

Murray proposed 35 districts where you are proposing as few 

as 20 larger districts?  Would you admit that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you.  Thank you very much 

for that question.  I think what we're saying about the districts 

is that the size of the districts is going to be determined by the 

people in the communities out there. 

 

We're going to work with local communities and say: what size 

of district makes most sense to the communities out there?  

Because a big part of wellness is community control. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, I appreciate your answer, 

and I can understand the difficulty that you are working with in 

this perspective.  And so perhaps now that the Minister of 

Health is here, I could rephrase that question and ask the 

Minister of Health that very same question. 

 

Madam Minister, the falsehood that you are propagating is that 

you are leading people to believe that the districts that you 

propose are smaller than those districts proposed by the Murray 

Commission, and I was just asking:  will you admit that the 

districts that Murray proposed are actually up to 35 districts, 

while those that you are proposing would have a maximum of 

approximately 20 districts?  Just so that we get that clear on 

record, Madam Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The Murray report, Mr. Speaker, 

recommended 10 districts in rural Saskatchewan and I think it 

was one in Regina, one in Saskatoon, and three in the North.  

Those were the districts that were designed by Murray. 

The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, what we are doing here 

is asking people to get organized on a district basis that may be 

12,000 -- it may be less, it may be more -- depending on what 

meets their needs and depending on what the communities 

think is appropriate. 

 

The reason we want that to occur is because we have been 

informed by communities in Saskatchewan, we have been 

informed by communities in Saskatchewan that in order to 

provide the kind of services they want to their remote 

communities, that they feel a critical mass of approximately 

12,000 population would be appropriate. 

 

Our objective, Mr. Speaker, is to deliver higher-quality health 

care services to our remote communities in Saskatchewan and 

to urban and rural communities, and that's what we will be 

doing throughout the health care reform. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Before the member asks his next 

question, I just want to remind him that his two questions were 

longer than the answers that were given. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I don't want to get 

into a debate with you.  But turning back to the Minister of 

Health, Madam Minister, you just did exactly what I have been 

accusing you of.  You are leaving the impression that Murray 

said there will be 10 districts. 

 

Madam Minister, those are the planning districts -- 10 planning 

districts -- and within those 10 planning districts there were to 

be from five to seven health board districts.  Which means that 

actually he was proposing totally different than you are trying 

to lead this Assembly to believe.  There's a difference between 

a planning district and the health board district, Madam 

Minister.  So please be conscious of that and tell the people the 

whole truth. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, the acting minister just said that the 

people out there are going to be determining the boundaries of 

the health board districts.  Are you saying now that the people 

are going to be sitting down from one area to another, and that 

they will be designing the boundaries, that you have no maps 

prepared, that you have nothing ready to guide them?  The 

people themselves, Madam Minister, are actually going to draw 

the boundaries themselves.  Is that what you're saying? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is Mr. 

Bernard Kirwan and other rural leaders have indicated very 

clearly that this version of the report, this new document that 

has been tabled, is very acceptable to our rural communities.  

And Mr. Kirwan has indicated, as the member opposite will 

know, that we're glad it's not being forced onto us.  It will 

cause people to co-operate and use their imagination. 

 

Now when we ask communities to get together and organize on 

a district basis, we are saying: come together with those 

communities that you feel you can work with and that are 

appropriate.  You tell us what communities you can work with 

and what sort of area you want to work 



2652 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

with.  People have asked us not to impose a blueprint on the 

province and a map of the boundaries.  They asked us not to do 

that.  They want the flexibility to make those determinations on 

their own. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Your words about 

telling people that they will be allowed to be making their own 

decisions ring hollow, Madam Minister. 

 

As about 20 minutes ago my office . . . I had my office phone 

your office to find out when these public meetings are being 

planned, when they were being held.  We were told by your 

office, Madam Minister, that there are no public meetings 

planned, that the only meetings that were being held right now 

are private meetings with the minister.  Those were the words: 

private meetings with the minister. 

 

Because our MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 

want to be out at those meetings that are going to be out there, 

Madam Minister, are there public meetings that are going to be 

held? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I will be meeting with 

stakeholders throughout the province in the weeks and months 

to come.  They are phoning my office.  They're asking me to go 

out.  I've said, bring together the boards in your area, home care 

and ambulance.  We'll sit around a table and we'll talk. 

 

And I will be doing that in the weeks to come.  The members 

opposite want consultation but they're constantly criticizing us 

when we engage in consultation. 

 

With respect to public forums, if areas want to hold a public 

forum on the matter, they can.  The government is not 

organizing public forums throughout the province, but if the 

region or the district wants to do that, that's up to them.  It's 

appropriate.  And we have absolutely no problems with that. 

 

The fact of the matter however, is, as Minister of Health, I will 

be meeting with people throughout the province.  And I hope . . 

. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, what we're trying to get at 

on this side of the House is that we want public meetings.  We 

want all-party public hearings to be held throughout this 

province, so that, Madam Minister, it is not you or your 

hand-picked bureaucrats that go about leading the people along 

to draw the conclusions that you want them to have.  Madam 

Minister, that is the concern that we're hearing right now from 

people. 

 

Madam Minister, my question to you is simply this:  will you 

commit to an all-party public hearings throughout the province 

so that people can truly get a balanced 

approach to this situation? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We're not going to foist anything on 

communities.  If communities want to hold public meetings, 

they can.  The government is not going to foist anything on 

them. 

 

What the member opposite wants is to play politics with this 

issue.  He wants to try and destroy the health care reform that 

the people across this province are asking for and have been 

asking for for a number of years now.  What the member 

opposite wants to do is what he did in the legislature yesterday 

and was pointed out by Mona Kines from the Saskatchewan 

Registered Nurses' Association.  His behaviour frustrated her, 

is her statement.  She has said that many people involved in 

health are willing to bury professional jealousies in order to 

make health care reform work, and I applaud the professional 

organizations for what they've done.  And she is calling on 

politicians to do the same thing to make this work for the 

people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, not for one moment have 

we questioned the professionalism of any of those people out 

there.  That is not the problem.  Their decisions, Madam 

Minister, are being based on half-truths and falsehoods that you 

are perpetrating.  That is our concern and the reason why we 

are asking you to do what we're asking you to do. 

 

Now your plan here is a political action plan and you are doing 

a super sales job on the political aspect of it.  Now I want you, 

Madam Minister, to tell the people that it is their decision and 

then force the decisions on them by denying funding for 

anything that you as a NDP Party don't want them to do.  That 

is our concern, Madam Minister. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I ask you a very simple, 

straightforward question and I would like that type of an 

answer.  If a local hospital does not want to give up its doctor 

in return for a visiting nurse, let's say, will you guarantee that 

funding will be maintained at that doctor level?  Will you 

guarantee that to that community, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite pays lip service to 

the need for community input and community involvement and 

community control.  And yet he wants the plans of a health 

care district to be determined on the floor of this Assembly -- 

totally inconsistent with respect to his positions. 

 

What we will do is we'll ask communities to come together -- 

we'll ask communities to come together.  We have witnessed 

this coming together of communities in the last few months; it's 

been going on longer than that.  People are looking at the 

health care services that are available in their districts and 

they're making decisions for themselves based on options that 

are presented to them and available.  They are making 

decisions for themselves, Mr. Speaker. 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2653 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Fair enough, 

Madam Minister, fair enough.  They make decisions for 

themselves.  But what I'm saying to you now is that the 

decision in that community is that they're not going to give up 

their doctor.  That's their decision, Madam Minister.  You just 

said that they could make that decision. 

 

Now are you committing yourself to maintain the funding for 

that doctor that that community has made a decision for itself 

that they want to maintain?  Will you then allow them to 

maintain that doctor by providing the necessary funding to 

keep the doctor there? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite, in his political 

partisan way, is trying to use scare tactics.  Oh yes, what you 

are using is scare tactics and you should be ashamed of 

yourself. 

 

What we will be doing throughout this reform is creating a 

critical mass upon which more doctors can get to our rural 

communities.  And in addition to that what we will be doing is 

implementing programs to get primary health care nurses doing 

hands-on work in our communities. 

 

Now this isn't going to happen over night because this is a 

reform that will take time, Mr. Speaker.  The objective and the 

goal is to look at group medical practices, for example.  It 

doesn't have to occur, but if districts want it to occur they will 

be able to make it happen.  Whereby communities who lose 

their doctors or if the doctor in a community wants to go on 

holidays, that they can make sure, through the interim board, 

that there is a medical professional in that community when 

needed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister . . . (inaudible) . . . such an 

answer.  Will you maintain the funding for that doctor? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, is 

that in the health care reform what we want to do is develop a 

quality health care system that brings more workers to rural 

communities and more health care services to rural 

Saskatchewan and urban centres. 

 

In order to do this it is absolutely crucial for us to co-ordinate 

and integrate services in the health care system.  Absolutely 

crucial.  And the people of Saskatchewan recognize this.  They 

recognize this.  You hear it on the open lines, you read it in the 

newspaper.  They recognize the need for reform and they are 

pleased their government is showing some leadership. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, you're obviously refusing to 

answer that question, so my next one will be a lengthy 

question. 
 

Mr. Speaker, to the Madam Minister I say, there's a political 

agenda here, and it's a shameful political agenda.  It's obvious 

by your answers.  This plan that you're talking about is going to 

be imposed on 

communities, and that's the truth.  The minister has already got 

maps prepared for the boundaries, and that's the truth.  The 

minister's boundaries are larger than those in Murray's, and 

that's the truth.  And this minister is already threatening 

communities like Eastend with a loss of funding if they do not 

bow to her will, and that's the truth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I simply ask you, Madam Minister, do you deny that your 

officials told the people of Eastend that if they did not give in 

to your demands, that $140,000 would be taken away from 

their hospital.  Do you deny that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I have not been present at 

the meetings that the officials in the department have had with 

Eastend, but I do know that the member opposite was present 

at the Eastend meeting, attempting to foment dissension 

amongst the communities.  Because those members opposite, 

their political agenda has been, since time immemorial, to pit 

urban communities against rural communities; to pit farmers 

against workers; and to pit professional people against people 

who aren't professional. 

 

The members opposite have been bent on that agenda for over 

ten and a half years.  And now they are attempting to do the 

same thing again.  They want to go into our rural communities, 

and they want to do what they can to destroy any possibility of 

health care reform. 

 

But I have faith in the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, one thing that you are 

accomplishing is pitting community against community.  I just 

talked to the mayor of Leader, and you'll be interested in 

hearing from the mayor of Leader on this issue and many, 

many other communities in this province whom you are now 

pitting one against the other because, Madam Minister, it's not 

reasonable to expect Eastend to say, sure we'll give up our 

hospital.  We'll give up our $140,000.  It's not reasonable, 

Madam Minister, to expect that. 

 

Now I want a clear answer from you, and I want the media to 

listen to this, and I want the people of Saskatchewan to listen to 

this: what is your explanation for refusing to allow a committee 

of this legislature to hold public hearings?  What is your 

answer to that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I once again ask the 

members opposite to join us in the health care reform and to try 

and facilitate it.  They don't want to be positive about this.  

They want to be destructive.  They want to do what they can to 

undermine health care reform in this province and to try to 

foment dissension because that's their game plan. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is health care reform is absolutely 

essential.  We will be meeting with people throughout 

Saskatchewan.  The whole process is one of consultation 



2654 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

and dialogue.  And that will be occurring.  We will be 

consulting with communities.  We'll be asking them to come 

together.  We'll be asking them to consider their health care 

needs. 

 

And we will do in this process what we can to improve the 

quality of health care services in our rural communities for 

example, and in our urban communities, and to bring people 

together to look at a district of approximately 12,000 . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- If at all possible, we would like to join in you 

in this exercise.  And if you want to take politics out of this 

situation, the way to do it is to appoint an all-party committee 

as we have done on the constitution for example.  And I think 

you will find that the Premier and the Minister of Justice are 

very satisfied in the non-partisan manner in which that 

committee is working. 

 

But the reason, Madam Minister, is that you are involved in 

politics while you're attempting this process.  And you 

obviously know better than the Premier; you obviously know 

better than the Minister of Justice.  It's got to be your way or no 

way, Madam Minister.  I'm not getting any answers from you. 

 

Now I ask you this, Madam Minister.  Quite bluntly I ask you 

this:  are there any circumstances, are there any circumstances 

under which you would consider agreeing to an all-party 

committee of this Assembly to study the matter?  Are there any 

circumstances at all? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, this government is showing 

some leadership.  The members opposite spent $1.8 million on 

a health care study and then shelved it.  And they did nothing 

with it.  And they didn't have the courage to do anything.  And 

now they want the matter studied some more and reviewed 

some more. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is stakeholders throughout this 

province have been asking for over 10 years that we need 

health reform.  They have presented briefs to the Murray 

Commission and other bodies over the last 10 or 20 years.  

There has been a lot of input on this. 

 

Finally it's time for somebody to take a stand, to put a 

document forward, and to go out and make it work in our 

communities, to consult and to develop a health care system 

that is going to bring quality health care services to our 

communities at a time when we are facing a huge deficit 

created by the members . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, the degree of hypocrisy 

dripping from your lips is just appalling.  Totally appalling.  

That is the most hypocritical stand that I have seen. 

 

When the Murray Commission report came out you were 

roundly condemning it at every twist and turn -- roundly 

condemning it.  Now what are you doing?  You're are holding 

it up as the be-all and the end-all that you're going to be 

following. 

 

Madam Minister, the hypocrisy of your government and your 

stand where you said you would be spending more on health -- 

you condemned us for a 4 per cent increase; now you're having 

a 4 per cent decrease -- Madam Minister, that hypocrisy and 

betrayal on the people of Saskatchewan is not going unnoticed 

by the people. 

 

Madam Minister, a simple question to you now.  You have 

stated that there are 67 town hospitals that are going to be 

closed -- 67.  Now there is a lot of doubt on there to which of 

those hospitals are the ones that are going to be closed or stand 

the jeopardy of being changed, in your words.  Would you 

table the list of those 67 that you're talking about in this 

legislature and write a letter to them indicating that you are the 

ones that I'm talking about.  Would you do that, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- If we want to talk about hypocrisy, let's 

talk about the member opposite and his statement that we said 

67 hospitals would be closed.  He knows full well we haven't 

said that.  What we are talking about with respect to hospitals is 

we're asking communities to come together and to look at the 

possibility of options, for example, that may provide 

higher-quality services to these communities.  We'll be asking 

small hospitals to do that and communities to do that -- to take 

a look at options that will provide higher quality health care 

services. 

 

I want to say once again, the members opposite were on the 

wrong side of the issue in 1962, and they're on the wrong side 

of the issue again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the same minister.  Madam Minister, you have said all 

throughout question period that the local individuals will be the 

ones that make decisions versus health care spending in the 

future. 

 

Would you tell the legislature today whether it will be the 

citizens in Regina or the citizens of southern Saskatchewan 

who will make the determination on the Plains Health Centre? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- With respect to the Plains Health Centre, 

the Regina Health Board has been asked to consult and engage 

in whatever consultations are necessary in order to come up 

with recommendations.  I would assume that that involves 

consultation with all people who are users of the Plains Health 

Centre. 
 

There is no decision by this government to close the Plains 

Health Centre.  There was a report commissioned by the PC 

(Progressive Conservative) government, the Atkinson report, 

that has recommended the closure of the Plains Health Centre.  

Instead of adopting that recommendation, we have asked the 

Regina Health 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2655 

Board to consult further. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Madam Minister, as usual you continue to 

mislead.  The Atkinson report came out with five options on 

the disposition at the Regina Plains Health Centre -- five. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, if the Regina Health Board, as you say, 

in consultation with other health entities in southern 

Saskatchewan make a determination on that particular 

institution that is other than closure, will they have the freedom 

to run that particular institution?  Will you fund it?  Or will you 

tell the tax base of either Regina or southern Saskatchewan that 

they then should come in with extra money?  Which will be the 

determination? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't believe these 

questions.  The fact of the matter is, is the Regina Health Board 

will be doing the consultation with respect to this and will be 

advising us of what they have heard.  At that time we will be, 

in conjunction with the Regina Health Board . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Oh, then you will be making the 

decision. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well the funding.  There is a funding 

issue here that has to be considered.  If the members opposite 

are suggestion that the Plains Hospital should be closed, then 

they have to be aware that there are millions of dollars that will 

have to be put into the Regina General Hospital in order to do 

that.  If the Plains Health Centre is going to be closed, it will 

cost millions of dollars to renovate the General Hospital. 

 

I would ask the members opposite if that is what they're 

suggesting we do, because I trust it is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Russian Grain Sales Suspended 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to speak today 

on a matter of major concern to Saskatchewan farmers.  The 

suspension of sales to Russia is a significant disruption in the 

grain sales and will have a significant impact on farmers in 

Saskatchewan in coming months. 

 

The Russian market has been a major one for Canadian grains, 

as members opposite know, Mr. Speaker, buying on average 

nearly 27 per cent of our wheat exports, 32 per cent of our 

durum, and 24 per cent of the barley exports from the Canadian 

market. 

 

The cash-flow difficulties faced by Russia, its inability to 

remain current on its credit, and the need to suspend shipment 

are a concern to all farmers and all parts of the agricultural 

industry.  Farmers have already faced poverty-level incomes in 

the last two years.  In 1992 incomes were projected to be 

increased somewhat, but are still below the average level of the 

1980s. 

Farmers are in no position to withstand any disruption that 

further erodes their livelihood.  The federal government's 

interest-free cash advance can help provide cash flow to 

farmers if sales are disrupted for any length of time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is sending a letter to the federal 

Minister of Agriculture, asking Ottawa to take the following 

steps.  And, Mr. Speaker, we would ask the members opposite 

to join in this proposal. 

 

First, the federal government must give farmers a clear 

indication it will stand behind them, both by securing access to 

difficult markets and by protecting them from any further 

disruption in cash flow.  And secondly, Mr. Speaker, it must 

continue to offer interest-free cash advances for 1992-93 crop 

year.  Mr. Speaker, that item is still outstanding, even though 

farmers are beginning to harvest this year's crop. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I thank members of the Assembly and ask the 

members of the opposition to join with us in this proposal to 

the federal government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to say, first 

of all, that we will support the government if they are planning 

on sending a letter to the Minister of Agriculture, asking to 

have the greatest amount of insight into the development and 

maintaining the markets that we have, particularly the Soviet 

Union.  And I think this comes on the heels of the report in the 

paper that the grain sales are going to curtailed because the 

limit has been reached in what the Canadian Wheat Board can 

provide as a backstop for loans to the Russian community.  

And that is significant.  And I think that we need to be very 

careful what we do there. 

 

However there's one point that I want to make on the 

interest-free cash advance.  You are being again a little 

hypocritical in saying the cash advance should be continued in 

grain, and what we had initiated as a livestock cash advance, 

you cut off on August 1. 

 

Now what you need to do, Mr. Minister, is to seriously 

consider the livestock industry as an asset in the Saskatchewan 

rural community, and say to the hog producers and the cattle 

producers in the province of Saskatchewan that they will have 

equal opportunity with the grain producers in order to market 

the grain through the livestock that they have in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And that, Mr. Minister, is what you should be 

doing and initiating with the Minister of Finance and the 

Minister of Agriculture. 

 

So putting the interest-free cash advance, making it available 

for 1992-93 in the crop year, is an excellent idea.  The second 

excellent idea is also that you make it available to the livestock 

producers so that they can maintain and continue the 

development of the livestock industry in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 



2656 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Seniors' Secretariat 

Vote 42 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to please introduce her 

officials to the House. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would 

like to introduce Brenda Righette, who is the executive director 

of the Seniors' Secretariat, and Del Fuchs, who is the director 

of seniors' programs. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Chairman, I appreciate the fact . . . First of all I'll acknowledge 

the fact that the minister has been very forthright in responding 

to the global questions, and acknowledge the fact that we've 

reviewed the global questions and there weren't any further 

questions that we felt were not appropriately addressed that 

we'd like to bring up today. 

 

But we would like to just make a couple of comments and we 

trust that as we enter into the debate today and even as we get 

into the areas of Social Services, that the minister will be as 

forthright as she was in responding to the question posed by my 

colleague on health.  And we know the Minister of Social 

Services has indicated more than a willingness to be as 

forthright as she can be. 

 

When we talk about seniors, Madam Minister, certainly one of 

the major concerns, I guess, across this province and the fact 

that since we have a population that is getting older, or we have 

such a large seniors population in this province, there are major 

concerns that senior citizens do have regarding funding. 

 

And as I look through the budgetary statement presented by the 

Minister of Finance, I notice that there's a substantial decrease 

for the estimated expenditures in Seniors' Secretariat this year 

compared to the forecast for '91-92. 

 

I think, Madam Speaker and Mr. Chairman, in light of the fact 

that seniors over the years -- and I will acknowledge the fact 

that seniors are like many other groups -- themselves they have 

a hard time working together and having one cohesive force. 

 

We have, as I found out when I met with the senior's "Action 

Now" committee, many of those seniors did not agree with the 

individuals who are working on the plus 55 games and I think 

there's something like a half a dozen or so organizations, and I 

think that they were all pulling from different directions.  So it 

must be difficult for the staff and for the minister to understand 

exactly what seniors are looking for. 

 

But I do know some of the major concerns they do have 

are areas like the heritage grant which has been discontinued.  

Certainly they are concerned about the fact that the Minister of 

Health through the Minister of Finance are talking about 

eliminating subsidies or care through the level 1 and 2 care 

home projects, Madam Speaker. 

 

And another area, Madam Speaker, is the fact that they just are 

wondering exactly what role the Seniors' Secretariat is going to 

play in the future.  So I guess my first question, Madam 

Speaker -- I posed two or three -- but I would like to ask what, 

Madam Minister, what your observations are of Seniors' 

Secretariat and the role that you as a minister will be playing in 

the future and what role Seniors' Secretariat will have in the 

overall scheme of this province? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thanks for that question.  I think 

what something like the Senior's Secretariat can do very 

effectively in government, is to work across departments to 

ensure that programs that affect seniors are better co-ordinated 

and are better targeted to seniors most in need. 

 

So I certainly see a continuing role for the secretariat.  And I 

think one of the great advantages with the secretariat is we 

have the seniors' provincial council which represents people 

from 15 different seniors' organizations and they are very 

helpful in co-ordinating our role as government with the 

opinions and the views of seniors' organizations. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, I guess one of the areas that has 

drawn a fair bit of criticism is the fact that the department has . 

. . or Department of Finance certainly has decided to 

discontinue the seniors' heritage grant. 

 

A couple of questions I'd like to ask the minister is, how many 

seniors are affected by this program, the discontinuance of this 

program?  And what kind of economic or dollar spin-off or 

saving is going to be . . . the Minister of Finance is going to see 

through the discontinuance of this program? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Okay.  Thank you for that question 

-- 28,750 seniors lost benefits.  The savings to the treasury 

were $10.9 million. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam Minister, I 

noticed one article back in June 11, '92 in the Leader-Post 

where the headline was: "Seniors watch NDP gov't"  And no 

doubt I think many people across this province right now are 

watching the government regarding the changes that are taking 

place.  And certainly a lot of change is taking place contrary to 

the observations people made prior to the election back in 

October. 

 

And as I indicated, and I've had many people in my 

constituency, seniors themselves who have acknowledged the 

fact that the deficit we faced back prior to October, 1991, the 

deficit we face today, sooner or later must be addressed.  And 

many seniors acknowledge that they may have to have a part 

and take a part in addressing the deficit. 

 

And I think we talk about deficits, we don't just talk about the 

deficit provincially, but we must look at the overall 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2657 

impact of the deficit we face on the national scene as well. 

 

And seniors in this article indicated that they are in support of 

eliminating the deficit.  The major concern they have is that the 

deficit reduction isn't done at the expense of the poor.  One 

comment was made in this article -- and I'd like the minister to 

comment on it -- regarding the elimination of the heritage 

grant. 

 

The individual that was quoted said he liked some of the 

alternatives that have been tossed out, and one of the 

alternatives he mentioned was "like the Home Adaption for 

Seniors Independence Program that provides $2,500 in grants."  

I wonder if the minister could comment on what this gentleman 

was talking about at that time.  Is this a new program for 

seniors, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, thank you very much for that 

question.  That is a new program.  It's a joint program with the 

federal government.  It helps seniors remain in their own 

homes by providing grants to allow them to renovate their 

homes to accommodate a disability; that is, if they're disabled 

they can get a grant to renovate their home so that they're not 

forced to leave their homes. 

 

The other program that we are introducing in conjunction with 

New Careers is assistance, not just to seniors but to other low 

income groups, in repairing homes, whereby we would provide 

assistance in terms of evaluating the project and also basically 

we would subsidize the labour component. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  That last response 

regarding New Careers, I take it from that -- and of course we'll 

be dealing with New Careers shortly -- you're going to be using 

some of the New Careers program and kind of co-ordinating I 

take it some of the seniors' housing needs through New Careers 

to provide the necessary services available to . . . Would that 

also be involved . . . would you use New Careers in this 

program that's helping the disabled; but by providing ramps 

and services through the disabled, are you going to kind of 

co-ordinate all of this into one service versus overlapping, or 

having two different agencies dealing with services like that, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much for that 

question.  The program for disabled seniors covers the whole 

cost, that is, labour and materials.  New Careers, all we would 

do is we would provide the labour component. 

 

What I find with seniors in my constituency, often say, 

especially single women seniors, is they have difficulty making 

renovations on their homes or doing basic repairs.  So what we 

would do is we would be there, we would be a reliable 

contractor, and we would also be subsidizing the cost. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam Minister, 

when you're talking about . . . If I caught you correctly, you 

were talking about the fact that you would give assistance in 

seeking a reliable contract.  Is that what . . . I think one of the 

problems . . . I'll pose this question, 

Madam Minister. 

 

One of the problems I think many people face, and seniors in 

particular, is the fact that even when we look back at the home 

program that was introduced by the former government back in 

1986 -- the $1,500 matching grant program -- many seniors, I 

think more than other people, got caught in a merry-go-round, 

if you will, of -- and I'm going to use the term -- unscrupulous 

individuals who took advantage of people, went to them and 

said, well there's a grant here and if you put a few dollars here 

and we see your home needs some work done on it, some 

renovations, and we can do it for such-and-such an amount. 

 

Many people, specifically the single senior women who were 

still in their own homes, may have been taken in.  And I don't 

think that they intended to be, but they put their trust, like a lot 

of people across Saskatchewan put trust in individuals yet.  

And we just have a recent incident in the local news about an 

individual putting his trust and going out as a good Samaritan 

to help somebody, only to lose his life. 

 

And I think, Madam Minister, when we come to programs that 

are helping people, it may be appropriate for the department or 

for someone to at least have, or the seniors having, an avenue 

in which they can do some consulting or consult someone to at 

least get some information and feel that at the end of the day 

when work is done, that they have received the value for their 

dollar. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much.  I 

acknowledge the concern about elder abuse, that for seniors 

this is a major concern for seniors.  And it's one that the 

secretariat is taking very seriously. 

 

Now with respect to New Careers, New Careers will actually 

be doing the work.  So this is one of the advantages.  We have, 

you know, the trained foremen who have the expertise.  And 

then the actual work is done by people on social assistance.  So 

it's taking people on social assistance, getting them to work on 

a very worthwhile project which is providing . . . doing repairs 

for low income people.  And I would imagine a lot of the 

people who will sign up for this will be seniors. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam Minister, 

and Mr. Chairman, I guess another area of major concern to 

seniors is the fact that drug costs have gone up substantially. 

And as we see from the recent budget, the seniors are now . . . 

not only have families gone from $125 a year premium to 380, 

but senior families where there are two people are doubling 

from 75 to $150 in their deductible, and likewise singles from 

50 to $100. 

 

Now I guess one of the major concerns that comes across my 

desk daily is the fact that for individuals . . . and no doubt 

seniors fall into a bracket of individuals who tend to be forced 

or in some ways end up on more medication than many of us.  

And for those of us who are quite healthy, I guess we should be 

thankful for that, because when you look at medication costs 

today, it certainly can take a big bite out of your budget. 

 

And that's the thing that I face, and I know it's a difficult 



2658 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

scenario.  Because many of these individuals happen to be 

senior single women.  They happen to be on the lowest fixed 

income that's available as far as . . . In most cases they're on the 

Saskatchewan Income Plan and on the federal income plan.  

And to see the increases in the utility rates and increases in 

health taxes and the increases in everyday taxes, Madam 

Minister, it has created a major problem for many of these 

people. 

 

And as minister responsible for seniors, what have you or your 

department done to address some of these concerns specifically 

with cabinet and with the Minister of Finance? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much.  I think there 

were a lot of difficult decisions that had to be made in the 

budgeting process.  Some of them certainly related to the drug 

program.  But I would still say two things.  We still have one of 

the best drug plans in Canada today.  And another thing about 

the plan as it exists now is it has something that wasn't there 

before.  It has a threshold.  And if you spend $390 on drugs and 

you're a heavy user, after that your co-payment is reduced.  So 

before, there was no protection for people who did have to take 

a lot of medication. 

 

One feature of the plan as it exists now is that there is that 

protection.  The other protection that we worked with Health to 

put in place was to protect seniors who really could not afford 

to pay.  That is, never mind the 390, they can't even pay that. 

 

And what is in place, and perhaps we should do a better job of 

advertising this, is there is an emergency service in place.  So if 

a senior goes to a pharmacist, anybody goes to a pharmacist, 

cannot pay the cost of the drug, there's a 24-hour WATS (wide 

area telephone service) line where the prescription can be 

filled.  And then there's a process whereby an application can 

be made and the senior or other person can have the 

co-payment reduced or whatever's appropriate to suit the 

circumstances. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I believe that 

certainly having access to a phone number -- and I believe you 

said a 1-800 number -- is something that is positive.  Because 

it's not always that easy for someone who's not feeling well to 

go to the druggist and not have the money available, then have 

to go home and go through the process of talking to a worker or 

calling someone and maybe a week or so later finding out that 

they finally can get the funding that's needed. 

 

I'm also wondering if the department or recommendation to 

Finance wouldn't be . . . or we couldn't form a . . . make a 

provision that allows people to lay out what their income 

projections may be for a year.  A lot of times, especially when 

it comes to the income plan, the Saskatchewan Income Plan 

kind of kicks in behind the guaranteed income supplement of 

the federal government. 

 

And that is based on a person's filing for their income tax 

notice.  And many times, especially today with the fact that 

interest rates are fluctuating so much, many people if they do 

have a few dollars in the bank are caught in a position where 

their income can change dramatically 

before the year is out.  And maybe at the start of the year, when 

they file their income tax, they may be in a position where they 

don't qualify, or for a very minimal income supplement; by the 

end of the year they could be on substantial income 

supplement. 

 

I'm wondering if there could be a process adopted that speeds 

up getting these numbers, or making these numbers available, 

or allowing people to make these numbers available so that we 

can kind of keep in touch rather than having people always 

continually calling departments or calling offices trying to 

make arrangements to get them through their difficult times. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, thanks for that question.  SIP 

(Saskatchewan Income Plan), one of the reasons SIP is so easy 

to administer is it is piggybacked right off the GIS (guaranteed 

income supplement).  So basically the federal government is 

the one that decides the criteria, and then we just automatically 

trigger our program on to the GIS. 

 

Now the GIS, which is the federal supplement, does work on a 

prospective basis.  That is, if you're . . . say you are a new 

senior.  You don't have to go on the basis of your last year's 

income if you actually believe that your income may decline in 

the coming year.  You can file a form saying this is the income 

that I anticipate; this is my prospective income, and they will 

base your payments on that. 

 

We also have a 1-800 number for seniors to facilitate, you 

know, the process.  So if they have a problem, they can call us 

quickly and get an answer. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, what is the provincial 

commitment to the Saskatchewan Income Plan?  What's their 

guaranteed maximum that a person could receive at the present 

time? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- For a single person, the maximum 

per month now is 80; it's going up to 90 in October.  For a 

couple it's now 135, and it's going up to 145 in October. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- This is a monthly amount? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, I guess one area that I feel 

would address some of the problems we are facing today is a 

program that was initiated by the former government.  And it's 

a program that helps people build for the future, and that's 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  And in light of the fact that some 

40,000-plus of the 56,000 participants in the plan were women, 

it would appear to me, Madam Minister, it would be more 

appropriate to help people build for the future, rather than 

governments of the day always being forced to -- as we have 

here -- looking at an income guarantee to try and at least 

maintain a minimum income available for our seniors or for 

individuals who are caught in circumstances beyond their 

control. 

 

I'm just wondering, Madam Minister, if as the Minister 

responsible for Seniors' Secretariat and certainly Women's 

Secretariat would almost come under the same 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2659 

. . . I believe comes under your mantle as well, Madam 

Minister.  If indeed you've taken the time to really consult with 

your cabinet colleagues about the Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

and not just . . . we see that you've allowed it to continue and 

suggest that it will continue. 

 

But I think at the present basis where it's sitting in limbo, many 

people are just concerned that it will not be much of a program 

at all.  It won't be of any benefit.  And I think it would be 

appropriate for us to take a serious look at that program to 

indeed give it some credibility so that it would help people, 

especially housewives, or people working in small businesses 

on low incomes, Madam Minister . . . could plan for their 

future because I believe in the long run it can be a very 

beneficial support program, mechanism in place that will take a 

lot of people off of the guaranteed income support plan. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you.  I'm not responsible for 

the pension plan but I have no problem answering the question. 

 

There was a flaw in the program from the point of view of the 

commitment of the province.  Because what the program really 

did was it took low income seniors and it increased our 

commitment to them and lessened the federal government's 

commitment to them.  That is, a low income senior who in 

other circumstances, without the plan, would qualify for the 

GIS, the federal supplement.  We in fact were wedging 

provincial dollars in there and lessening the commitment to the 

federal government.  Now that was a flaw, as far as I was 

concerned. 

 

But the reason for the changes to the plan were financial, 

because of the cost to the plan.  But the plan has not been 

abolished.  People will be allowed to continue to make 

contributions.  We are also negotiating with the federal 

government to allow people, if they want to withdraw their 

money, to have the money withdrawn and put into another 

shelter plan like an RRSP (registered retirement savings plan) 

and not be taxed on the money that they withdraw.  Because we 

feel that's fair.  Because we've changed the rules, we think that 

we have to give them the option to withdraw if they choose 

that. 

 

I think in the long term, when you talk about women -- and I 

agree, women on pensions is a serious problem -- with so many 

women now in the work force, I think one way to start dealing 

with the problem at a very early stage is to ensure there are 

better pension benefits for groups like part-time workers, 70 

per cent of whom tend to be women.  So I think you have to 

start earlier to ensure that pensions are in place.  And one way 

to do it is through changes to labour standards. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  I appreciate 

that.  But one of the problems you do face is the fact that . . . 

Just take the farming situation, and I think that's one of the 

major areas where women run into a major problem, because of 

the fact that you really . . . How do you pay your spouse?  And 

yet that is the only appropriate way for an individual to at least 

acknowledge.  And yet it's taken a long time for Revenue 

Canada to recognize the fact that a spouse in a farming 

operation, even though they may be involved in the house and 

may not be specifically out running a piece of 

equipment, play a very major role in the ongoing workings of 

that farm, or the economic viability of that farm. 

 

And I think that's why a lot of women over the years have 

ended up in a situation where they really haven't had anything 

at the end of the day, and maybe that's an area that we need to 

address.  And as Minister responsible for Seniors and women, 

that's probably an area that I would ask the minister to certainly 

raise with the federal government as well. 

 

Allowing small businesses, working with small businesses, and 

maybe this is . . . I'm not sure, there's a pension plan Act before 

this Assembly, whether it allows for some changes or allows 

for some room to negotiate and manoeuvre to build pensions 

for women.  But I think that's where my personal view of the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan was.  Even though the government 

may have felt it was too large and maybe it was too costly, it 

was probably costly on the fact that there was an automatic 

$15-a-month pay-out.  But I would suggest, as the younger 

generation were involved and as more women got involved and 

the program was allowed to build over a number of years, it 

would have built itself into a place where it should carry itself. 

 

And probably what the government could have looked at, 

rather than matching up the $300, even matching, let's say, a 

hundred dollars.  And that's what many women have suggested 

to me.  They weren't necessarily saying, maintain that $300 

match; maybe give us a hundred dollars or whatever.  But 

encourage . . . the idea was to encourage people to plan for the 

future. 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you.  A lot of those issues 

would have to be raised, as you pointed out, with the federal 

government.  What I would encourage the member opposite to 

do though with some of these ideas, is to plug into the income 

security review where we're reviewing all programs.  But we 

have a special unit looking particularly at seniors' programs.  

Some of the consultations will be done by the seniors' 

provincial council and others will be done by department 

officials. 

 

But it's things like this that we want to look at.  What dollars 

are in the system across the piece, not just in the Seniors' 

Secretariat, not just in one department, but in several 

departments.  What dollars are in the system for seniors and are 

we using the dollars as effectively as possible?  Are we doing 

the very best job with the dollars we have? 

 

So that's the purpose of that review.  And we really are trying 

to get as much input as possible.  So I would encourage the 

member opposite to give us his ideas. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well I thank you, Madam Minister.  And 

certainly I would be more than willing to offer and, as I've 

mentioned even just previously, throwing out some ideas that 

I've had. 

 

I did catch up on the Minister of Finance's comment about 

wasting money.  And certainly there's . . . it doesn't 



2660 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

matter where government's involved, it's difficult just to really 

track and police all the spending.  But I think what we need to 

do is learn how to work with groups, and in many cases 

working together versus always pulling apart. 

 

Just a couple more questions, Madam Minister.  What I'm 

wondering is, what cuts were made in Seniors' Secretariat to 

date financially and were any programs besides the heritage 

grant cut from Seniors' Secretariat? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- There was a reduction in grants to 

seniors' activity centres.  They were cut in half. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- What effect will the cuts made to the department 

-- and I'm specifically looking at the fact that funding is down 

from 48 to 37, something like $11 million -- what effect does 

this have on the department? 

 

And one other question before I take my place.  Is this the 

beginning of the end for Seniors' Secretariat, Madam Minister, 

or do you see the Seniors' Secretariat continuing to have a role 

in government? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much.  The majority 

of the reduction is the heritage grant.  And then the other one I 

mentioned was the activity centres. 

 

I think that the Seniors' Secretariat will continue to have a role 

because I think one of the problems is the one I mentioned a 

minute ago.  We have to do a better job of co-ordinating across 

departments.  If one department does this, another department 

does that, a third one this, what is the cumulative effect on 

seniors?  How is this affecting seniors across the piece?  And 

so therefore the secretariat will continue to have a very vital 

role in doing that. 

 

And I think the other thing is, when you're dealing with seniors, 

there's such a resource out there that we have to continue to tap 

and that is that they have so many different organizations, they 

have lots of time, they work very hard as volunteers in their 

different organizations.  And the secretariat plays a key role in 

having a liaison relationship so that we can get their input very 

easily.  So for those two reasons I would see it continuing to be 

very active. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 42 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Seniors' Secretariat 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 42 

 

Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 42 agreed to. 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, just before the officials just get 

away, I just want to say thank you for their help and joining 

with the minister and I in debating the Seniors' Secretariat this 

afternoon. 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair would also like to . . . we'd ask that 

the minister communicate appreciation to her officials as well. 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

New Careers Corporation 

Vote 59 

 

Item 1 

 

The Chair: -- And before I recognize the hon. member from 

Arm River, I'll ask that the minister introduce her official who 

is here with us for this estimate. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you.  I'd like to introduce 

Alvin Gallinger who is the chief executive officer of the New 

Careers Corporation. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This isn't going 

to take very long to do this.  I just have a few questions. 

 

Madam Minister, the first thing that comes to my mind, I see 

going back to the years 1991 and then '91-92, there's been an 

increase.  And this year I see a decrease in the total 

expenditures for New Careers Corporation.  Now I just 

wondered what cut-backs the roughly $2 million or 2 

million-plus means here.  What does it entail? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Okay.  Thank you very much.  

There's about a $2 million decrease.  About a million of that 

comes from Sask Works.  The employment program last year 

had a budget of about 6 million.  It's about 5 million this year.  

And one of the reasons for the change is the federal 

government changed its rules last September, October.  They 

used to cost share those programs, so that if we spent . . . and 

actually in a way we're spending more, because if we spent $6 

million on employment programs last year, we would get back 

from the federal government three, because it was cost shared. 

 

In September, October, they ended cost sharing so that now 

when we spend 5 million on employment training programs, it 

costs the province 5 million.  We don't get that back from the 

federal government.  So there's a million less in these numbers, 

although in effect, in the long-term effect, it is not that great.  

And the other million is administrative, a series of small 

changes in tightening up the operation. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, you're 

saying that in 1992-93 there will be no federal monies and in 

1991-92 there was?  Was there in '91-92 and what percentage?  

What percentage of what? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- We can get the exact number for 

you, but the principle basically is cost sharing.  So that if you 

put in, as the corporation did last year, 6 million into training, 

at the end of that cycle, you get back from the federal 

government 3 million because it was a cost-shared program. 

 

So it would be approximately 3 million, but we'll get the exact 

number for you.  And that has changed.  Now it is not cost 

shared so the province pays the whole shot.  So in a 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2661 

sense we're spending more because our part of the cost last year 

was 3 million for the training programs; this year it's 5 million. 

 

Now what the federal government has said is that they will cost 

match it.  That is they will put the equivalent of $6 million in 

training programs into the province.  We're still working out 

that agreement with the federal government. 

 

So in sense we should, if what they're saying proves to be true, 

get $12 million worth of training programs in the province . . . 

or $10 million worth of training programs in the province.  Our 

5 and then they should cost match it and they should put 

another 5 million into their own kind of training programs. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  So, just so I 

have it clear, let's go to last year's . . . just a question on last 

year so I understand this.  The $11,341,800 last year, was that . 

. . was there a percentage come back from the federal 

government of that or was the percentage over and above that? 

 

This should have been . . . whatever's in here should be the 

actual spending, of government spending.  It should be because 

if there's . . . they'd have to show an income if there's money 

coming from the federal government.  If there's money come 

from the federal government last year, then where did it go? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- It's in a sense, it's a complicated 

process.  The department, New Careers Corporation, the 

Department of Social Services, same principle.  We spend all 

the dollars up front.  So we spend the total amount.  Then the 

province is reimbursed from the federal government for the 

cost-shared programs, but that money goes into Consolidated 

Fund rather than into our individual budgets.  It goes into the 

Consolidated Fund when it comes from the federal 

government. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay, I understand that, Madam Minister.  

That's fine.  Thank you very much. 

 

I want to move along here quickly.  Just for saving time here, 

because I do want to get on to Social Services, Madam 

Minister, could you send me documents or send us over 

documents that will show us where New Careers will be 

spending this money?  Would you be able to supply that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- No problem.  We can easily supply 

that.  A more detailed breakdown than what you have now?  

No problem.  Yes, we will. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- And of the total vote, Madam Minister, how 

much is for administration? 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Can we provide that to you?  It's 

more complicated this year because, as you know, a part of the 

Department of Social Services was basically carved out of 

Social Services and moved across to New Careers.  So we have 

to put together the consolidated picture.  But I have no problem 

in providing that to you. 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, that's fine. 

 

I just have two questions that I . . . two more questions and I'll 

put them together.  I'd like to have . . . Well maybe you can 

answer this one individually.  I'm just not understanding and I 

should I guess: what do you mean by when they put in the vote 

here ". . . Local Authorities and Other Third Parties"?  I don't 

know what you mean there or what it means. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- What that term means is that it's 

grants to individuals.  Could be, say, a grant to a trainee 

working on a program, and it also is grants to groups like, for 

example, a non-governmental organization that had 

successfully applied for a grant.  It would be a grant to, say, a 

food bank to hire the trainee as well. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you.  My last question is, is what new 

plans have you in the department for promoting new programs 

for 1992-93? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I think our major priority is that 

there's an imbalance right now.  The group of people who tend 

to be on long-term social assistance tend to be female -- a lot 

of, say, single-parent women.  Our programs tend to be 

programs, the training programs, male.  So we have to readjust 

that balance.  We have to look at ways to gear our programs to 

the long-term people on social assistance who tend to be 

single-parent women.  And that's our goal. 

 

It's a difficult one to achieve because it's often easier to provide 

construction-type work which tends to be male.  But that is our 

major priority for the next year. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, you say 

that's going to be the major priorities.  But what other . . . and 

you don't have to . . . you're going to get me some information 

anyway.  Maybe you could just give me an outline of what all 

the new programs that you're talking about initiating . . . And if 

that's agreeable, we can move on. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I'd like to thank the minister and her officials 

for coming in to answer these short questions.  I don't mean to 

just shove over New Careers because I think it's quite 

important.  But it's not a big department, not a lot of spending.  

And I think it's very important.  And if there's anything else 

comes up in my mind, Madam Minister, I can always talk to 

you and get answers I'm quite sure.  So I'm quite willing to let 

it go. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 59 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

New Careers Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 59 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 59 agreed to. 



2662 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

The Chair: -- The Chair would also like to thank the minister's 

officials for assisting in this estimate. 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Social Services 

Vote 36 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask the minister, first of all, to introduce 

her officials who have joined her in the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce Con Hnatiuk, who's the deputy minister; I'd like to 

introduce Bob Blackwell, who's the assistant deputy minister; 

and Elizabeth Smith, who's the executive director of support 

services. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Firstly I'd like to 

thank the minister for the pre-questions that we asked of her 

department and her office.  We've been through them very 

carefully and are very satisfied with the answers that came 

back. 

 

There were three or four minor ones that weren't answered.  

And you made such a good job of the important ones that we're 

not going to . . . There was a few about your office that were 

missed, but it's not important so we're not going to spend any 

time asking questions on any of those questions at all, Madam 

Minister. 

 

I have one question that I want to ask before I get into my main 

questioning here.  There was a name that has been brought to 

my attention, the name Kim . . . I'm not sure I'm pronouncing it 

right.  I'll spell it so I make sure I've got the name right -- 

D-y-m-y-t-r-y-s-h-y-n.  I think that's close.  Do you know who 

I'm talking about, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Kim Dymytryshyn. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay.  Sorry I didn't know how to 

pronounce it.  Is she paid for any services, any contract, any 

way in public by public monies? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- She's on the Social Services appeal 

board for the Saskatoon region.  She's actually the chair for the 

Saskatoon area. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So you're saying she's on a board.  Is that 

just on a board or full-time board or full-time worker? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- What it is, is it's if you have a 

complaint about the way the department's handled your case, 

you can appeal it.  And there's a local board, and this would be 

the board for Saskatoon.  Then if you're still not satisfied or if 

the department isn't satisfied with the judgement at that level, 

you can take it to a provincial appeal board. 

 

So it's a board that only sits when there are appeals to be heard, 

and they're paid on a per diem basis. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  That's fine.  

And the other name is Peter Prebble.  Is he working for 

government or getting any funds out of government, 

that you know of? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- He's not getting any . . . he's not 

working for the Department of Social Services, that's for sure. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Would the Department of Social Services, 

would they be paying any grants to any departments or into any 

other individuals or organizations that he could be working for? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- As far as I know, Mr. Prebble is not 

employed right now.  I'm not sure of that, but that's my 

understanding.  Certainly as far as we're aware, he's not getting 

any . . . no organization gets a grant who also employs Mr. 

Prebble. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- That's fine, Madam Minister. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, the only reason I ask that 

question, that I was talking to him a few months ago and I 

asked him if he was working.  He said that he was working but 

not being paid by government, and I wasn't just sure what he 

meant.  He was working for government, not being paid for 

government.  But that's fine. 

 

I just thought I'd ask you in case he was involved in Social 

Services because his heart and soul was always in Social 

Services, and he's the one that made the billion-dollar promises 

-- if we're to win another election.  I think he was sitting right 

about here, Madam Minister, when you weren't here, and I 

think his promises were the billion-dollar man.  He was 

nicknamed in here as the billion-dollar man. 

 

And I don't mean to slight him because the things he was 

asking for he believed in his heart was right, and maybe for the 

people of Saskatchewan it was right.  We might be talk a little 

bit more about some of the things that he asked. 

 

I want to start off, Madam Minister . . . I understand . . . I guess 

if you turn over to the Estimates, page 86, I would think that 

the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, that's where all persons will 

be paid social assistance.  Is that the funding that covers all 

people in the province for social assistance? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I'd just like to ask a few questions pertaining 

to that item.  Could you give me a . . . Just taking it for 

example that there's an individual, an employable individual, 

what would their total assistance come to?  An employable 

individual, whether they're living in a city or in rural 

Saskatchewan, or if there's any difference.  If there's no 

difference, I'd like to know please, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- They would be entitled to $480 a 

month. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you.  Was that $480 a month, is that 

the total basic monies they would receive, or does that include 

other benefits paid on their behalf?  Is that the total or is there 

other benefits on their behalf paid out? 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2663 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- That's the total benefits, and it would 

include -- I'll just read what it is -- basic allowance for food, 

clothing, personal, household items, of $195; utilities and 

laundry, maximum of 75; shelter, maximum of 210; for a total 

of 480.  So that's the whole package. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Is there any other benefits under certain 

circumstances that they could receive through Social Services? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- The only other thing would be a 

special-needs benefit, like if they were a disabled person, for 

example; or a health care benefit, if they became ill, they would 

have that paid.  And of course if they were in training, they 

would have their training paid as well. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now could you give me what a couple, two 

people living together, what their same benefits would be . . . 

the same answer for only two people living together. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- The total amount would be $870.  

The breakdown would be, the basic allowance would be 390, 

utilities and laundry maximum would be 365, and shelter, 115, 

for a total of 870. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now how about a single employable, 

keeping in mind all these questions I'm asking you are 

employable people.  Single employable with one child, what 

would he or she receive? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- The total there would be $855.  

Basic allowance, you know, food, clothing, personal, 

household items, $380; utilities and laundry, maximum $125; 

shelter, maximum $385. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So that one comes out to approximately, 

Madam Minister, 375 for that child.  I just figured that in my 

head.  Is that approximately right, 375? 

 

So if that's one child, now will it be exactly the same if you 

have two, three, four, five children as single employable?  How 

much per . . . what I want to know is how much per child after 

one? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, this is covered in the 

regulations and I'll certainly send a copy over.  But the basic 

idea is that utilities and shelter cap off after you have two 

children, but the increase per child is about $155 a month. 

 

But you know what part of this exercise shows is why we're 

doing an income security review?  Our regulations are too 

complicated.  They are very difficult for an average person to 

sit there and figure out what they're entitled to, so we want to 

try to simplify this. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well you said it there, Madam Minister.  It 

is complicated, because I've been dealing as an MLA going on 

to my 15th year, and it's . . . you talk to one individual and 

they've been to see about social assistance and it seems to be 

different 

under different circumstances and where they live. 

 

Now, I'd like to go back on that breakdown on a single 

employable, what is the housing allowance on a single 

employable?  I didn't get that on your breakdown. 

 

I'd like to, Madam Minister, any of that information you have 

there that's available to the public, I'd like to have it sent over 

so I'd have it.  I haven't got a copy of it in my office.  I guess I 

should have, but I haven't. 

 

But I'd like to know what the housing would be for a single 

employable? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- $210 a month. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now I ask you there, Madam Minister, for 

$210 a month, where does a person . . . what do you get for that 

-- for $210 a month?  I mean what are you going to get for 

that?  Are you just going to get a little one-room shack some 

place with furniture in it or otherwise?  Or what?  I mean what 

do you get for $210 a month? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think 

the member opposite makes an excellent point.  These rates are 

very low, very low.  So that you end up in very poor-quality 

housing.  You end up perhaps being able to rent a room.  So the 

rates are inadequate, and I can see that.  And I think it's a 

tragedy. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right, you read . . . here's a single 

employable with one, two, three children or otherwise.  But 

those children are going to be brought up in that home for . . . 

the $210 home.  So if they have a family, is there more 

allotment for that?  Say a single employable living in a $210 

suite, room -- it wouldn't be much of a suite -- but a whatever.  

And then a little child comes along or maybe after a while 

they've got two or whatever.  Does that housing increase at that 

point? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes it does.  A single employable, 

the maximum is 210.  But, for example, if you have a family 

with two children, the maximum is 365; at three children . . . a 

family of two, the maximum is 365; a family of three, the 

maximum is 385.  And it goes up in gradations until you get to 

a family of six, and the maximum for housing is $500. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I guess that's what would tell me if I was a 

single person, I wouldn't want to live in a $210 suite.  I think 

I'd be wanting to get hold of some children to live with me and 

live in a $500 suite.  That's what that really tells us. 

 

And I'm not making fun of the department at all, Madam 

Minister, because I know there hasn't been changes there for a 

good many years in some of those things.  But I think there 

should be.  I think it needs to be looked at.  There needs to be 

some changes here. 

 

But there's something that does bother me -- back, and this is 

going to take me back when the NDP were in government prior 

to 1982, when I was told that they actually would go out, 

Social Services . . . and maybe they did afterwards.  I don't 

know that.  I never was involved in 



2664 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

my nine and a half years in government with Social Services 

unless I asked a question or heard it in here.  So being critic for 

Social Services, there's just some things that I won't know.  

You'll know more perhaps than I will for sure, Madam 

Minister.  Do Social Services buy homes to put families into?  

Do they buy homes? 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- No, we don't.  What we do is we pay 

a shelter allowance to the individual and then the individual 

decides where they will live.  So it's their choice.  We just pay 

the allowance. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Madam Minister, could you ask your 

officials if it's been the practice of the department in the past to 

buy homes to put social assistance families into? 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chair, my officials said they're 

getting pretty old but this question pre-dates them.  As long as 

they've been here the department has never bought homes for 

people on assistance, but they go back into the 1980s only.  So 

as far as they are aware, this was never a practice of the 

department. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well if they go back to 1980, then they will 

know that out in my constituency of Simpson there was . . . 

And I hope this practice has come to an end.  I am sure that it . 

. . I stood up in our caucus and said, I never want to see this 

happen when we're in government.  And I hope it didn't, but 

I'm not saying it didn't.  I was hoping your officials would 

know. 
 

But in the town of Simpson there was two single individuals -- 

sisters.  And these people were on social assistance and it is as 

sure as I'm sitting . . . standing here that Social Services built 

them -- didn't buy them two houses  they built them two new 

houses in the town of Simpson and lived on social assistance.  

And I wonder if any of your officials recall anything about that 

incident.  Because that incident, it came up in this legislature 

before. 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, my officials have no 

knowledge of that incident.  But if you would like to provide us 

with the details, we can check for you and find out what 

records we have.  Because if in fact the department was 

involved, we would still have a record of that.  But certainly 

the individuals that are now in the department have no 

knowledge of that incident. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- No, I wouldn't ask the officials to go back 

that far because I went through that back in 1980 and it did 

happen as a fact.  I just wanted to get your commitment that it 

wasn't happening today.  And I'm not saying it didn't happen 

under our government in the first years too.  I don't know that.  

I was told it didn't.  But I know this case because it was 

confirmed under Social Services. 
 

I want to ask another question before I move off homes.  Do 

they buy homes . . . do they own homes in Saskatchewan?  Do 

Social Services own homes, period? 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- No, we do not own any homes. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now just another question before I leave.  

What people obtain on social assistance . . . the questions I 

asked you and you said you'd send me over a 

document.  Will that include like a couple, then?  I asked 

before, if you remember, I asked about the single employable, 

and then the single with a child and so on, and then a couple, 

and I don't think I made it clear that couples with children, and 

what the rates would be.  Just if that's going to be on the 

document you're going to send, we don't need to further that 

any more.  Just assure me that that's going to be on there. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- That information will be in the 

document.  What I'll send you is -- I would send it right now 

but it's the only copy we have here -- the Saskatchewan 

Assistance Plan regulations.  And I think . . . I've looked 

through it.  I think probably your impression would be the 

same as mine -- it's far too complicated. 

 

My deputy minister came recently from Alberta and he says in 

Alberta they have a one-page document which can be 

understood by somebody with about a grade 5 education which 

says, here's what you're entitled to.  So we certainly want to 

make this more in that form. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Madam Minister, could I then ask you 

then for . . . if this complicated book that I won't be able to 

understand and perhaps you don't understand and for sure some 

five-year-old picking up the book won't understand, could your 

officials or your department supply me with a one- or two-page 

. . . what is very simple.  That should be very easy for someone 

to take that book and just put her into a one- or two-page, 

because I think that's a good suggestion that the individual that 

came from another province. If that's what they're doing there, 

let's do it here. 

 

So maybe I could have something come from that book that 

outlines it all so when we have people ask about social 

assistance that an individual like myself who's an MLA, maybe 

a rural councillor, or a city alderman, or whatever, or just an 

individual, or people in churches, whatever, that work with 

young people, they can reach in the drawer and they've got this 

page and here it is, plain and simple.  And so could I ask if that 

could be done or if you're going to do something like that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much.  Yes.  We 

were waiting for the income security review because we're 

hoping to simplify the rules.  But we have no problem in 

providing you with a couple-page summary of what's here and 

what the key points are.  And actually that's an excellent 

suggestion because until the income security review is done, it 

might be worthwhile to have that couple-page summary for 

other people as well, because there must be other groups out 

there who have the same difficulty with these complex rules. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Madam Minister, I appreciate 

that.  All right, I'd like to ask this question before we move off 

this line of questioning here.  Where there's a time when an 

individual that's on social assistance and they're not 

employable, and they move on into their later years, what's the 

date . . . I mean what's the age that they have to move on to 

some other type of benefits? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Basically they move off our system, 

primarily when they become seniors.  They're 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2665 

eligible for full benefits at age 65, and they can apply for 

partial benefits at age 60.  So the most common way to move 

off would be to become a senior citizen. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right, Madam Minister, we have many 

people out there that I know that are receiving social assistance 

and they're employable, but there's not jobs available.  And I 

know that what the criteria is if they're not able to get a job and 

they've tried then they get social assistance. 

 

What is Social Services doing?  Have they got any special 

program because I know they sure used to condemn us when 

we were in government.  Here you're not coming up with 

enough plans and enough to . . . some new programs to get 

people off of social assistance.  I though we were trying to do 

our best, but maybe we didn't do well enough. 

 

But I know at election time that was the promise that you were 

going to do.  You were going to get people off social 

assistance.  What programs are you coming up with or have 

come up with that are going to get the employable to work and 

off of social assistance? 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- The main plan that we have is the 

community employment program which is an umbrella 

program really.  It involves . . . it's got different components.  

The target groups, the groups out there that we encourage to 

apply and we give priority to are, first of all non-governmental 

organizations.  They're our first target group. 

 

We include in that food banks, feeding programs, a child care 

centre would be an NGO (non-governmental organization).  

Another example of an NGO would be a small, private group 

that provides supports to families in crisis, organizations in the 

community that are non-profit, that are not government, and 

provide very valuable services to the community in terms of 

dealing with hunger or supporting families.  We put them at the 

top of our list as a priority.  They make application for 

assistance, and what we do is we provide someone on social 

assistance, goes and works at the food bank or goes and works . 

. . Some of our projects are planting gardens in the summer, 

and then the food from the gardens is used at the food banks or 

in the feeding programs.  That's the first target group. 

 

The other target group is more geared to rural Saskatchewan 

and its local communities.  I think, for example, there are . . . 

one of your members opposite, his community got a pretty 

sizeable grant, and I forget exactly what the community project 

was.  But they're community projects.  I think it was in doing 

some renovations with respect to rail ties or something. 

 

But those are basically projects that the local community 

decides what needs to be done in their community.  They apply 

and we provide people on social assistance to do the work. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So what you're saying, that you do agree 

that they should try to get people off of social assistance and 

get them doing something, if it's even 

community work.  You're saying that you agree that if there is 

community work to do, naturally they're getting their social 

assistance, but they would at least be doing community work 

where applicable.  Do you agree with that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I certainly agree that people on 

social assistance want to work.  And on the community 

employment program, for example, we've created, it's about 

600 different jobs, and we've had no problem.  Certainly the 

people on assistance seem, from my point of view, to want to 

work as well, that they feel much better about themselves when 

they feel that they're making a contribution to the community.  

And that's something we support as well. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Madam Minister, that's quite a 

change, and I'm glad to see that you think that way.  Because 

when we were in government back in the early '80s -- about 

1983-84, I forget the exact year -- Gordon Dirks became the 

minister of Social Services.  And he felt along the same lines as 

the rest of us, that if there's a day's work that you can do out 

there or a job, period, to get them off of social assistance . . . 

because I always believe in the philosophy, a day's work for a 

day's pay.  And if you're able to work, for goodness sakes, find 

them work. 

 

So what Mr. Dirks did was -- and my story, it's 10 years old 

now, but this is how I recall it -- it was to go in and prune trees 

up in the North in the winter.  And you only could get into 

these swamps in the northern . . . in the winter, in the colder 

times of the year, in the fall and before break-up in the spring.  

So what Mr. Dirks did was -- out of Prince Albert, I believe it 

was, Meadow Lake, North Battleford -- was to have people, 

young people that are getting social aid, but strong and healthy 

and could go do this job. 

 

And I don't know the numbers, Madam Minister, that signed up 

for this program.  But I know that after we did it, that all we 

heard from this side of the House was discrimination, that 

you're making these people go into that cold, north, old country 

and do whatever they were to the trees. 

 

Am I saying . . . am I hearing you say that you agree with what 

Mr. Dirks did now, that you try to get these people to do 

something -- do something that's productive?  If it's nothing 

else, it's doing something for the province and it's doing 

something for themselves, or learning how to work.  They're 

learning how to get their muscles in shape and become . . . 

learn this day's work for a day's pay. 

 

Are you agreeing now with what Mr. Dirks attempted to try to 

do, rather than say discrimination? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not exactly sure 

what Mr. Dirks was doing, but I do know what we're doing.  I 

think our goal is simple.  We want to encourage people to be 

independent and self-reliant.  And I think that that's what 

people want as well.  They don't want to be dependent.  They 

want to be independent and self-reliant. 

 

And with respect to the employment programs, I think what we 

did there is we listened to the communities and the 

communities said that they thought these projects 



2666 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

were worthwhile for their communities.  A lot of the work 

programs are still in the North.  I'm not sure that we have 

pruning of trees but I know the biggest-ticket item up there is 

fire suppression. 

 

And the communities thought the programs worked and the 

people who were in the training programs wanted to be able to 

make a contribution.  Their only hope is that they find 

long-term employment, which is our hope as well. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Madam Minister, I think you've been in this 

government now as a cabinet minister for about 9, 10 months 

and your philosophy's getting just the same as all the rest of 

them now, that everybody's just so co 

_operative and so nice. 

 

Just like we heard in question period today -- that we're just 

going to go out to the communities and we're just going to ask 

them about their hospitals and whatnot and their health care, 

and there's going to be no problems.  We're not going to 

interfere.  We're just going to let a local autonomy take care of 

it all, when you, Madam Minister, know quite well that all 

people -- and I make no bones about it -- that all individuals on 

social assistance aren't what you just said they are; that they 

aren't all wanting to get a job and want to make something of 

themselves. 

 

You know that there's people out there that wouldn't work 

unless you . . . if you took them right off and let them starve, 

they wouldn't work first.  They'd line up in the streets at the 

food banks.  You know that those kind are there. 

 

And we have to separate those kind because I think the 

majority of the people on social assistance are there because 

they can't help it.  They are there because of tragedies and 

things that went wrong, and they can't help it, and they couldn't 

get a job. 

 

But there's many people . . . and let's get off this nicey-nicey 

stuff, that we're always saying that the communities out there, 

oh, they all want to.  That's what you're hearing from your 

ministers, and I don't like a nice lady, to you, to start get like 

the rest of them in the front row.  If you start getting too much 

like that, you're going to move to the front row. 

 

So what I'm saying to you: do you, Madam Minister, agree that 

if there is work to be done in this province and you've got a 

strong, able individual, male or female, that can do that work, 

should they be told they've got to or lose their social 

assistance? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I guess I'd answer 

that question in two ways.  I agree in every barrel there's a bad 

apple.  We're all supposed to pay income tax and be honest.  

And there are some people who do not put the truth on their 

income tax form.  And I don't think it matters what group of 

people you're talking about.  Sure there are going to be 

problems.  But I think we are looking at two ways to deal with 

problem cases.  One, is we're . . . the individual social worker 

has a lot of discretion; that is, if a social worker really feels 

there is a resistance there, the social workers has a lot of tools 

at his or her disposal to force the issue. 

I think the other thing -- and I'd like to just recount to the 

member opposite, a conversation I had with somebody 

involved in one of the NGO grants.  It was a friendship centre.  

The guy had a got a grant from the department to hire a number 

of people, and he was an aboriginal person, and he was talking 

to me about the grant and he was saying exactly your point.  He 

was saying, I'm having trouble motivating some of these 

individuals to work.  And I said, but you know, really aren't 

you a better person to do the motivating than me because you're 

dealing with your own people who you understand. 

 

And I talked to him a couple of months later and he said that he 

was making progress; that he knew how to deal with the people 

because he was one of them and had been in a similar situation 

at one point in his life; and that he was having success. 

 

So it's a difficult problem.  There's no quick, easy answer here.  

But we show no signs in our system of people out there taking 

advantage of the system in any significant numbers.  And we 

feel that the tack that we've taken is one that will have a 

long-term success rate. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  You know, 

I'm going to say this comment because I've listened to a lot of 

socialists in this building, in this legislative, since 1978, speak.  

And I've heard on the opposition side and when they were in 

government. 

 

And somehow or other the answers that you're giving me and 

your thoughts, it pleases me because somehow or other, you 

don't talk like a socialist to me -- you talk like you're on the 

wrong side of the House.  You should be over here.  That's 

where you should be because socialists usually don't talk that 

way. 

 

But I just want to give you caution, Madam Minister, that if 

you keep on the type of thinking you've got, you're going to get 

in trouble with some of your back-benchers because they don't 

agree with your philosophy and some of the things you've been 

saying. 

 

Okay, I want to move on, Madam Minister, to . . . Mr. 

Chairman, Madam Minister, I just want to go . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Let's allow the Minister of Social 

Services to answer the questions and the member for Arm 

River to ask them. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I see in the budget like we talked before, on 

page 86 of the . . . Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, the roughly 

$240 million that's your budget.  Last year it was $205 million; 

this year, its 233,469 or approximately.  That's your estimate. 

 

Now what if there's a real run on?  That's your . . . And we've 

had the Minister of Finance say, there is no way; we're going to 

stick to this budget no matter who suffers.  We've been through 

it.  You've been listening to it for two months, Madam 

Minister, about the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

program.  They know it's the '91 program is the best for the 

farmers, but the '92 is best for the Minister of Finance.  We 

know that's the stand he's taken. 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2667 

All right.  What's going to happen if there's a real run on Social 

Services?  Is it fixed that that budget . . . But if all of a sudden 

there's 2 or 3,000 more and it goes a way above that, how does 

that work, Madam Minister?  How does that work in the 

department?  You just pay the actual . . . You pretty near have 

to pay the actual . . . But I'd like your comments on that. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much for that 

question.  It's basic entitlement program.  It's basically a 

federal, cost-shared program as well with the federal 

government, so it's entitlement.  You do not have the right to 

say, we've spent $233 million so the next person who comes 

and applies for social assistance, we deny social assistance.  

We do not have that right. 

 

So we arrived at the 233 million by projection.  We did our 

best to estimate what we think the demand will be out there for 

social assistance.  And so we have to hope that our estimate 

was accurate. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- That leads me to a question then.  That 233 

million, is that the same as when we're talking about in New 

Careers, is your federal cost-sharing there over and above that 

or included in that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- These dollars would be cost-share 

dollars so that essentially we would pay out . . . Say we were 

right on target, we would pay out to people on social assistance 

$233 million this year.  Then at the end of the cycle the 

Consolidated Fund would get the half of it back from the 

federal government.  But that would go into the Consolidated 

Fund. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So then what we're saying, that it's really a 

misleading figure, and it's no different than the past 

government.  So that figure's always been there.  It's carried 

right through.  But I'm saying just as . . . Mr. Chairman, to the 

minister, it's actually a misleading figure because we don't 

spend that much if we're getting a certain percentage back and 

it goes into the Consolidated Fund. 

 

So if you had to draw on more money, would you . . . Let me 

ask this question.  You got your 233 million that you would get 

a cost share from.  But all of a sudden it costs you 400 million.  

Where would you get . . . What percentage would you get from 

the federal government cost-sharing?  Would it be just on this 

figure or the whole, entire figure? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- The cost sharing would continue no 

matter what the amount.  What they would basically do is they 

would look at the end of the year and they'd say, how much did 

you actually spend?  So if we ended up having to spend 400 

million, we would get cost sharing on 400 million. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Madam Minister, just so . . . did have that 

clear.  Is that . . . I didn't hear you just quite well there.  But to 

make it sure, my colleague and I were wondering, that 233 

million, the cost-sharing comes off of that.  So just say for 

example you got $75 million back, it would cost 160 million 

for the department, and then the others would go into the 

Consolidated Fund.  Is that correct? 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- That's correct, and there's no 

capping.  The only capping is for the three wealthiest 

provinces, Ontario, Alberta, and British Columbia.  They have 

a limit, but we don't so if we go over that we would have it 

cost-shared. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- In your projections when you come up with 

a budget last April, in your projections you must have thought 

that that was going to carry through for a year or you would 

have projected for more money, of course, because last year 

they projected 205, this year 233 million.  So you must have 

been projecting perhaps some more. 

 

There's been a lot of changes in Saskatchewan since this budget 

was drawn up.  This would be drawn up probably some time in 

February, March, or whatever, those figures would be put 

together, probably March 31.  I'm not sure whenever your date 

was you put that figure together.  There's been a lot of changes 

in this province because this government has come down with 

their heavy hand on people pretty hard. 

 

I mean there's a lot of people with extra costs out there.  The 

GRIP program, if this crop comes off the way it looks, it's 

going to be like three-quarters of a billion less dollars and cents 

in the hands of the farmers in the province, plus that goes on 

out to individuals throughout the whole province.  There's been 

tax increases.  There's been . . . well almost every promise that 

the government has made it's been broken with more increases 

in dollars and cents. 

 

When SaskPower went up, SaskTel went up, SaskEnergy, SGI, 

income tax, E&H (education and health) -- they took 7 per cent 

on, and put 8 on.  I mean it was just . . . it has to be hard on 

individuals.  And the point why I bring this to Social Services, 

the jobs that people . . . the unemployed are higher than it's 

been for a long time.  So are you looking to . . . that there may 

be another large increase on that figure because of the people 

that may have to go on unemployment.  If a farmer loses his 

land out there, he's going to be on unemployment to have 

something to eat. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I guess I have two different answers.  

First of all I guess my own view of a budget is what you have 

to do is you have to be totally realistic.  That is you have to say 

here's our target; it's a realistic target; and then you stick with 

it.  It's a pact.  You say we're going to spent $409 million in the 

Department of Social Services, and I'm sure my officials will 

tell you that I tell them all the time we're going to spend $409, 

we're not going to spend any more. 

 

The estimate as to the number of people who would be on 

assistance this year we made as realistic as possible.  It was 

done as part of the whole budget process so that we knew what 

was happening in other parts of the budget when we came up 

with that particular figure.  So all of the things that you're 

talking about were taken into account.  When you're projecting, 

there's always a risk of being off.  But because it was done in 

the whole context of all of the other changes occurring in the 

budget, we think it is realistic. 



2668 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you.  A question that I'm asked a lot 

out there lately.  We'll talk about the people in rural 

Saskatchewan.  If you're a farmer and you have no . . . there's 

lots of farmers out there with no assets left.  They owe more on 

their land than what the land is worth.  They owe on their 

machinery.  And they're still hanging on because they're, 

through the boards and whatnot, some of them are getting 

leasebacks on their land and they're talking about a program in 

here for six-year leasebacks. 

 

So that we're moving into an era now where a farmer can have 

no assets to borrow money on.  So if they run out of cash and 

absolutely haven't, in some month . . . got a family and 

themselves to feed and there is, all of a sudden, no money left.  

Like for instance, I just had an individual just on the weekend 

that I . . . these sad stories I pick up all the time.  They are sad 

stories. 

 

But this individual thought he wasn't doing too bad for cash for 

the summer, but he deposited . . . he hauled the last of his grain 

out on July 31; he has no way of borrowing money, and he had 

this here wheat in his hands and the cheque, enough cheque to 

get him through and pay his bills and buy his groceries to get 

him into harvest. 

 

He deposited the money into the bank and the bank took the 

whole cheque and left him with zero -- not $1 to buy food.  

And they are taking some out of their garden, of course this 

time of year, but that's all they got is their garden, with no cash 

and no family.  These people, a lot of cases it's . . . you can go 

to mom or dad or grandpa or grandma or maybe you got a 

brother.  But these people are fairly new in this country, and 

they have no family. 

 

Now I'm not saying some friend won't come along.  But the 

question asked of me -- and this is a proud man -- but if I'm 

desperate enough, is there any place in Social Services for this 

individual to go to? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I can certainly tell you, yes there is, 

and we have had from the opposite side of the House 

emergency cases come forward in which there's just basically a 

cash-flow problem.  And sometimes the individual doesn't even 

have to be on social assistance in the long term.  They just have 

a month-long problem in which they can't provide the basics.  

We certainly have the capacity to provide that sort of 

assistance. 

 

We also have the ability in farming situations to base our 

assessment as to whether or not you need assistance not on 

your last year's income, which is the tradition, but on your 

current income if in fact you are having a crisis this year that 

would not have shown up in your taxable return last year. 

 

But I will make another general point.  The social assistance 

system was really designed for people who are on wages and 

lose their jobs.  It wasn't designed for farm situations. 

 

So it's one of the things when we review -- we're talking about 

income security review -- one of the things we have to look at 

is to make the system more sensitive to the agricultural 

problems that are out there.  Because it is not a 

system that is basically designed for farm situations.  It's based 

on the idea that you have to liquidate all your assets essentially 

to be eligible, which of course doesn't work in a farm situation. 

 

So within the next year, I certainly invite you and your 

colleagues to participate in the review if you have ideas in 

which we can change the rules to make them fairer to farm 

families. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Madam Minister, I appreciate that because 

that's . . . Now myself as an individual, and I suppose the 

majority of farmers out there in Saskatchewan, if they know 

what the future's kind of planning for them, what the future's 

going to give them . . . and I don't give much excuses to 

somebody going hungry on a farm.  I can remember back to the 

dirty old thirties when people had to go to farmers to get 

something to eat when they didn't have any money at all.  But 

at least they would . . . I can remember my mother carrying 

water from an old well to grow vegetables, and we always had 

a steer around to butcher and eat.  But there were some people 

living in towns didn't have that luxury. 

 

But I guess the point that I want to leave with you, that here's 

this emergency that can come now, like the case I'm talking 

about where this individual thought he had everything planned 

right and the bank takes all his cheque -- those situations like 

that.  And that's what I'm sure glad to hear from you, that I can 

tell an individual like him that at least he can apply.  That's 

what I need to know. 

 

And now the next question along that . . . because I asked you, 

I said this person had no assets to borrow on.  His machinery 

was already a loan at the bank.  There might have been assets 

in the machinery but not a lendable asset; they weren't a 

bankable asset.  Now there isn't an individual . . . you couldn't 

go to John Deere or Case or any finance companies or the bank 

if you've got a loan on a combine and say, well here, I'd like to 

take another thousand against my equity on that combine just 

to buy some food.  The banks just don't do that way. 

 

So if a person finds himself then in an emergency monthly . . . 

just say for one month or two months where they do have 

maybe some assets and they just can't borrow five cents and 

they have no money in the house, they could go and apply.  Is 

that right, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- They certainly can.  And as I say, 

we've had emergency situations come to my attention.  You 

would know this about rural people.  Sometimes they're so 

proud that it's really a friend or a neighbour who's phoning our 

department and saying that somebody should go out and see 

this family because they can't provide the necessities. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Madam Minister, I want to move into child 

care now.  We had a Bill go through the House here some time 

ago, and I can't remember . . . We had two Bills, Bill 13, 14 -- 

one was The Adoption Act, one was child care.  I forget which 

one it was.  I believe Bill 14 was the child care Act.  But if not, 

that number doesn't make any difference. 

 

Could you just in your words today here, tell me how that 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2669 

really affects the child today, the family of the child, and just 

people in general, how that Bill is really affecting people out 

there. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, we had put a piece of 

child care legislation before the House in first reading, but we 

pulled it after Martensville because what we found was there 

was a greater desire on the part of the public to do more 

changes in the child care system.  So that instead of just 

tinkering with it, we want to look at more extensive changes 

and we have already begun a process of talking to people. 

 

For example, the people affected in Martensville had given us 

some very useful suggestions.  So we will not be proceeding 

with any child care changes this session.  Next session we will 

come back with a more comprehensive piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Madam Minister, are you saying that that 

Bill 14, was that the one that you just didn't proclaim it -- it's 

just going to be put on hold?  Or was there another Bill that 

you were going to introduce? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- No, there were two pieces of 

legislation that were passed -- The Adoption Act amendments 

and The Child and Family Services Act amendments which 

were minor changes.  But then there was a Child Care Act, 

some changes to The Child Care Act which we have put on 

hold.  Because what we're hearing is that in light of what 

happened in Martensville, people want to look at more 

extensive changes to the system.  So that will come back next 

session in a different form. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Can you tell me now, under the present laws 

today, if someone suspects that a child . . . we're not talking 

about wife-beating here or spouse-beating.  I guess it happens 

both ways.  We're talking about child abuse.  Now what is the 

actions that an individual must do, an individual, if they report 

to Social Services that they're suspecting child abuse, what is 

the first thing that Social Services do? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- We have very strict regulations 

about what a social worker has to do, and there's simply no 

discretion in this case.  If there's any sign of injury, the child 

has to be taken immediately to a hospital to be examined so 

there can be an assessment as to whether or not, is this injury 

consistent with an accident or is it an injury that would lead 

one to suspect abuse; and the police have to be notified. 

 

And as I say, these are two rules in which there's no bending.  

They're absolute.  The child has to go to the hospital; the police 

have to be notified. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Madam Minister, I have several questions I 

want to ask pertaining to child care and child abuse, but the 

member from Thunder Creek wants to ask a few questions and 

I'll come back on to it later on.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

I would like to discuss the area also of child abuse.  The 

Friebus case, which I'm sure you're aware of, 

occurred in my constituency.  And that saga was one that was 

very ongoing with a lot of my constituents because of the 

numerous locations that the family lived in.  The fact that child 

abuse had occurred was not a surprise to a great number of 

people in my riding. 

 

There was a report done and there were some that felt it didn't 

go far enough.  The former critic, Social Services, I know was 

asking questions.  And today I would like to know from you 

sort of where that is going, and sort of the direction.  Because 

I'm getting people that were very familiar with the Friebus 

situation asking me questions; that they're feeling a little bit up 

in the air.  And I would like you to clarify that a little bit today. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- The case, because of concerns like 

the ones you raise, the case was sent to the Ombudsman.  The 

Ombudsman did an investigation and his conclusion was that 

the Department of Social Services in that instance had done 

everything it could to prevent the death of the child involved. 

 

The details are confidential because there's a lot of personal 

information there.  But I do think I can say that what the 

Ombudsman concluded was, although there were signs of 

difficulties in the family, there was no reason to believe, in the 

terms of the past behaviour, that the mother would do 

something like take a shotgun and shoot the daughter.  There 

was simply no pattern building up to that, so that it was quite 

an unpredictable event in that sense. 

 

But his main conclusion was -- he did a thorough investigation 

and he said everything that could have been done was done. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I'm wondering, Madam Minister, if 

when we do a review such as this, if we aren't so worried about 

the overall system sort of remaining intact, that we don't miss a 

few things. 

 

Because in conversations that I've had with a number of people 

-- some of them testified at the trial by the way -- that there 

were some things that were very evident.  I mean one 

individual said to me: we didn't want our children playing at 

their house any more because of these violent tendencies that 

were exhibited.  And the fact that Social Services had 

interacted with other of the children previously. 

 

And I know the concern, Madam Minister, that you and your 

officials had because I even received a call from one of the 

lady's relatives requesting me as the MLA for that area to 

become involved on her behalf, that Social Services don't have 

the right to take her children away. 

 

And I know that the to's and the fro's that occur there, but this 

one seemed to me to exhibit a lot of sort of a classical case 

history of where abuse will occur.  And I understand your 

reluctance to tear the whole system down because of one or 

two instances, but I honestly believe, Madam Minister, that 

there's got to be some more public input or some way that we 

don't threaten your system at the same time we're allowed to 

get on with it. 



2670 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

Because I think what we see there leads directly so many times 

up the road to what we're seeing now with the Young 

Offenders Act and changes, because obviously patterns of 

abuse lead to abusive people later on in life.  And I'd like you 

to comment a little bit more on that. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, thanks for that question.  

You've got the balance right.  I mean, what the member 

opposite said is true.  It's a balance because you have to respect 

the family, and you can't ever appear to be taking children 

away from their family for a frivolous reason.  Okay?  So that's 

the one side. 

 

Then the other side is, though, you can never leave a child in a 

dangerous situation.  So that is always a very . . . not always. 

Often it's black and white -- the child's safe; the child isn't safe. 

 

But often it's a grey area.  It's a judgement call.  And it's a 

judgement call actually made very frequently, not just by social 

workers but by doctors in hospitals.  Is this child abused, or has 

this child had an accident?  By police  

_- should we charge this person with abuse?  Or should we say, 

well the person has said yes, I hit the child too hard, but I'm 

going to reform and I'm going to take counselling.  So across 

the piece, professionals in this province daily make those 

judgement calls, and as I say, they're very difficult calls. 

 

Now in terms of the future, though, what we're looking at is the 

creation of the children's advocate or ombudsman.  We struck a 

task force to look at the form that such an office would take.  

And the role of that particular office would be to monitor the 

systems that affect children -- the foster care system, the child 

care system, any of the systems that affect children, including 

the Department of Social Services.  To ask those questions 

regularly -- are we doing the most effective job possible? 

 

And to take individual cases like the previous case and because 

these people are experts in dealing with children -- the office 

would be -- perhaps they could even do a better job than an 

ombudsman who is dealing with a whole variety of cases.  And 

to go back and say, what went wrong?  Could this have been 

prevented?  Do we have to change something in the system so 

that this doesn't happen again? 

 

So we're aware of the concern we share, and we have that as 

our first-stage response to the situation. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I think it's important, Madam Minister, 

that that be taken probably quicker than later, although once 

again you will have -- and I suppose it's necessarily so -- you 

will have a child's advocate who basically will deal with adults, 

not with children.  You're still going to have to have the 

judgement calls in most cases made by an adult in some 

position of responsibility in order to have the advocate look 

into a particular situation.  It still will be an adult judgement 

call that's made. 

 

I guess another area that will reflect on this, and once again it 

may be clouded by what we saw happen in Martensville.  As 

you know, in the last couple of years 

there's been a lot of discussion on what the best form of day 

care is -- whether it should be public, private, that type of thing.  

And I can tell you that there's a lot of concern because of 

Martensville, that people on the private side are going to feel 

some heat put on them by the sort of official bureaucracy, 

because of not wanting any repetition.  In other words, we'll get 

into a situation of perhaps overkill. 

 

And my own children have experienced both.  And I can tell 

you that there are a lot of very excellent people on the private 

side out there.  And I wonder, given what's happened in the 

province, Madam Minister, if you have some comments there 

that may allay the fears of people that are engaged in this 

debate. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, thank you very much.  That's a 

very good question, because again it's exactly the same thing.  

It's a balance.  There are parents out there who want to have a 

licensed, regulated child care service.  There is that group.  

Because of Martensville, the demand for that has increased. 

 

There are other parents however, who say, I know my 

neighbour.  I've known her for 20 years.  She takes care of a 

few children in her home.  And I don't want the state coming 

and interfering in that relationship because it works very well.  

So we want to respect that group as well.  We don't want to 

become excessively regulatory.  And that is actually, that 

particular dilemma is one of the reasons why we want to spend 

a little bit more time on the child care facility. 

 

And I think the other message that we want to get out to 

parents is that the government can only do so much.  That is, 

we can licence and we can regulate to a point, but it's still 

primarily their responsibility to do what they can to ensure that 

their children are safe.  And we put in the SaskTel bills last 

month, information about how to choose a safe child care and 

how to monitor it.  But they have an obligation as well to 

ensuring that their children are safe. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I agree with you, Madam Minister, 

because in rural Saskatchewan many times the institutional, 

government-run facility simply isn't an option.  You will find 

very few towns in my constituency, the largest of which would 

probably be under 700, that can engage in that type of a 

function and do it in any way remotely successful, looking after 

the taxpayers' dollars at the same time. 

 

So we're going to have to rely on private care institution or 

private care in most cases in coming up with some type of 

satisfactory regulations, and I know that review has gone on in 

the last couple years, and there have been changes to the fire 

code and this type of thing.  And I guess what I'm asking you 

is, given that you do have now at least a year, year and a half, 

experience of some of those regulatory changes, if it's working 

fairly well and are you expecting more major changes when 

you do bring that piece of legislation forward from what you've 

seen so far? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, thanks for that question.  I 

think really as a result of Martensville we got some very good, 

practical suggestions that we want to look at.  Let 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2671 

me give you an example, and this one came out of a visit I had 

to Martensville. 

 

The individual said there should be a distinction made between 

advertising yourself as providing child care and just being the 

neighbour next door.  That is, he was making the point to me 

that if I put an ad in the paper and I say mom of two will look 

after three children, that's fine because really what I've said is 

I'm a mom of two children.  Those are my qualifications. 

 

But he said we should be very strict about me saying, you 

know, Janice's child care service, because that suggests a 

professional quality that should require that person . . . if I 

wanted to put that ad in, I should have to go through a licensing 

process. 

 

Now I give that as one of many examples.  Think what 

Martensville did is it put people into the mind set of thinking 

about child care.  We're getting lots of different ideas, and we 

want to follow through and see how many of them will be 

workable. 

 

But our aim is where I started -- the balance.  There are a group 

of people who want regulated licensed child care.  We want to 

ensure that that's available.  But for people who want to make 

their own private arrangements with individuals in their 

community who they know quite well, we don't want to intrude 

into that relationship either. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Personal curiosity, are you saying that we're 

going through some type of a hearing phase on this before we 

get into further discussion of this Bill?  And the reason I ask it, 

I know lots of people.  My wife was a program director in an 

institutional day care for about a year and a half, upwards of 60 

children, a very difficult situation, quite frankly, to do anything 

with in a church basement, and has always felt that there was 

no place for an individual like herself to sort of make her views 

known with previous reviews of the system.  And I would think 

those are the kind of people that you would want to draw on to 

sort of strike the balance, as you say, as to what's worthwhile 

and what is simply a holding pen for children. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, thanks.  That's a good question.  

We're not going to go through a formal hearing process.  But 

certainly what we do want to hear . . . and probably a good idea 

would be to work through the MLAs, make MLAs aware of the 

fact that we are reviewing the legislation.  Lots of people are 

coming forward, but if individuals like your wife have other 

suggestions, to let me or people in my department know what 

the suggestions are. 

 

Because this is an opportunity . . . I guess you have to kind of 

be prepared to listen to people when they want to speak.  Now 

a lot of people do want to speak on day care, so that's what 

we're doing.  So I certainly invite the members opposite, if they 

have any personal experiences or any suggestions, or there are 

people in your constituencies who we should be contacting, we 

have no problem with that.  We would welcome that. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I appreciate the offer, Madam Minister, but 

it's very difficult for an individual to approach 

government.  My experience has been that most people are 

very overwhelmed with the thought of senior bureaucrats sort 

of one on one with them.  They're much more comfortable if 

they can relate their experience in some type of a forum of 

like-minded people.  And I know how difficult that gets 

because you find the extremes tending to gravitate to those 

situations.  But I'm not sure we're going to get where we need 

to go without some type of public expression over and above 

you or your officials or me sort of one-on-oneing with people. 

 

It's too big an issue because what is at stake is our next 

generation basically.  And I would like some thought given to a 

more formalized process.  If that's unworkable, so be it, but I 

would like you to think about it anyway. 

 

I want to go on to one other area -- and you can respond to the 

critic -- and that is the changes that were made to the . . . 

proposed changes to the Young Offenders Act because of the 

problems that have occurred with particularly violent 

individuals below the age of 16, I believe it is -- or is it 18? 

Madam Minister can correct me -- and the necessity to come up 

with a better system on particularly incarceration. 

 

Has your department played any role in that review?  And sort 

of where are your thoughts?  Because you must, through Social 

Services, end up dealing with some of these people and their 

families on a fairly regular basis. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, thank you very much.  As you 

would know, the young offenders legislation is federal.  I 

actually just recently instructed the officials in my department 

to begin discussions with groups who are concerned about the 

Young Offenders Act.  Neighbourhood Watch, I just happened 

to see in the paper that they have concerns.  Most of their 

concerns, from what I could tell from the paper, is about the 

federal legislation.  But I want us to sit down with them and 

figure out what their concerns are vis-a-vis our system. 

 

Our problem, I think, is we don't have choices.  The courts 

decide who has to be incarcerated and who doesn't.  That is, in 

adult corrections the judge has a lot of discretion as to whether 

somebody should be incarcerated or not.  The young offenders 

legislation does not give a lot of discretion.  So we're really left 

picking up what the federal system decides. 

 

I think if I could make a general statement as to where I would 

come from on young offenders, anybody who's a danger to 

society obviously has to be removed.  If there's no danger to 

society, the cost of incarceration is very high.  These are very 

young people.  You have to put as much emphasis as you can 

on rehabilitation and alternative measures.  I have no problem 

with the idea of punishing people for what they've done wrong.  

But I think when you're dealing with young people, it's 

especially important to have that other side there, looking to 

ways all across the piece of rehabilitating the person, so that 

they don't spend the majority of their life in an institution of 

some kind. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, I agree with you. 



2672 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

And I think by incarceration what we do in many cases is take 

someone who obviously has a bent for violence or for being 

sort of obstructionist in society, shall we say . . . will further 

that bent because they'll have the best teachers available 

possible. 

 

Now on the other hand we see the situation in the province here 

where we're closing down our work camps.  They were 

associated with the Department of Justice, but a lot of Social 

Services former clientele . . . I mean we have people that 

basically through work and other interactions were 

rehabilitatable without putting them into that tougher situation. 

 

And the questions that my colleague was asking earlier about, 

you know, allowing people the opportunity to do community 

work and service and that type of thing, appeals to me in a 

regulated environment far more than either incarceration or 

simply booting them back out on the street because our jails are 

full. 

 

And I'm really, really saddened by the fact that we've decided 

to close those work camps down.  I mean they provide a very 

valuable service to many of our provincial parks, to the 

communities associated with them.  And many of those people 

quite frankly don't burden our system further.  They don't come 

back and be a client of yours.  They don't bother the Minister of 

Justice any more because they're not habitual. 

 

And I really think that in conjunction with this we need to 

rethink that concept  And I know it's dollars and cents with the 

Minister of Finance.  But, Madam Minister, as the Minister of 

Social Services who doesn't need any more clients and 

certainly doesn't need violent ones, I would think that you 

might want to rethink that system. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I think certainly community-based 

alternatives to incarceration are the way of the future, not just 

here but elsewhere.  I also think though in Saskatchewan, 

something that will make a big difference in the long term is 

the greater involvement of aboriginal people in the system.  

And I don't just mean young offenders; I mean family support 

systems, the whole system. 

 

Because I think that when you look at the fact that in our young 

offenders facilities, 70 per cent of the institutionalized young 

offenders in this province are aboriginal, we have a major 

problem in this province.  It's one that there's no easy answer 

to, but we have to start dealing with it and we have to start 

dealing with it across the piece.  I think the way we have to 

start dealing with it is by getting the aboriginal groups and 

individuals involved in designing and delivering their own 

programs. 

 

I think they relate to each other the same as we would.  We 

relate best to somebody white like us, and as long as there's a 

culture gap there, we're not going to be serving the best 

interests of these young kids.  To me, it's a disgrace to our 

society when 70 per cent of the kids who are locked up in this 

province right now are aboriginal.  We've got to change that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, just when the member from Thunder Creek 

asked you some questions there I asked you about, and I'd like 

you to repeat that answer if you would, please. 

 

There's a child that someone suspects that they've been abused 

and they report it to Social Services, in what manner I don't 

know, but Social Services find out.  What is the first step that's 

. . . and the first step and a series of steps that Social Services 

do in these cases? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- First thing we would do is we go 

into the home; we talk to the child; we talk to the other people 

in the home.  So we do an investigation of the situation to 

determine what different individuals are saying happened.  We 

start with home.  We talk to the individuals in the home, the 

child and whoever else is there and living in that residence. 

 

Then we take the child, if there are injuries of any kind, 

anything visible, to a doctor to be examined.  Then we notify 

the police.  So that's the procedure. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Madam Minister, what if a child . . . let's say 

they're of school age or whatever, they're in school and a 

teacher suspects that maybe there are marks on the child or 

whatever, could be from child abuse.  Is there any special 

requirement the teacher is supposed to do if they suspect? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much.  That's a very 

good question.  The person, whether a teacher or whatever, 

whatever their occupation, has a duty to report that situation to 

Social Services, to the police if they choose. 

 

The Ombudsman in his report, his recent report, made a really 

good point -- there is not enough public awareness of people's 

obligations relative to child abuse.  This is not a choice.  You 

have an obligation, a duty to report any suspicions of child 

abuse to the Department of Social Services or to the police. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Let's just use, for example, that a teacher 

suspected a child was . . . He or she, the teacher, sees a mark on 

the child and you don't know for sure whether it was from 

playing or whether it was . . . It's hard to tell.  I mean you can 

see children that you don't know where they come from and 

what their family background is.  You can see a mark on this 

child or whatever.  Well did that child get a whop from it's 

mother?  Did it fall?  Or did it . . . What happened?  Did it fight 

with it's brother or sister or whatever?  But if a teacher suspects 

that this child may be involved in child abuse, who would the 

teacher contact? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much.  That's 

actually a very good question; it's very pertinent because the 

Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation recently made the 

Department of Social Services aware of the fact that they want 

to work more closely.  They're concerned about those 

questions.  Their teachers are concerned.  Because they don't 

want to wrongly accuse somebody but on the other hand they 

don't want a dangerous situation to go unreported. 

 

So what we want to do is to work more closely with the 

teachers' federation so that, for example, teachers 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2673 

probably should have training to make those sorts of judgement 

calls. 

 

But still, the same answer as I was making to the member, your 

colleague, it's still going to be a judgement call.  There's some 

cases in which you can say nothing is happening, the child is 

totally safe.  There's some cases in which you say something is 

terribly wrong, and this has to be reported.  There's a grey area 

in the middle.  And every individual professional, whether it's a 

teacher, a doctor, or a social worker, struggles with that daily. 

 

All we can do is give them the training and the information.  

But still in some of those cases it's going to be a struggle.  Is 

this something that should be reported, or is it just innocent. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, I appreciate your remarks, because 

these are serious situations, because you don't know whether a 

child is abused or whether they just got hurt.  It's a hard 

situation.  It's hard to make the accusation to a family or a 

mother or father or whatever, that you're abusing your child 

when perhaps they weren't.  I mean there's a fine line that we 

don't see.  And we know it's a very, very serious situation. 

 

But my question was, if you remember, Madam Minister, was, 

and I asked you:  what would the teacher do if she wanted to 

report it?  Who would she report it to?  To the Social Services?  

Or would she call the parents?  Or RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police)?  What's her duty?  Or any outside individual 

that have children . . . that are looking after children?  Would a 

school teacher  -- we'll use a school teacher for example -- 

would he or she contact the RCMP, or the parents first, or 

Social Services? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, thank you.  The teacher -- he or 

she would have a judgement call.  They could call the parents if 

they wanted to give the parents an opportunity to respond.  

That would be a judgement call as to whether to call the 

parents or not. 

 

But if there is a suspicion of child abuse, phone Social 

Services, local office of Social Services, or the police -- either 

one.  But they have an obligation to call one of those two. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right, thank you.  Okay let's carry this a 

little further now; we're just talking hypothetical so far here.  

Then I have a case I want to bring to your attention, or not an 

individual case because I'm not going to use any names in here 

of course. 

 

The teacher suspects that this child is abused and she phones . . 

. he or she phones Social Services.  So then what do they do?  

What is Social Services' first reaction, if they've been told 

when a child at school perhaps has been abused?  What's Social 

Services' move then?  Do they go see the teacher?  Do they go 

see the parents or the doctors?  What's the procedure? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- They would go first of all to the 

teacher to get the information and the allegation.  If the child 

was available there, they would talk to the child there.  Then 

they would proceed to follow the child to the home situation 

and then do an investigation there.  Then if 

there is any serious concern -- as I say, a doctor would be 

called or the child would be examined medically -- then the 

police would be called.  Then the police would do an 

investigation. 

 

And what you require . . . and this can lead to frustration on the 

parts of people reporting abuse, if the police have to have 

evidence that it has occurred, because if the police decide that 

the evidence isn't there to warrant a charge, then the process 

has comes to its end at that point until some new evidence is 

introduced. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right now I won't talk hypothetically 

now.  I'm going to just bring a case to you, Madam Minister, 

but I . . . for the protection of the families I'm not going to use 

any names of course.  And I don't have my notes here so I'm 

completely by my memory, but I think I understand it in 

generalities. 

 

This child is approximately three years of age -- some of your 

officials may know who I'm talking about -- and it goes to . . . 

This child goes to a school because it has a hearing 

impairment.  And the mother also has a slight hearing 

impairment.  And so this child in school one day, the teacher 

sees marks or a mark on the child.  And somebody from the 

hospital . . . The next thing that happens that we know about, 

that the hospital phones the parents and says, we have your 

child here, and gave the number since Social Services delivered 

the child to the hospital. 

 

The mother was, in her panic, and not being able to hear very 

good, doesn't know whether she wrote down a wrong number, 

but she couldn't find out until she finally phoned.  Her number 

didn't jibe.  And then she finally went to the . . . She phoned the 

school.  The school had closed.  School was over by this time. 

 

And then she phoned all the hospitals.  And the child was not at 

the hospital.  And then later that day or evening, someone from 

Social Services -- perhaps the police too -- came to the home 

and informed them that your child was in the hospital, was 

checked over and it was all right, and put in a home for a few 

days to look into the situation. 

 

Is that the right and proper manner to go through, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, no that's not the 

proper procedure.  The parents would be notified immediately 

if that occurred. 

 

In any situation in which there's an allegation of that kind, the 

paramount issue always has to be the protection of the child.  

So you have to take the child quickly, go through the steps to 

see whether or not there's danger.  But you can't take a chance.  

You can't say, go home; we'll see you tomorrow.  Go home, 

whatever.  You have to take the steps to answer the big 

question: is this child in danger?  And you have to stick to it 

until you've answered that question.  But the procedure would 

be, the parents are notified.  You don't just come and take a 

child away.  So the parents would have had to be -- should -- 

the procedure would be the parents should be notified. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you.  Because that's what 



2674 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

happened in this case and that's my understanding of the case, 

that the first knowledge the parents had, the child was in a 

hospital.  By the time the mother tracked down a number the 

child was taken from the hospital, already in a home.  And 

before the evening was over . . . like they were afraid that this 

child would panic.  A three year old child with an impaired 

hearing to start with, all of a sudden is put into a home where it 

can't see a face at all.  He doesn't see anybody . . . I mean 

anybody, a face that it knows. 

 

So the grandparents of the child very quickly come to the city, 

and they had other relatives in the city, and they asked -- still 

that evening and also in the morning -- if they could not have 

the child until they settled their problems.  Because the 

grandmother is an individual that has . . . that Social Services 

knew very well because she had taken children in her home 

through Social Services.  They knew she was capable.  And she 

was denied that right. 

 

And then I was contacted about the sixth or seventh day, 

approximately, and our office was contacted and they had 

contacted your office and several other people.  And I didn't 

know just what to do and I didn't like . . . They asked me if I 

would go the next . . . That morning, the grandmother asked me 

if I would go with them to see the child for the first time in 

approximately a week -- I think it was six or seven, eight days. 

 

(1645) 

 

I didn't think that would be the right thing for me to do.  So I 

phoned the deputy minister's office -- it was about 8:30 in the 

morning I believe -- and I told whoever answered the phone in 

the deputy minister's office the story, kind of thus far as I've 

said here, Madam Minister.  And they got some individual to 

talk to me -- and she was a very caring person, I really liked her 

attitude -- and said that she would see someone from her office 

would be represented where the child was going to be meeting 

the grandmother and the mother and the other two children in 

the family. 

 

And I came back to the buildings here, I was in caucus, I was 

called out by an individual that works in your office in this 

building, it would be an EA (executive assistant) of yours.  And 

I don't feel that his actions towards me were just the way it 

should have been.  I'm not into this thing.  When you start 

talking about children, and if they're abused, we've got to act; 

and if they're not, you have to act.  There has to be . . . We're 

talking about people's lives here and I do believe that you and 

your officials here believe the same as I do, that it's a bad 

situation. 

 

It's a bad situation to have a child away from its family entirely 

for whatever those days were -- I forget the days.  But whoever 

talked to me at the Deputy Minister's office informed me there 

was so many days goes by and then they have to meet and do 

something and I think that was the day that was up.  And so 

your assistant told me that there's been a series of child abuse 

here and that there's going to be charges laid by the RCMP 

(Royal Canadian Mounted Police). 

 

And that's the absolutely opposite story that I got from the 

grandparents, that there had been a problem whatsoever.  And 

I'm not blaming your assistant, somebody had to give 

him the information.  In no way am I casting aspersions upon 

him because he just told me what was happening.  And so I 

told him more about it then and about what I heard about the 

story, talking to the grandparents who live in rural 

Saskatchewan, and what not. 

 

And then the story now jumps, Madam Minister, to the Social 

Services office where the individual that was involved, the case 

person that was involved through this whole week, that the 

parents had to talk to.  And I don't remember her name.  I have 

it in my file.  Your office will know. 

 

And she was insistent because when they met -- the two 

children, the grandmother and the mother and the caseworker 

and some other individual I think from the deputy minister's 

office or somebody designated there -- she says when they 

started the conversation, she was absolutely insistent that the 

grandmother was not going to get this child.  The grandmother 

could not take the child out because how could the child miss a 

day or two of school, or what ever it was going to be -- maybe 

a week. 

 

So my thoughts at this moment were very serious, that here we 

have a child three years of age and it has an impairment and it's 

in a strange home and a grandmother that loves the child.  And 

we knew that Social Services knew the grandmother and said 

yes, you'd be quite capable of taking care of that child, but we 

don't want the child to miss a day or two of school.  That's the 

part that kind of upset me, Madam Minister. 

 

Anyway, I told your individual in your office that this is 

absolutely wrong -- absolutely wrong in the way this case is 

being handled as far as what I've been told. 

 

And so I was phoned by the grandmother that morning, and she 

wanted me to bring it up in question period in the House.  At 

that point it was going to be one of these public things.  I don't 

like that because sometimes something comes public and 

named.  It's happened in this legislature before.  And all of a 

sudden they're marked people out there.  Somebody says, oh I 

know those people in Regina.  I hear they're child-beaters.  And 

these things, you've got to be very careful. 

 

So I pleaded with your individual in your office, if something 

could happen to let that child go with the grandmother.  So I 

was phoned by about 1 o'clock that day, that the child would go 

to the grandmother, or I think it's going to go back home and 

the grandmother stay in the home until things were settled.  But 

there was going to be . . . the police investigation was through 

and there were going to be charges laid. 

 

Now what bothers me here -- and I'm not normally or 

necessarily wanting answers here -- I'm bringing this kind of a 

case to you because we've had several of the same and it's got 

to be handled in a different manner because the caseworker, 

when the child had to be handed over to the mother and the 

grandmother and the children, said:  I knew this would happen 

if the politicians got involved.  She showed temper, and I want 

to give you that individual's name because I think she should be 

dealt with, whoever she was.  She should not be a caseworker 

if a child is running to his grandmother with open arms and 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2675 

crying, Grandma, Mommy.  All the brothers -- the two brothers 

and sisters or whatever . . . and then somebody says you can go 

home, and some caseworker says, I knew that this would 

happen if the politicians got involved. 

 

Well I thank God that I did that morning get involved as a 

politician because it wasn't happening.  And I don't blame your 

office at all because they didn't know.  They'd have no way of 

knowing. 

 

I do thank the office, the deputy minister's office, that they had 

someone interfere at that point.  And I don't know just what it 

all happened at, I just bring you this case because I think 

they're prime cases.  Because it turned out that there was no 

police charges.  It turned out to be just about a nothing thing. 

 

And it upset a lot of families.  I had relatives of this family 

phone me from different places in the province, asking me to 

bring this case to the House today, just so Social Services can 

be aware, we can be aware, and talk about things like this, how 

we handle the balance. 

 

And if you want to comment on it, fine.  If not, fine, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, I would welcome an 

opportunity to comment.  I think one of the things as officers of 

this legislature that we have to do is that we have to work with 

each other on these sorts of cases. 

 

I think you did the absolute right thing by not making a public 

issue of it because the real person who suffers is the child.  Her 

picture, her name, or his picture, his name is spread all over 

newspapers.  And that child then has to deal with other children 

who know and tease the child and on and on. 

 

But I think what needs to happen is if you have those concerns, 

you raise them with me.  And I can tell you how the process 

should work.  But the Department of Social Services is people.  

The people who work there are people; they're human beings.  

So it doesn't always work the way it should; no system does. 

 

And we're quite prepared if you're saying to me, as you are in 

this case, that the system wasn't working the way it should, 

we're prepared to look into it and to be sure that it does work 

the way that it should, and that if somebody isn't performing 

their job, that they're dealt with.  Because it has to work the 

way it should, but it doesn't always. 

 

So the process should be the same in the future.  If there is any 

other concern, raise it, and we will look into it immediately. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you.  I appreciate those words and 

I'm not going to say any more about the case.  I'd just like to 

have your commitment that . . . We want to try and . . . I 

understand we're going to stop the clock and try to finish Social 

Services here because I haven't got that much more. 

 

And I do have the member from Morse that has a case that's 

quite serious and I have a couple more I'd like to talk to you 

about.  If I could just have your commitment 

that we could sit down before the House ends here and talk 

about these things, I'd appreciate that. 

 

And I do want to say thank you to the deputy minister's office 

for their co-operation with me that morning.  Because I 

appreciated that.  And I know in my files I do have the name.  

And I do appreciate the steps that happened from that time on. 

 

But I do want to bring you a little bit more about the case 

because I do believe it shouldn't be dropped, that whatever 

individual, you know . . . they should be contacted.  Maybe . . . 

There's always two sides to the stories and I'd just like to get it 

further a little more with you personally.  That's all that I ask 

you to do. 

 

And I have . . .  I just want you to commit to me that, and I'm 

sure you will, that we can sit and talk about some of these 

things. 

 

Madam Minister, I'd like to ask you your thoughts about the 

food bank, whether you agree with the philosophy of the food 

bank or not. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Well I think that food banks are a 

tragic reality.  I think it's a very sad comment on our society 

that we have to have food banks. 

 

But I think at the same time there are a lot of committed 

volunteers who see a problem out there that governments are 

not dealing with adequately.  They're also seeing food in the 

system that is being wasted.  And I know I've talked to a lot of 

the people involved in food banks -- they think that they're 

performing a valuable service. 

 

So it's a service that I would love to see some day eliminated.  

But in the interim, it's a service that volunteers provide, show a 

lot of heart in providing. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- What involvement does Social Services . . . 

Did they have any direct involvement at all with how the food 

banks operate?  What is their involvement and what funding do 

they pay towards food banks? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- The food bank gets no direct 

funding from the government.  It's just volunteers in the 

community.  And so we have no direct role in any way. 

 

The only relationship we would have with them is that we 

might . . . In the case of Saskatoon we put a social worker at 

the food bank because it's a good place to deal with people's 

problems.  Or they may . . . some of the food banks have 

applied for community employment programs and have people 

on assistance working in the food banks.  But other than that, 

there's no government funding. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- What's your view on how we can phase out 

food banks and handle the hungry people in some other 

manner, in some other way? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I think in the long-term what we 

have to look at is long-term job opportunities for people so that 

they don't end up on social assistance and they don't end up at 

food banks.  And I think tackling poverty 



2676 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

across the piece, but especially with job creation, is the best 

long-term solution to the problem. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Naturally I, like you, I don't want to see 

anybody go hungry.  And as I . . . the age that I see people go 

hungry in the hard times, in the '30s, it's a sad situation.  But I 

have a problem with the food banks because I think they're 

being created because of the lack of funding from Social 

Services. 

 

I see we have another Madam Minister in the chair there now.  

Mr. Chairman, I'm so used to saying Madam Minister, I don't 

know how to address the member from Elphinstone . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . right.  Do I have it straight?  Are 

you going to be answering questions while she's gone?  Fine. 

 

Mr. Minister, what I was talking about is food banks and the 

connection with . . . is in the connection with Social Services 

and food banks and how we eliminate food banks because to 

me it's got a dangerous precedent.  I don't know how . . . I don't 

want anybody to go hungry, but I still don't like people that are 

getting Social Service and then food banks too. 

 

If they haven't got enough . . . if we haven't got enough funding 

with social aid, maybe that's why we're creating the food banks.  

I don't know.  I'd like to have your thoughts on that, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

(1700) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member opposite knows that 

there was a major commitment made by the now government 

for the last few years.  And, Mr. Chairman, you will know 

because you were instrumental in putting forward proposals as 

well.  And the member from Saskatoon, Mr. Peter Prebble, did 

a lot of work on the issue of poverty in Saskatchewan.  And 

this is not an issue or a problem that is unique to our province.  

And in fact in many ways we have many more solutions, let's 

say, than other jurisdictions at our disposal. 

 

But the key solution to food banks is obviously trying to attain 

a rate of employment that's closer to full employment, having 

people with meaningful employment, and therefore alleviating 

the need for those many people now on welfare. 

 

And if you look at the number of people on welfare in 1982 

compared to 1991, you'll find that there was a fairly dramatic 

increase not only in the amount of monies that were being paid 

out in welfare, but also the number of families who were 

deriving their main income as a result of welfare.  So obviously 

full employment or something that would be deemed to be full 

employment -- meaningful jobs, a minimum wage that is a 

living wage, trying to have incomes that are relatively high -- 

because we believe basically that people with income stimulate 

the economy. 

 

And that's why when we talk about NAFTA and the North 

American Free Trade Agreement that compare average salaries 

in Mexico at $2 an hour or less, we have concern that heading 

in that direction will create more of a problem as opposed to 

alleviating. 

So it's full employment or something approaching full 

employment, meaningful income, and having fewer people and 

fewer families on welfare, I think would help alleviate that 

issue of food banks and poverty and children who are going to 

school hungry. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you.  I agree with those statements, 

the statement that the minister just said, Madam Minister.  But 

what still bothers me is, I do believe . . . but I don't know the 

figures, and I don't know whether the department knows or not, 

what percentage of people that line up at food banks are also on 

social aid.  Have they ever taken any surveys?  Do they know 

that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, thank you.  We don't know that 

figure and food banks don't want us to know about that sort of 

information.  Food banks guard very closely the confidentiality 

of the people who come to them.  I know when we put the 

social worker in at Saskatoon, I know the director told me, she 

said, I was very nervous about having a social worker here 

because I don't want you prying into our affairs or into the lives 

of the people who are coming through our system. 

 

And to me that's fair enough.  We don't give them money, they 

don't get grants from the province, they are a volunteer 

organization.  And I think that they therefore have the right to 

say to us, if you don't want to be funding us, keep your nose 

out of our affairs and let us carry on. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, it's become . . . food banks have come 

into the political arena.  Because I sat here on that side of the 

House in government for years while the NDP on this side of 

the House would blame us for starving people and lining up at 

the food banks and it's . . . maybe it should or shouldn't be.  But 

maybe there should be some way of Social Services getting 

involved.  You start asking people to feed the starving people, 

and people are good.  If they've got extra garden stuff and extra 

money, they'll help.  People in this good old country of 

Saskatchewan, and I guess it spreads a lot farther than that -- 

people are always good, to try to help other people. 

 

But what bothers me is, we went through at the very beginning 

of our Estimates here, Madam Minister, we talked about the 

funding for Social Services, the $210 homes, and dollars and 

cents per child, and the employable mother and father and 

whatnot, we went through those figures, and the figures are not 

high enough for today.  We know that, the way the costs are 

growing rapidly. 

 

Now is the funding from Social Services, did that need to be 

increased to slow down people lining up at the food banks? 

Because I think we need to know who's lining up at the food 

banks.  The people on social services haven't got enough to go 

around because they're short, or are they people that just spent 

too much money on booze the night before and go to the food 

bank.  And if the food bank maybe wasn't there at all, they 

maybe wouldn't have drank the booze the night before. 

 

I think there's too much just being abused out there.  And I'm 

always concerned about people say we're starving people.  

Well I don't think anybody needs to starve in this 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2677 

good country of Saskatchewan regardless. 

 

Because somehow or other I do believe if you're not . . . if a 

mother doesn't get up, or a father, and feed their child in the 

morning before they go to school, put at least some porridge 

and a piece of bread in that child's stomach, they would do it if 

they knew the child wasn't going to get fed when it got there.  

And maybe they would find the money to buy that porridge and 

that loaf of bread if they didn't spend the money on booze the 

night before. 

 

And it's so hard to get at it because we don't know who the 

abusers are.  But maybe Social Services need to get involved 

into the food banks and see who's who.  Is somebody that's 

worth a lot of money putting on an old pair of clothes and 

going lining up in the food bank? 

 

I mean we don't know what all this is about.  We're making a 

bigger and bigger issue all over starving people.  And it's not 

just sitting in food banks and nothing to do with the 

government, because they're asking for funding and we talk 

about it in the House.  And I just would ask -- maybe we 

shouldn't get involved -- to know what is going on. 

 

If we have to increase social insurance funding to slow the food 

banks down . . . or I think there should be some monitoring to 

know what's going on -- who's feeding who? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, thanks for that question, 

because you're raising an important point that I want to respond 

to.  Two things.  Social assistance rates are not adequate.  They 

do not cover basic costs of living.  If you look at what the 

poverty line is, social assistance rates, depending on the 

category, are 50 to 60 per cent of the poverty line.  So the rates 

are not adequate.  They don't provide enough money to cover 

the basics. 

 

But with respect to food banks, they are actually quite 

regulated.  It varies from community to community, but I know 

in my own home town in Saskatoon, the problem . . . you see, 

they have to go to stores and they have to say, give us food.  

They have to go to other agencies and they say, give us money, 

give us a van.  All of these different agencies that provide food 

or whatever other assistance to the food banks, require the food 

banks to regulate who comes through their doors. 

 

So in Saskatoon you have to be referred by an agency.  You 

can't just walk in the door.  An agency has to refer you.  It can 

be a church, it can be the Salvation Army, it can be a variety of 

agencies.  But some agency has to refer you to the food bank, 

so that people cannot just walk in the door.  I know, I've visited 

the food banks. They all keep records of who it is who's come, 

how many times have they come, and what their situation is.  

Are they on social assistance?  Are they on unemployment? 

 

So this information is all very carefully monitored by the food 

banks themselves.  What they're saying is they don't want the 

government, they don't want my department in there prying.  

But they do an excellent job of regulating themselves because 

they have to.  Otherwise, if they didn't, if in fact what you're 

suggesting was happening, the stores, the grocery stores would 

stop giving them 

food; Kinsmen and like agencies would stop donating vans or 

whatever.  In order for them to keep going to other people, 

other groups in the community and getting support, they have 

to be able to show that they are monitoring the system and 

regulating it. 

 

And I'll tell you -- as I say, I'm most familiar with the food 

bank in Saskatoon -- they do an excellent job of monitoring and 

regulating the system that they have. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Madam Minister, would it not be a good 

idea if . . . I don't know why they wouldn't turn their names and 

their books over to you, so you could find out if people on 

social aid were the people lining up in the food banks or not. 

 

Let me ask you this question.  Does the caseworkers for Social 

Services, are they one of the groups that recommend they go to 

food banks? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- No we don't.  And individually, 

when I visit the food banks, they will show me their records so 

that I can see that, you know, this percentage of people are on 

social assistance. 

 

And I can tell you, a significant percentage of the people using 

food banks are on social assistance and they're there because 

the rates aren't adequate.  That you cannot live an adequate life 

in this country on what you get on social assistance and that's 

what statistics tell us as well.  Now our problem is finding the 

money to make those rates adequate. 

 

What they don't want is, they don't want us prying into their 

affairs in a formal way, but certainly they have shared this 

information with me on an individual basis and there's no 

problem. 

 

And of all the systems we have out there, I have the greatest 

confidence that food banks are doing the best job they can to 

ensure that their system works properly and is not being abused 

by anybody. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, I agree with you.  From what I 

understand, the food bank people that are involved are doing a 

good a job as they possibly can do. 

 

So anyway you agree then that people that . . . there is people -- 

you've seen the list and I think it should be kept confidential.  

There only should be with the people in Social Services.  That 

there is people then, we have that on the record then, there is 

people on Social Services that go to food bank because the 

money's not enough to go around on the people on assistance.  

So that tells us then we either have to encourage food banks or 

raise the social assistance. 

 

Madam Minister, I want to be through here in a few minutes so 

I just have . . . all I had left that I . . . because we want to finish 

here very shortly.  But I want to put on the record and I'm just 

going to read it into the record, and this is from the 

billion-dollar man.  The promises made by this government in 

1991 election . . . I'm just going to quickly . . . I'm not going to 

get into the details of it.  I'm going to read the promise that was 

made and then total dollars in the end. 



2678 Saskatchewan Hansard August 18, 1992 

And why this here . . . These papers were put out throughout 

the province at election time.  Mr. Prebble used them and they 

hit some of the . . . I don't know how many ridings or whatever 

they hit.  They didn't hit in mine, but I know they did hit in a 

lot of places. 

 

So I'm just going to as quickly as I can put it on the record.  

There's about twenty of them I guess: 

 

 Resources shall be provided to Indian and Metis groups to 

develop appropriate counselling and support services for 

Indian and Metis foster children . . . NDP Policy Commission 

reports . . . 

 

 New programs should be developed to provide a high degree 

of local authority over Indian and Metis child and family 

services. 

 

 Amend The Family Services Act to allow Indian and Metis 

groups to establish child care agencies. 

 

 Establish a special provincial fund so that any school board, 

school or day care can obtain sufficient funding to establish 

and operate a breakfast and lunch program. 

 

 Increase Saskatchewan Assistance Plan rates to poor families. 

 

 Quality affordable housing is a basic human right and a deep 

concern for older women. 

 

 Fully accessible family counselling and therapy services are 

essential to reducing the stressful conditions under which 

many families operate. 

 

 Assist underprivileged youth. 

 

 Domestic violence must be combatted with the creation of 

network of support services with adequate funding. 

 

 Improvement of child care. 

 

 Stop physical and sexual abuse against children by building a 

commitment to a solution to the problem. 

 

 Adopt the practise of the United Nations Convention on the 

Rights of the Child. 

 

 A system of guaranteed income and universal, portable and 

indexed negotiable pensions. 

 

 Eradicate family poverty through a program of full 

employment and a system of family support. 

 

 Fund Child Counsellors at all shelters. 

 

 Put into effect a children's guardian in this province. 

 

 Day Care accessible to middle income earners. 

 

 Reinstitution of the northern food transportation subsidy. 

 . . . improve the lot of the disabled including a $150 a month 

increase in the monthly allowance. 

 

 . . . called on the government to . . . stop deducting Canada 

Pension Plan benefits from (Social Assistance) cheques and 

to develop a policy that would bring disabled people up to the 

provincial poverty line. 

 

 Increase Social Assistance payments for disabled $5 million 

annually . . . We . . . are calling on the PC Government to 

implement a plan that will see within five years all disabled 

persons in the province of Saskatchewan being able to live at 

the poverty line. 

 

 We are calling on the PC Government to stop deducting 

disability benefits under the Canada Pension Plan from social 

assistance cheque of persons who receive these disability 

benefits. 

 

 . . . the provincial government should boost social assistance 

payments by 20 per cent or $20 million as a first step to 

easing the problem (food bank problem). 

 

 (Saskatchewan government) should also bring in a winter 

works program. 

 

 (Saskatchewan government) should also increase Family 

Income Plan benefits. 

 

 (Saskatchewan government) should also increase the 

minimum wage by 50 cents an hour immediately and another 

50 cents next July, in conjunction with establishment of a 

minimum wage board to rule on further increases. 

 

 (Saskatchewan government) should also reinstate 

transportation allowances. 

 

 (Saskatchewan government) should also lift the cap on utility 

rates for social assistance recipients. 

 

 (Saskatchewan government) should stop deducting family 

allowances from social assistance payments. 

 

 Department of Social Services will not provide (severely 

handicapped) with funding to have a live-in home maker. 

 

The total cost of all these promises that I said are all itemized, 

and I will send you a list of everything itemized here.  There's 

$904,367,700. 

 

Those were the promises that the Social Services and the NDP 

government made in the last election; and I'm wondering where 

that billion dollar figure is.  If you're going to make those kind 

of promises, then should follow through with it over a long 

period of time.  And I'd like the minister . . . That's my only . . . 

my last question I'll be asking.  I won't be getting up again 

other than to closing remarks.  What is your feeling on the 

million-dollar, billion-dollar man, that he made this promises 

and on 



August 18, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2679 

behalf of the NDP government? 

 

And I don't see anything, any place, anywhere in the Estimates 

that answers any of those questions.  And I shouldn't say 

maybe "any."  Pretty near 100 per cent of those questions are 

not answered in this budget today. 

 

(1715) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much.  I guess my 

answer would be this.  In politics you have to have long-term 

goals.  Our Premier talks as well about eliminating poverty.  

He's not stupid.  He knows that that can't be done overnight.  

And it's not going to be done in the first term of this 

government.  And it might not be done in the second or the 

third or the fourth term of this government.  But you still have 

to have goals there, targets that you're aiming for. 

 

And I think that what you read there were a series of targets 

that at some point the government aims at.  Now I didn't keep 

track of the list.  But when you send me the list, I'll send back a 

little answer.  We actually have begun on a number of those 

initiatives.  Social assistance rates were increased.  People can 

keep a little bit more of their disability pensions.  We have 

moved to give child care centres some more assistance.  And as 

I say, I can't remember the whole list. 

 

But I do think that in politics, if you don't have the long . . . if 

you don't dream a little bit, that is you don't have a long-term 

dream, a long-term vision, then you're just basically a 

short-term manager of a bunch of money and a series of 

resources.  And that's the way I would respond to what you 

read.  It's a long, long, long-term vision. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I'm going to 

do as I said.  The copy of that . . . There's about 30 pages I'm 

going to photocopy in the morning and send them to your 

office.  And we can talk again about it. 

 

I'd just like to thank you and your officials for . . . We've been, 

between the two departments, about three and a half hours.  

And I thank you personally, Madam Minister, for your 

straightforward answers.  And I guess that's all I can say.  

Thank you, and thanks again to the officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, I'd like to thank the members 

opposite too.  I think this has been a very civilized exchange 

this afternoon.  And to me, this is the way the system should 

work, the way it has this afternoon. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 36 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Social Services 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 36 

 

Items 1 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 36 agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- The chair would like to thank the minister and 

the opposition, and in particular, the officials for their 

assistance in deliberation for Estimates this afternoon. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:25 p.m. 

 

 

 

 


