




















































Hansard: August 11, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2257 

 August 11, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In our eagerness to 

present these, my colleague got up at the same time.  I have 

some petitions to table for the Legislative Assembly's 

consideration this afternoon, Mr. Speaker: 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

that back pain and other highly prevalent 

neuro-musculo-skeletal disorders are extremely costly to 

the Canadian economy; 

 

that scientific evidence clearly illustrates that chiropractic 

treatment is the most cost effective and efficient therapy 

for such disorders; 

 

that in the face of an ever increasing pressure to adopt 

expensive new forms of high technology treatment, 

chiropractic care has proven to be a low technology, low 

cost, conservative, and safe form of treatment, consistent 

with the true wellness model of health care; 

 

that the government publicly asserts it remains committed 

to the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

comprehensiveness, accessibility, portability, and public 

administration; 

 

that the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to chiropractic patients; 

 

and that the government's proposed restrictions on this 

therapy will clearly cost more both in dollars and in 

patient disability. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full 

coverage and universal access to chiropractic treatment 

and that your Honourable Assembly withhold consent 

from any government proposal to discriminate against 

chiropractic patients by charging them fees not assessed 

for any other medical treatment. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have about a half a dozen sheets here.  We got 

about 1,580-some petitions in yesterday.  And as they continue 

to come in, I find that they are from Prince Albert, Spruce 

Home, Birch Hills, Spiritwood, another one from Prince 

Albert, Mr. Speaker.  Saskatoon, entire sheet basically from 

Saskatoon here; Prince Albert, St. Brieux.  Most of them are 

from Prince Albert on this particular sheet. Birch Hills, 

however, has a couple of extras on there as well. 

This sheet is mostly Prince Albert.  Melfort, there is one from 

Melfort, Mr. Speaker.  And then we go to the southern part of 

the province: Assiniboia, Caronport, Moose Jaw.  And I find 

here, Mr. Speaker, that most of them are from Moose Jaw and 

then back up north to Prince Albert.  This sheet is almost 

entirely from Prince Albert, Spiritwood. 

 

And so it goes, Mr. Speaker, and it gives me pleasure to table 

these petitions for the House's perusal.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have more 

petitions to table today concerning chiropractor treatment in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  As my colleague the member from 

Rosthern read the whole thing, I'll just read this one last 

paragraph, Mr. Speaker, where I think is one of the most 

important parts of it: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I'll just go through some of these here.  This 

one here, the first ones are from Wilkie, Cut Knife, Rockhaven, 

North Battleford, Landis, Major, Unity, Kerrobert, Unity -- 

quite a few from Unity. 

 

The next one, Mr. Speaker, it looks like it's entirely Saskatoon.  

They didn't put Saskatoon on all of them, but it looks like 

Saskatoon addresses, but they haven't got Saskatoon beside 

them.  So that's entirely Saskatoon.  And the next one, Mr. 

Speaker, also is all Saskatoon.  One from Martensville and the 

rest are Saskatoon. 

 

And the last one, Mr. Speaker, is Moose Jaw, Caronport, 

Elbow, Moose Jaw.  Yes, that pretty well covers them.  Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker.  I now table these. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm just going to read part of the 

prayer that was presented that's on this petition.  And I read: 

 

 that the government publicly asserts it remains committed to 

the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

comprehensiveness, accessibility, portability, and public 

administration; 

 

 that the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to chiropractic patients; 

 

 and that the government's proposed restrictions on this 

therapy will clearly cost more in both dollars and in patient 

disability. 



2258 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I have a number of pages of petitions here, Mr. Speaker, to 

present to the Assembly.  Petitions that have been signed by 

people from Star City; Humboldt; Naicam; Melfort; Saskatoon; 

Lake Lenore; Rose Valley; Carmel; Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, a 

number from the Moose Jaw area; Clavet; again Melfort; 

Hudson Bay; Wadena; Bjorkdale; Lake Lenore; Pleasantdale; 

Tisdale; Bruno; St. Benedict; Brooksby; Porcupine Plain; Saint 

Front; Quill Lake.  Again, Mr. Speaker, most of the petitions 

have been signed by people in that north-east part of the 

province, including people from Pilger, and Prince Albert, and 

Hague, Mayview.  And again a number from the Saskatoon 

area. 

 

I so present them to the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a number 

of pages of petitions.  I think they number about 11 or 12.  Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to read what I think is a couple of very 

important paragraphs in the prayer, rather than the whole 

prayer.  And it says here: 

 

 that scientific evidence clearly illustrates that chiropractic 

treatment is the most cost effective and efficient therapy for 

such disorders (talking about backs and stuff); 

 

And it says also: 

 

 that in the face of an ever increasing pressure to adopt 

expensive new forms of high technology treatment, 

chiropractic care has proven to be a low technology, low cost, 

conservative, and safe form of treatment, consistent with the 

true wellness model of health care; 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think those two paragraphs are very significant 

when we're talking about health care. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I have allowed the members to do 

some reading.  First of all, I want to indicate that if one 

member reads the preamble to it . . . I've been very generous in 

allowing other members to selectively pick out of those, but 

when they start commenting on them then the member is really 

out of order.  And I think he knows that.  So I want the member 

to proceed. 

 

Order.  I don't need any comments from the members on this 

side.  I'll make the ruling and let the members decide. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Let the record show that was the 

government side. 

The Speaker: -- Order.  That was the government over there, 

but this one happened to be in opposition. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I certainly respect 

your ruling. 

 

I too, Mr. Speaker, would like to draw to the attention of the 

Assembly of the wide-ranging areas from which these petitions 

come:  Saskatoon, Regina, quite prevalent.  Also I noticed, Mr. 

Speaker, Yorkton and Unity for instance.  Macklin, Provost, 

Major -- and those are in my own territory, Mr. Speaker, and I 

recognize a lot of the names.  And I can assure you, sir, that 

this crosses all political lines. 

 

Torquay is another.  Estevan, Bienfait, Estevan, I go on, Mr. 

Speaker, to Estevan, Gainsborough, Carievale, Oxbow, 

Carnduff, quite a few from Carnduff.  Mr. Speaker, as I said, 

several pages from my own area and I recognize a lot of the 

names: Little Pine, and it goes up onto the reservation, Scott, 

Unity, Hoosier, Winguard. 

 

And I would like to just stand now, Mr. Speaker, to table these 

several pages of petitions. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a list of 

names of people who have signed, dealing with chiropractic 

care.  They are from Saltcoats, Yorkton, Calder, Melville, 

Willowbrook, Hazel Dell, Esterhazy, Canora, Springside, 

Tisdale, Bjorkdale, Hudson Bay, Porcupine Plain, Nipawin, 

Carrot River, Aylsham, Naicam, Perdue, Star City, White Fox, 

Weekes, North Battleford, Unity, Denzil, Meota, Wilkie, 

Meadow Lake, Saskatoon, and many others.  I'm going to 

present them. 

 

I also have to present today another petition that deals with the 

livestock cash advance.  And it says here this: 

 

 To the Honourable Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

Legislature Assembled: 

 

 The Petition of the undersigned citizens of the Province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 That the provincial Livestock Cash Advance program was 

vital in putting the Saskatchewan Livestock industry on an 

equal footing with the national grains sector, enabling 

Saskatchewan grain to be efficiently used in local industry, 

thereby supporting the entire agricultural backbone of the 

province, and that the provincial NDP publicly acknowledged 

the need for cash advance programs when they demanded the 

federal government restore the grains based program, and 

that the provincial government is taking a variety of actions 

in addition to eliminating the Livestock Cash Advance such 

as imposing taxes on farm fuels, increasing utility rates and 

imposing other hardships such that the additional loss of the 

Livestock Cash Advance will destroy many family operations 

and further cripple the provincial economy; 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2259 

the Government to restore the Livestock Cash Advance 

program. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I have another one here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 To the Honourable Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think I've made a ruling on 

that before that the members . . . I've been very generous in 

allowing you to present two.  But each member . . . I think if 

the member has another one, he should reserve it for another 

day. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's a different one. 

 

The Speaker: -- I know it's a different one.  But this is in 

keeping with the ruling that was made in the past.  Order.  The 

member will certainly have another opportunity on another day 

to present that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have petitions 

with respect to chiropractic care in the province.  These ones 

come from . . . the first number of them are primarily from 

Regina and surrounding area.  And the last three are all from 

the area of Kamsack, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would 

like to present some petitions from the people of 

Saskatchewan.  I will read out the one paragraph: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from North Battleford, 

Sonningdale, Delmas, Wood Mountain, Mayfair, Gallivan, 

Paynton, Cochin, Glenbrunch, Dodsland, Glaslyn, Richard, 

Swift Current, Hodgeville, Gravelbourg, Gull Lake, Sceptre, 

Webb.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I present these petitions. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I as well am 

presenting petitions on behalf of petitioners, with regard to the 

chiropractic problem that has been read earlier today.  We have 

from several communities around the province concerned 

petitioners from Netherhill, Empress, Kerrobert, Plenty, 

Alsask, Marengo, Flaxcombe, Leader, Eatonia, Eston, 

Kindersley, Biggar, Saskatoon, Neilburg, Prince Albert, 

Assiniboia, Mendham, and from Moose Jaw.  He'll take interest 

that many people from Moose Jaw, the beautiful city of Moose 

Jaw are expressing their concern -- over 1,000 names I believe 

today, Mr. Speaker.  And I present these at this time. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am going to present 

some petitions to the House with respect to 

chiropractic care.  Just the last sentence of the petition: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

And a large number of petitions, Mr. Speaker, from Swift 

Current and area, including Gull Lake, Webb, Cabri; Neville, 

Saskatchewan. More from Sceptre and Hodgeville, more from 

Swift Current, and two pages from Saskatoon and area.  Mr. 

Speaker, I present these petitions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have a 

number of petitions today.  They are two different ones.  

Because the one has not been presented before today, I will 

read it in its entirety: 

 

 To the Honourable Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

Legislature Assembled: 

 

 The Petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 That the provincial Feedgap program has been an essential 

tool in the preservation of a competitive Livestock, Feeding, 

Slaughter and Packing industry in the province, and just as 

grain farmers need and deserve support to preserve their 

competitive position in the face of unfair subsidy practices of 

others, so too our highly competitive livestock industry must 

be protected against the unfair subsidy practices of others and 

further that the loss of FeedGap will result in thousands of 

jobs destroyed, homes lost and the crippling of an entire 

industry, 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

Government to restore the FeedGap program or to establish 

another, equally effective program as is its duty to the 

province. 

 

And I have today, Mr. Speaker, people from Mortlach, Caron, 

Parkbeg, Moose Jaw, Outlook, a number from Moose Jaw, the 

entire Moose Jaw trading area. 

 

And I also today, Mr. Speaker, have petitions concerning the 

chiropractors.  I'll only read the last sentence on that one. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 



2260 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

And I have a page here that has people from Riverhurst, 

Hodgeville, Moose Jaw mostly, Saskatoon, Saskatoon, Yellow 

Grass, Pangman, Osage, Weyburn, Radville, Gladmar, Cupar, 

Moose Jaw, Weyburn -- mostly Weyburn.  I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Deputy Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions 

have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby 

read and received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to re-evaluate the elimination of the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to de-insure optometric 

services. 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce some very special guests seated along the floor of the 

legislature.  They're members of the Saskatchewan Abilities 

Council, and with them are two staff people, Jill Hunt and 

Kerri Buckberger.  Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too on behalf of 

the official opposition would like to welcome our guests on the 

floor of the legislature today.  We hope you enjoy yourself here 

and I ask all members to again applaud these people.  Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I have the 

pleasure of introducing to you and to members of the House 

two students who are sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  The 

students are Iryna Synychak and Lesia Luciuk who are visiting 

the legislature here today, along with Lesia's sister, Stefania, 

and Mr. and Mrs. Gerry Luciuk who are serving as chaperons. 

 

Now Iryna has come to this Assembly after completing a 

session of summer school class taking the English language in 

the Mohyla Institute in Saskatoon, along with Lesia.  She 

comes from Ukraine, from the city of Kolomaya which is about 

200 kilometres west of Lvov and is looking forward to possibly 

taking classes in Edmonton this summer. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.) 

I ask all members to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Changes to GRIP 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, yesterday 

the Attorney General refused to stand in the House and answer 

a reasonable question placed by the opposition leader regarding 

the retroactive GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

legislation.  Mr. Speaker, today I have a simple question for the 

minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, a preamble and a piece of the legislation is 

usually reserved for those that directly affect the constitutional 

rights of individuals.  There is a lengthy preamble to the GRIP 

legislation, so one can only believe that your department has 

recognized the effect this kind of legislation has on the Charter 

of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you at least agree that the retroactive GRIP 

legislation does indeed affect an individual's rights? -- in this 

case, Saskatchewan farm families who are taking your 

government to court.  Would you agree to that simple 

assessment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, last week, I believe, I 

reminded the members opposite that in their second term in 

office -- not counting any of the travesties they committed in 

the first -- they passed 70 pieces of retroactive legislation.  The 

sense that they now try to give the public that . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  If question period is going to start like 

that, we're going to have a lot of trouble here.  There was no 

interruption when the member asked his question; I don't want 

any interruption when the minister is answering. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Well we're asking, they're not answering. 

 

The Speaker: -- Is the member from Arm River questioning 

my judgement in the Chair here?  And I just want to warn him, 

I will not accept that kind of interruption. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, with that kind of record, I 

find it ludicrous that the members should even ask questions 

about retroactive legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I'm 

surprised that again the Minister of Justice has passed the 

question to the Minister of Agriculture because the question I 

am asking is not talking about the harm your government's 

policies are having on the economy.  I'm asking about 

individual rights as guaranteed by the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms.  I believe the Minister of Justice is responsible and I 

hope that he will respond. 

 

To the Minister of Justice.  I believe there is no question 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2261 

that this legislation has serious implications on our 

constitutional rights.  We see the Premier in Ottawa pretending 

to fight for those rights while tearing them down in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

A simple question: will you refer the retroactive GRIP 

legislation to the Court of Appeal under The Constitutional 

Questions Act for a ruling regarding its constitutionality? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the members are opposite . . . 

opposite are now aware . . . and they are also opposite . . . and 

obstinate. 

 

The members opposite are aware that the legislation that was 

introduced last week after too many days of obstructionist 

tactics by the members opposite simply introduces the GRIP 

legislation which was recommended to us by a broad producer 

committee, and the legislation provides for its effective 

implementation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, again to the Minister of Justice.  The 

minister will remember that back in 1989 a heated debate took 

place regarding the electoral boundaries Act, and the former 

administration of the day referred The Representation Act to 

the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court of Canada to 

determine its constitutionality.  The case was heard quickly and 

the matter resolved. 

 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, this is the most honourable and impartial 

thing to do.  The Bill could be passed in this Assembly with a 

provision for its enforcement once the Bill's constitutionality is 

confirmed. 

 

Will the minister give . . . will you give this course of action 

the serious consideration it deserves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, we would not be bringing 

this legislation forward if it was not legitimate and legal. It 

represents the implementation of a program which corrects 

many errors that were made in the hasty implementation of the 

program last year. 

 

The feature the members opposite continue to rail about in a 

meaningless and obstructionist fashion is the provision relative 

to a deadline of March 15.  We gave notice to farmers on 

March 13. 

 

And what I find really amusing is that the members opposite 

ignored the March 15 deadline for crop insurance changes for 

years.  Before last year and last year, they made changes, as I 

said earlier in the House, no. 94 and no. 95, in the meetings I 

went to after March 15.  I do not understand the objection of 

the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, we believe and 

many people across this province believe that this Bill takes 

away the individual's right to have their day in court.  Are you 

saying this is constitutional?  Is this what the Minister of 

Justice is saying through the Minister of Agriculture to this 

Assembly, that if the government has done something illegal, it 

can fix it by simply passing legislation saying it isn't illegal? 

 

Mr. Minister, if you're so right and if you have nothing to hide, 

then I believe you should have no hesitation whatsoever in 

referring this Bill to the courts as we have asked you to do for 

months.  Will you make this commitment to the Legislative 

Assembly today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 

fully aware of the number of times that retroactive legislation 

has been used in the legislature by them and others.  They are 

aware that apart from the 70 pieces of legislation I referred to, 

which I can provide for the members opposite in a list if their 

memories fail them, there were the very significant incidents of 

the land bank leases and the beef stabilization program which 

continue to plague farmers. 

 

And I just simply don't understand why the members opposite 

are trying to make a big issue of a piece of retroactive 

legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to try again to the 

Attorney General and ask him if he agrees with the Premier of 

Saskatchewan.  The NDP (New Democratic Party) Premier of 

Saskatchewan said this about GRIP: 

 

 I worry about contracts and all of that.  I mean, one has 

certain rights.  That's where the merit of the PC walkout is. 

 

Then he went on to say: the courts will have to decide that. 

 

Now, Mr. Attorney General, couldn't you at least stand in this 

legislature and say that you agree or disagree with the NDP 

Premier about rights needing to be protected and this will have 

to be settled in the courts?  Would you agree with the Premier 

or not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite ought 

to be aware that the courts will continue to deal with these 

matters. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Certainly, Mr. Speaker . . . A question to the 

Attorney General.  And certainly those in the legislature know 

that he's here and he's smiling at us.  And he must have some 

sort of an answer.  The media knows that he's here.  I want the 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  If the Leader of the 

Opposition has a question, I wish he'd put the question. 



2262 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

The government will decide who will answer.  The government 

will decide who will answer the questions in here.  If the 

Leader of the Opposition has a question, I wish he'd put his 

question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just have a legal 

question to the Attorney General of Saskatchewan.  Do you . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I've just asked the members in the 

opposition not to intervene and I ask the government members 

not to intervene when the member is asking his question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Attorney 

General.  The farmers have sued the government.  The Premier 

of Saskatchewan, the NDP Premier, says this will be settled in 

the courts.  You're the top legal legislative officer here in the 

Assembly.  We're asking you a simple question.  If you're in 

court and you're being sued and your Premier says this will be 

settled in the courts, won't you refer this to the Court of Appeal 

so we'll all know where we stand in the province of 

Saskatchewan with respect to this legislation?  It's the decent 

thing to do.  Won't you agree to do that today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, as I have already once 

indicated to the member opposite, this matter will continue to 

be dealt with by the courts.  But I find it very interesting that 

the member opposite should ask questions about legality when 

I consider the headline in yesterday's newspaper, "Many in 

Tory hierarchy corrupt to the rotten core."  And then about the 

former premier: 

 

 Sadly, he was surrounded by some of the most dishonest men 

and women who ever wore a party button or unfurled a 

political banner. 

 

 Let's hope they will finally be brought to justice. 

 

And what did the member opposite do about that in his time in 

office? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I go 

back to the Attorney General.  Mr. Attorney General, your 

Minister of Agriculture just said -- I want the members of the 

media to hear this, and the public -- your Minister of 

Agriculture answered for you and he just said, this will be 

settled in the courts.  That's what he said.  It's in Hansard.  It's 

on record. 

 

Now if this Bill denies farmers access to the courts and the 

minister has just said, as did the Premier, that this should be 

settled in the courts, Mr. Attorney General, the only way it's 

going to have fair treatment before the courts is if you refer this 

to the Court of Appeal.  Given the acknowledgement now by 

the Minister of Agriculture and the NDP Premier of 

Saskatchewan that this should be settled before the courts and 

you're denied . . . farmers are denied the right to go to court in 

this Bill -- won't you now do the honourable and decent thing 

and refer this to the Court of Appeal in Saskatchewan? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the supposed respect the 

member opposite has for legality and justice and honesty is not 

at all reflected by someone who should have been his friend 

and someone who believes that he would not be . . . was not 

respected in the party hierarchy because of his values.  If I may 

read from the author, Paul Jackson: I suspect that . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I believe what the 

member's referring to has nothing to do with the question that's 

being asked. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The minister has some 

responsibility to relate his answer to the question that is being 

asked.  Order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crop Insurance Yield Adjustment Deadline 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 

responsible for Crop Insurance.  Last January farmers were 

forced to measure their own bins and were told Crop Insurance 

would verify the yields once the crop year was over, using 

sales records.  It has come to our attention that Crop Insurance 

put a secret deadline of July 31, '91 on farmers to adjust their 

estimated '91 yields to actual, based on their sales records. 

 

Mr. Minister, farmers were never notified of this July 31 

deadline.  I know because I have received a number of calls on 

this issue.  I want to know how you can justify forcing this 

deadline on farmers without any notification whatsoever. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, about the detail of the 

question the member opposite asks, I cannot answer but I will 

look into it and make sure I respond later. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, farmers were never notified of 

this deadline, and apparently you, sir, haven't been notified of 

the deadline either.  This deadline date for adjusting their yields 

. . . and there is no such a deadline mentioned in the revenue 

insurance or crop insurance contract.  The ramifications of this 

deadline are staggering, Mr. Minister, both for the farmer and 

for the provincial government.  Customers that overestimate 

their yield will receive less money than they are entitled to 

through the program.  And if customers overestimate, the 

government will pay more than is their requirement. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you confirm today that this is the case, and 

this will be happening because you fired all of the adjusters 

who were measuring the farmers' bins back in November of 

last year because you thought they were all Tories? 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2263 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, much to the member 

opposite's surprise, I believe there were changes in staffing in 

order to save money for the corporation, a notion the member 

opposite would know very little about. 

 

With respect to the question of bin measurement, as I already 

said, on the detail of the question the member opposite asks, I 

do not know and we'll find out. 

 

But I do want to comment on the accuracy of the system that 

was established by the members opposite, another one of the 

rather seriously flawed pieces of the previous legislation.  The 

members of the GRIP committee, their third criticism of the 

program as it was, was the administrative cost which included 

the necessity of measuring bins when the inaccuracy of that 

process is well known.  The prospective error for 

Saskatchewan's crop insurance program, with the error inherent 

there, would have been tens of millions of dollars, and that's 

simply an unacceptable error in a farm program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I'll just 

explain it this way.  The adjuster came to my place and said 32 

bushels to the acre.  The Crop Insurance Corporation said no, 

it's 35.  And in actual fact it was 29.  And under the suggestion 

which we have received and the phone calls we have received, 

that six-bushel margin will be accredited, not to my account, 

but to your account. 

 

And so we're asking you the simple question, Mr. Minister.  

Will you commit today to extend this deadline for adjusting '91 

yields to give farmers a fair chance, and will you allow farmers 

to use their actual sales as a basis for a pay 

_out? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite were 

responsible for creating a rather inaccurate system before.  I 

fully trust the minister in charge of the Crop Insurance 

Corporation to continue to make sound decisions with respect 

to the corporation as he has done till now, and I will not make 

those decisions for him.  Whatever decisions he makes I'm sure 

will be the right ones in the end. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I just want to 

point out, sir, that all of the decisions that I have talked about 

happened after the December 1 date-line.  And so I want to 

inform you that this is just another example of how really far 

out of touch you really are. 

 

Mr. Minister, why don't you just admit that it was a mistake 

secretly imposed on July 31 and that producers and the people 

in the province of Saskatchewan should ask you the question in 

your questionnaire relating to whether your services are worth 

a dollar or two. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite was I 

think associate minister of Agriculture, while the leader of the 

then government was minister of Agriculture as well, and they 

created a measurement system that had holes in it as big as a 

barn door.  And the new minister in charge has cleaned up the 

accuracy of that system, and I'm sure the new minister in 

charge will make sure that there is some attention paid to the 

interests of both the farmers and the taxpayers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Supplementary to the Minister of Agriculture or 

to the Attorney General, which ever might be comfortable with 

this agriculture question, just a supplementary. 

 

Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that you are unaware, as 

Minister of Agriculture, you're unaware of this artificial 

deadline that was put on people who had estimated their crop 

and then were told later, even if you actually sold X number of 

bushels and it was wrong, you have to live with your estimate.  

Are you unaware of that?  You took notice earlier, and you're 

admitting, as the Minister of Agriculture, you're unaware of 

that decision. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I've got the connection, I think, that 

the Leader of the Opposition was asking a question on which 

the minister took notice.  I need some clarification on that.  If 

the Leader of the Opposition was asking a question on which 

he took notice, that's an unfair question and I can't allow the 

minister to answer. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think you've . . . it's 

a good ruling; you've helped me make my point.  I will ask it a 

different way.  Will the minister give us any additional 

information with respect to the secret deadline imposed on 

people who estimated their crop, then have hauled in the actual 

numbers, but if it's after July 31, they have to stay with their 

estimate whether it's right or wrong. 

 

Could he give us any additional information about why you did 

that, when you made that decision, what it might cost the 

treasury, and what it's going to cost farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the substance of the member 

opposite's question has a lot more to do with his allegations 

about how government functions than it does to do about any 

reasonable piece of information. 

 

Talking about secret deadlines and strange plots.  That's a 

theme that could only arise from the mind of someone who was 

in charge of a government described as Paul Jackson described, 

that is associated with a hierarchy corrupt to the rotten core, 

that's associated with secret plots and decision makings that 

have nothing to do with the public interest. 

 

If there's a real question about something we can answer, 



2264 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

I'll answer it.  But those kind of inferences are silly at best. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, a question again to the Minister of 

Agriculture or the Attorney General.  Mr. Minister, you are 

being sued because of your mistakes in crop insurance.  And 

you have legal opinion in the paper that says your actions are 

unconstitutional, they violate the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms.  The Premier of the province says it'll have to be 

settled in court.  So we brought up another mistake and you just 

guffawed and laughed and throw it away and say, oh, it has 

nothing to do with reality or government operation. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, in the light of all of the allegations and 

the court cases and the admission by the Premier and yourself 

that some of these things should be settled in court, do you 

have any more information on why you would have this 

arbitrary, secret deadline set for farmers, when they know it's 

against their principle.  It hurts the province, and it hurts them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 

continues to make points about the . . . try to make points about 

theoretical secrecy in government.  I find the moral authority of 

the man opposite absolutely lacking when considering that here 

again the quote is: 

 

 "Ah, the scandals that come out of Grant Devine's erstwhile 

government! 

 

 Fellows who apparently ripped off the taxpayers with ease, 

gals who drew a paycheque but seemingly did no work 

whatsoever . . ." 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Completion of Alameda Dam 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have 

received a number of calls about the current status of . . . Mr. 

Speaker, I've received a number of calls about the 

Rafferty-Alameda project and particularly the Alameda dam.  

These calls range with concerns about the cost overruns, 

because the construction seems to be at a standstill, to safety 

concerns as to whether the dams will be completed by next 

spring. 

 

My question is to the minister for Sask Water.  Will you give 

us today a brief overview of what is happening at the Alameda 

dam, how close is the dam to completion, and whether work is 

currently under way or not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the member asks 

questions about the Rafferty-Alameda project, which would 

obviously include the Shand project and the power plant.  The 

power plant is to be officially commissioned on August 29.  

The Rafferty dam is virtually complete except there's no water 

in it, and hasn't been for 

years. 

 

The Alameda dam is very near to completion. Although there 

are some technical problems with the project, there's nothing 

that is seen to be insurmountable. 

 

So on the three main points -- the power station will be 

commissioned on August 29; the Rafferty dam is virtually 

completed except there is no water; and the Alameda dam is 

virtually completed as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, is work currently taking 

place at the Alameda dam site?  And is the court case with the 

Tetzlaff brothers holding up construction of that dam? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Souris-Cannington may want to get a hold of the member from 

Estevan to talk about the project and the problems with it.  And 

I'm sure that the headlines in the Star-Phoenix of yesterday, 

related at least in part to these kind of decision makings, where 

hundreds of million of dollars were spent on the Rafferty dam, 

squandered on a project that is unlikely to ever provide service 

and production to the people in the area for cooling the power 

plant, for recreation, or for irrigation, all of those things that the 

then premier promised would be part of this project. 

 

I say to the member opposite from Souris-Cannington, many of 

these questions on technical side on this project would be much 

better put to the former premier because we have no idea why 

much of that project went ahead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, you're currently in charge 

of whether or not the project proceeds.  You're in charge of 

whether construction is currently taking place.  My question 

was: is construction taking place and is the court case with the 

Tetzlaff brothers holding up construction of that dam? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Obviously the issue of the Tetzlaffs 

and their court issue and the challenge has been going on for 

many, many months and the former premier would be well 

aware of why that was the case. 

 

But as to the whole project, we're completing those parts of it 

that make sense.  For example, we cancelled completing the 

21-hole golf course -- the only one in the province -- that the 

former premier had planned, saving some millions of dollars, 

although we're negotiating with a local group down there to 

take over that part because it makes sense now that there's an 

infrastructure there to try to salvage what we can. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 89 -- An Act to amend The Occupational Health 

and Safety Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2265 

amend The Occupational Health and Safety Act be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like leave to 

introduce some guests please. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Speaker, I would . . . to you and 

through you to the Assembly I would like to introduce some 

guests that are here from Calgary.  These are former colleagues 

of mine from when I was teaching in Swift Current.  Nick and 

Leone Strukoff are sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and I'd 

like you to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, the 

government would like to move to Bill 87, the GRIP Bill. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 40 -- Consultations on Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate the 

opportunity to again get on my feet and finish a few of the 

remarks I was making about the labour Bill.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to go back and kind of get back into the mood we 

had before dinner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had occasion for the members opposite to read 

from newspaper headlines.  And I'd like to read a couple of 

headlines before I get started into my remarks.  And one of 

them is "Business sector airs grievances with Romanow".  And 

this is by a reporter by the name of Randy Burton of the Star-

Phoenix.  And what he says is: 

 

 Saskatchewan business is "overwhelmed and frustrated" by 

the government's legislative agenda and says there is no 

apparent plan for economic renewal. 

 

He goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 "The budget . . . was entitled deficit control and restoring 

confidence in the provincial economy and that doesn't sound 

like this agenda to me. 

 

 "Certainly a lot of this looks like a payback agenda" to labour 

with no . . . direction in mind. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, that's kind of what we have in mind here 

when we talk about this.  We understand and we know that 

there is a certain amount of responsibility 

by the NDP to pay back the unions for the support that they 

gave them.  However what we're worried about and what the 

business community is worried abut is the fairness of that 

pay-back. 

 

The business community, Mr. Speaker, are very, very 

concerned about how far it may go in the pay-back.  And while 

the members, I'm sure, of the unions would be satisfied with a 

reasonable and fair settlement, we're a little concerned, I think, 

with the power hunger that some of the union leaders have.  

And that is what's got the business people upset, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I'm not sure if it was read into the record -- the numbers of the 

organizations that supported the letter that was read in.  Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker.  We won't go into that then, at this time.  I 

would ask your indulgence to allow me to refer to the letter in 

my remarks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed legislation changes, as I said, is of 

great concern to the majority of the people in Saskatchewan.  

And the concern, Mr. Speaker, mostly is concern for the lack of 

consultation on the issue.  And I can assure you that we need 

only to look at the letter that was written to the Premier to 

understand what they are talking about, the letter which spurred 

-- I believe is the term you might use -- the Premier to have a 

meeting with the people concerned.  And I guess, Mr. Speaker, 

if we were going to be fair, we have to say that the Premier did 

at least listen to their concerns in order to have a meeting. 

 

But I would like to say, and I would like to impress on the 

people opposite,  I urge you, I urge you not to just have the 

meeting and then forget about these people.  These are 

responsible people, Mr. Speaker, and they will not forget.  

Whether it is so or whether it is not so, these people are 

concerned about this legislation.  And I'm sure that, Mr. 

Speaker, they don't want this swept under the table just because 

they had a meeting. 

 

I think what they do need and what they expect from the 

Premier is to either hold the Bills or pull them until proper 

consultation has happened, until the point where they can agree 

with some of the changes.  And as I said, there are reasonable 

people among these people concerned.  And they will, I'm sure, 

be able to reach a consensus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the letter clearly outlines the frustration that 

business people have with this government.  They are 

frustrated, Mr. Speaker, because they don't feel they've had 

equal time.  They expect, Mr. Speaker, to see an economic 

development plan for Saskatchewan, a plan which was sadly 

lacking during the last election.  And that is of course another 

topic for conversation, and I'm not here to speak on that, but I 

believe it ties into the topic which we are speaking about today 

and that is the motion and the amendment. 

 

And the amendment I think illustrates quite well the concern 

that these people have raised, and that is that the government 

recognizes the needs to engage in genuine public consultations.  

And I think if that was done, if people would get together with 

an open mind, you'd find that these things would fall in place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Prairie Implement Manufacturers and 



2266 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

the association of hotels and several others were all involved.  

And this is not just one group trying to further their own 

interests.  This has a serious impact on the whole economy of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We, as I've mentioned I think before, that we've lost 18,000 

jobs now, and without some kind of confidence for the creators 

of wealth . . . and I again use the dirty word.  According to the 

socialists, anyone that is looking to create wealth is looked at 

with a jaundiced eye by some of those people over there.  But, 

Mr. Speaker, that is the fact of the matter. 

 

Those people are the people that create jobs.  Survey after 

survey has proven that particularly in the small contract 

business, and the small-business people create more jobs on a 

percentage basis than some of the larger projects.  And that is 

why these people I think should be heard, and I think it would 

behove the government not to sweep this under the table. 

 

They are reasonable people and they're here for the long haul.  

They're not here for just a little while.  If their concerns are 

genuine, we may see then an advantage go to out-of-province 

contractors and wealth creators, which will lose jobs for our 

own people and in matter of fact have a money drain out of the 

province into other provinces.  And those are all parts of the 

concerns that the people have had in the letter that was 

presented to the Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I told you that I had occasion to speak 

with a person who was on the Trade Union Review Committee.  

And some of the union proposals put in, Mr. Speaker, was 

shocking, to say the least. 

 

And as I said again, I know the present government owes a 

debt of gratitude to the organized labour; it's a huge favour.  

But to impose its desires on other people just in order to pay off 

a debt of gratitude, Mr. Speaker, I don't think is proper, 

particularly when the consultation was not done.  And I suggest 

it would be extremely destructive to this province's economy 

and the small-business sector. 

 

And as I said before, in reviewing what I had said, we know 

that in the confrontation process that has taken place now, both 

parties put their best bargaining position forward.  In respect of 

the union leaders, they put the highest expectations and the 

employers may put their lowest. 

 

And as I understand it, Mr. Speaker, one of the biggest fights 

had to deal with the Act's name.  Now, Mr. Speaker, there was 

no way they would allow the Act's name to be changed, which 

points out, I think, what I consider some very mundane and 

petty things to argue about when the economy of Saskatchewan 

is in such a shape. 

 

(1500) 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as far as the unions are concerned, it is their 

Act.  And it will remain union legislation even though it affects 

employers as well as employees.  Now the unions won't even 

allow that.  Mr. Speaker, if that is the amount of co-operation 

we have to look forward to, it's a bit frightening.  It's a bit 

frightening, Mr. Speaker. 

And one of the problems people seem to have is the pendulum 

swings from one extreme to the other.  And according to what I 

read in the letter and in the concerns that people are bringing to 

us, that is what the business sector fears here, is not that there's 

some changes could be done, not that there could be a degree 

of fairness missing, but how far do you go?  How far do you let 

the pendulum swing the other way? 

 

The other issues, Mr. Speaker, the unions seem to want the 

right to enter into an employer's property during a membership 

drive without interference.  And if an employer interferes, they 

want automatic certification.  Mr. Speaker, the implications 

there are a bit scary too. 

 

The fundamental belief that most of us have is that our property 

is ours.  Our home is our castle and that sort of thing.  And if 

you allow people to walk into other people's property without 

any justification other than they want to certify the workers 

into a union . . . and if the employer interferes, they want 

automatic certification. 

 

Now if you let your imagination go a little bit, let's do a little 

something here that probably won't happen.  And that is where 

we got 10 workers and one of the workers wants to be 

unionized but the other nine don't.  The employer resists the 

union people, organizers entering his property, and then the 

other nine members automatically then become certified. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that's a little bit of a scary provision as well.  

It interferes I believe with what we consider our inherent rights 

to protect our property.  Now they may want to make it easier 

to certify and more difficult to de-certify.  As a matter of fact 

they actually, I believe, want to eliminate an employee's option 

to de-certify. 

 

There again, Mr. Speaker, that should be talked about and I 

think those things should be clarified with the business people 

and as was mentioned before by the Minister of Justice where 

he said, some of the wording is being changed because, as he 

said . . . and I will find the quotation, Mr. Speaker, but I will 

paraphrase it.  He said that, I have always believed that the 

labour Act should belong to labour.  And he said also that some 

of the changes being made was to clarify interpretation. 

 

I quote from the Leader-Post: 

 

 I've always thought the Department of Labour should be for 

labour, said Mitchell, a deputy minister of Labour in the 

1970s.  That is what we're trying to construct in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

He also says that the reasons for some of the changes was to 

interpret what the legislation was supposed to be about so that 

people could understand.  So here we go back to what I'm 

saying here, sir. 

 

Before these things should be legislated, I think they should be 

talked about.  There may not be any sinister motives in these 

sections, but certainly the business community believes there 

are.  And again quoting headlines from newspapers, which the 

members opposite were doing, I want to quote just the 

headlines 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2267 

because I don't want to take up too much of your time. 

 

And I quote from a Mr. Bruce Johnstone, and he said: The Act 

will stand construction industry on its head.  And that's the 

seriousness that they see in this.  And I'll quote him, Mr. 

Speaker.  He says: To hear Labour minister Bob Mitchell talk, 

the government's draft Bill is to resurrect the old Construction 

Industry Labour Relations Act is just a bit of tinkering to make 

our labour laws more democratic.  That's what he's saying.  

That's what the Minister of Justice is saying, and I have no 

reason to try to contradict him.  But, says the former labour 

lawyer, the Bill will simply bring Saskatchewan into line with 

other provinces. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, other provinces are not demonstrating the 

anxiety . . . the construction people in other provinces are not 

demonstrating the anxiety that the construction people here in 

Saskatchewan are demonstrating. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they also want the anti-scab legislation that one of 

my colleagues developed a little bit before the lunch break.  

They want to make it illegal to hire replacement workers. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that again should be discussed a little bit 

and clarified.  Because if you carry out what this may do, it 

means that the workers could shut down a business or an 

operation even if it was illegal to do so. If they were on an 

illegal strike which hadn't been determined by either the courts 

or by their own negotiations, then that company or that 

contractor or that business could not hire anyone to keep the 

business at least alive until the dispute was settled. 

 

And there again I say to you and I say to those workers that it 

doesn't help a whole lot if you've got a high-paying job if the 

job isn't there.  If the salary is high but you don't have a job, it 

doesn't help you a whole lot. 

 

And that goes back to what I said before lunch, Mr. Speaker, 

when I happened to be sitting close by when an employer and 

one of his employees were discussing the new labour law, 

where the employee said, oh boy oh boy, you'll have to pay me 

$8 an hour.  And he said, no I won't.  And the employee said, 

oh yes you will.  And he said, no, because you won't have a 

job; I can't afford it.  So what good is a $8 minimum wage to 

somebody that hasn't got a job?  It might just well be $800 an 

hour. 

 

Now the other thing they want to do, or one of the other things, 

they want the Labour Relations Board to impose an agreement 

if a contract dispute exists.  Now I believe I had the Bill before 

lunch and we looked at the power of the board.  And this takes 

. . . this goes into the power of the board. 

 

They want the Labour Relations Board to have the power to 

interfere in collective-bargaining process.  Mr. Speaker, how 

many times have we all heard the complaint of unions about 

other people interfering with the collective-bargaining system?  

So what I'm saying here is, fair is fair and it's got to be fair for 

both sides.  And the business sector are suggesting that that 

could be a bit unfair. 

 

And I read into the record the powers of the board under 

the heading "board," which goes back to the section that I'm 

talking about here.  They want the Labour Relations Board to 

impose an agreement if a contract dispute exists.  And to tie 

that into the Bill, I want to show you . . . The board also wants 

to be able to determine whether an unfair labour practice has 

occurred. 

 

You see what I'm saying, sir.  They want the power to say 

there's been an infraction and over here they want to impose an 

agreement.  First of all they say there is a dispute, by their own 

definition, then they turn around and say, we're the ones that's 

going to fix it.  So it kind of makes you judge and jury. 

 

So there's some nervousness there among the business sector.  

The Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, Mr. Speaker, alone 

had 61 changes that they wanted to see in the legislation.  Now 

just the number of changes . . . Without consultation.  Now if it 

was one or two minor changes, you could argue that there 

wasn't a big enough change and it wasn't important enough to 

go into in-depth consultation.  But when we're talking about 61 

different and separate changes to any piece of legislation, it 

would seem to me, sir, that that alone would indicate a lot of 

negotiations would be necessary. 

 

There was even a presentation by the Grain Services Union, 

Mr. Speaker, and they want to unionize all domestic and farm 

labour.  They want sectorial bargaining.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

this is an outrageous proposal.  If you let your mind go and you 

use your imagination, you'll find out the implications of such a 

change in the labour laws. 

 

We have, and you know, in the province of Saskatchewan we 

did have a law that said you couldn't hire a person for less than 

three hours.  So now we say if you're a farmer and you want 

some help -- seasonal, part-time, emergency help -- that person 

has to be unionized. 

 

Now for the sake of the debate, Mr. Speaker, let's suppose that 

out in my country, which is quite a ways maybe from a union 

hall, all of a sudden someone needs one or even two people for 

an emergency situation on the farm.  And he has to get in to 

Saskatoon to the union hall to find out where there is someone, 

and they send someone.  You understand that they have to be 

paid their travelling time.  So let's suppose that the job out there 

only lasts half a day -- maybe it's a clean-up situation that the 

farmer is involved with; maybe it's a spray operation that has to 

be done quickly.  So here we have the farmer in the position 

that he can't call on local people if they're not unionized. 

 

And I want you to let your mind wander a little bit on that and 

find out the cost that would be to that farmer.  It's two hours 

drive from Saskatoon to where I live, Mr. Speaker.  So it 

would, I think, follow that it's two hours back.  Well there's 

four hours of driving time and that would have to be paid for 

on a per-mile basis. 

 

So as I say, this is a bit of an outrageous proposal, and it's no 

wonder that the business community has some fears of this 

legislation.  Now if their fears are unfounded, fine and dandy.  

Let's talk about it.  Let us -- as the Justice minister said -- let us 

be sure the interpretation is understood by 



2268 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

all, how you interpret what is being written.  He said that that is 

part of the problem.  So I agree with that. 

 

And I also say to you, sir, we had, as you heard, a couple of 

times some derision from the other side because we want to 

talk about this Bill or we didn't want to take the GRIP Bill.  

And I said then, we certainly are not abandoning the GRIP 

debate.  But we are of the opinion that this debate is also of an 

urgent nature not only because of the implications that may be 

in there, not only because of the fears that the community have, 

the business community have, but because of the time.  They 

have to know as quickly as possible where they stand with 

these things, so they can bid their contracts, they can get their 

people hired, and they know what the costs are going to be.  

They also have to know the interpretation, as the Justice 

minister said, of what is being written here.  So this Bill is an 

important piece of legislation. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said once before -- I think I did -- that . . . and 

you can correct me if I'm out of order, Mr. Speaker, that I don't 

believe this is the time for the business community and the 

working community to get at loggerheads to any extent. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that right now while we're all trying to 

work our way out of a recession, we have to have the 

co-operation of both sides, which comes back to my remarks I 

made about these people in the business sector being 

reasonable people.  And the element of fairness has to be there 

for both sides. 

 

And I happen to be one of those people that believe that with 

the opportunity to sit down and visit with each other, there can 

be an element of fairness.  Because even though labour leaders 

seem to believe . . . And I don't want to label the whole group 

in the unions as being anti-free-enterprisers.  If you think about 

it in their own way, they are free-enterprisers.  They look to the 

best position that they can find, with the best return that they 

can find, to better their own station in life.  So that's basically 

what a free-enterpriser is. 

 

Some people choose the security of a paid position, a salary.  

Some people take the risk of going off on their own, and 

hopefully by their own ingenuity and their willingness to put in 

the extra hour or two, end up at the other end of their life span 

in a little better financial position than they might have had 

they taken a secure, salaried position.  And I don't say that in 

criticism in any way at all.  That's a position and that is a 

freedom that we have here and that is something that should be 

protected at all costs -- the right to choose. 

 

But at the other side of the picture, Mr. Speaker, it is the right 

of the free-enterpriser to choose to go and be his own 

employer, if you will.  They have to have a level playing-field, 

and the fairness should be a goal for both sides.  Because if the 

free-enterpriser, the employer, can make his business work, 

there should be and could be benefits for both sides. 

 

And I believe that the union members can and should expect to 

be protected to a large degree by government to 

take care of that . . . And I would say this, Mr. Speaker.  I think 

that the majority of the employers are fair, but there could be 

the odd time when someone would try to take advantage of 

another person.  And that's what I say, that the union members 

should expect a large degree of protection by government to 

take care of those circumstances when someone is not playing 

fair. 

 

Mr. Speaker -- and I know it sounds like I'm coming down a 

little hard on the leaders -- but, Mr. Speaker, I believe the union 

leaders who lead their membership seem to want more power 

for themselves rather than looking for a degree of fairness for 

both sides. 

 

And I can understand over the years that animosity has built 

up, which goes back to my comments about who lays the 

demands on the table.  I happen to have a relative who works 

under a unionized shop, and some of the things he tells me is 

exactly what I'm saying here.  He is frustrated because when 

the organizers for the unions come out and talk to them, they 

say to them, put it all on the table, put everything out there, 

whether you expect to get it or not, because you never know 

where the balance will be.  And if you've got it on the table, if 

you get more than you really and truly expected, then fine. 

 

Now I suppose that the employer approaches it in the same 

manner.  Start as low as you can because you never know 

where they will balance off, and you may end up not paying 

quite as much as you thought you may have to.  Which to me, 

Mr. Speaker, is not the way to go.  I've never believed that, and 

I'm sure that the majority of the employers, particularly those 

employers who are the wealth creators . . . And the wealth 

creators in my mind, Mr. Speaker, are the small-business 

community.  They have only a few number, a small number of 

workers, and it's a lot more personal basis.  And so they know 

the problems that their workers have. 

 

And that's something, Mr. Speaker, in my working life I never 

did have a hired man.  What I had was someone who helped 

me.  And I never referred to anyone who helped me as the 

hired help or a hired man.  That person, Mr. Speaker, was 

someone who helped me.  He was my helper, and I tried to pay 

him according to the help that I got from that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have one or two more comments I want to 

touch on.  And if you'll indulge me, I got my papers mixed up a 

little.  As I said before, we give full credit to the Premier for 

meeting with these people when he became aware of their 

anxiety.  But I have to suggest to you, sir, and the members 

opposite, that the Premier should not have been surprised by 

the anxiety that was there. 

 

Had the Premier and his people been consulting with the 

business groups before the draft Bill came down, then these 

things maybe could have been ironed out before the anxiety hit 

the level that it did where the business community got together 

and in fact almost, I would say, demanded that the Premier hear 

their concerns. 

 

As I read off some of the headlines that I have here, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to read one more headline that I think indicates 

that there is concern out there by other than just 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2269 

the business people.  This is an article in Leader-Post and it 

was written by one Dale Eisler, who all of us are aware of.  

And the headline that he uses is: "Labour act excludes 

majority." 

 

Mr. Speaker, there I think is a point that should be recognized 

because this Bill is directed at the minority: 

 

 According to the Labor Department, (Mr. Eisler says) in 

1991 one-fifth of the total workforce, or (just a little over a 

hundred thousand) people, was unionized.  Of that unionized 

total, less than 30,000 -- or (as he puts it) 28 per cent of all 

union members . . . 

 

So what we have here is a Bill that impacts dramatically on 

many other people who are not particularly interested in 

becoming unionized.  And if this Bill, the way we read it and 

the way the business community interprets what they're 

reading, forces everyone then to become unionized, I read from 

this, Mr. Speaker, that it is the majority who is being hurt here. 

 

Now generally in a democratic society, we look at the majority 

with some bells and whistles and counterbalances for the 

minority.  But in this Bill, it's the minority -- the majority, 

excuse me -- the majority are being excluded.  And I think that, 

of course, is part of the concern of the business sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that there are others that would like to 

speak to this Bill, and I believe I have pointed out to you and to 

others that my concern about this Bill, I believe is much the 

same as the Minister of Justice when he says, we want to be 

sure in its paraphrasing that everyone understands and 

interprets this Bill the same way.  Because, as he said, the way 

you interpret the writing of the Bill sometimes causes some 

anxiety. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We have here 

before us today a motion moved by my colleague, the member 

from Maple Creek, and an amendment by the member from 

Moose Jaw Palliser.  And some of the wording that the member 

from Moose Jaw Palliser used in his amendment is quite 

interesting.  He used some of the words that we had already 

included in the motion, and included a few more of his own. 

 

Part of his motion included our words, genuine public 

consultation.  Mr. Speaker, we believe that there is a need for 

genuine public consultation in the labour relations process, in 

labour legislation process. 

 

Then the member from Moose Jaw Palliser went on to talk 

about building bridges between rural and urban, between 

farmers and labour.  And again, I agree with the member -- that 

is very important. 

 

But when you look at what this government is doing, it's 

sometimes difficult to see where those bridges are being built, 

particularly when farmers, Mr. Speaker, are being cut off at the 

knees, as with the GRIP legislation, and 

union members are being given a monopoly situation to supply 

all the labour in Saskatchewan.  It's difficult to see how that 

builds bridges between farmers and labour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farmers have many times been hurt by labour 

actions as they take place throughout the farm work place, as 

they take place throughout the farmers marketing system as 

they move their grain from the field to sales. 

 

The farmers actions, Mr. Speaker, do not cause harm to labour 

unionists.  They do not cause harm to the labour movement.  

But the reverse can and is sometimes true.  We see labour 

action taking place as rail strikes, long-shoremen strikes, grain 

handler strikes. 

 

(1530) 

 

But as I said before, Mr. Speaker, the action of farmers does 

not harm the labour unionists.  And fact is, the farmers are 

probably that portion of society which is most co-operative in 

aiding the entire society, because farmers, Mr. Speaker, are 

those that feed everyone. 

 

When we look at building bridges between farmers and labour, 

I think back to what happened about 1988-89 at Thunder Bay.  

We were in a position where we had a large grain crop to 

move.  We were getting towards the end of the crop year.  

Sales were tight.  There was a large shipment was needed.  And 

yet what happened at Thunder Bay?  The grain handlers, Mr. 

Speaker, went on strike. 

 

I believe that strike lasted from 21 to 25 days, held up the 

movement of grain from the prairies, and caused us as farmers 

to lose some sales.  That type of action, Mr. Speaker, does not 

build bridges between farmers and labour; it does not build 

bridges between rural and urban. 

 

The next year the same people that had been on strike and 

stopped the grain movement were asking farmers now to ship 

their grain, Mr. Speaker, through the port of Thunder Bay.  The 

grain shipments were slow.  Work was scarce.  But the farmers, 

because they had a limited crop, because their sales were 

mainly in the west coast, going through the west coast ports, 

were going to the Pacific Rim -- farmers were shipping through 

Prince Rupert and through Vancouver. 

 

The unions at Thunder Bay asked the farmers, begged the 

farmers to ship their grain east even though, Mr. Speaker, that 

meant that it was going to cost more money to the farmers.  

Because it was a lot further around, shipping costs were much 

higher to go through Thunder Bay than it was for the same 

product to go through Prince Rupert or through Vancouver.  

But at the same time, when the trade unions in Thunder Bay 

were asking that that grain be shipped east, meant that they 

were denying their own union members at the west coast those 

jobs. 

 

So it seems when you look at it, Mr. Speaker, that the bridges 

that need to be built need to be built starting perhaps indeed 

with labour, that their interest is very self-centred, very much 

directed at themselves, at their own benefit rather than at the 

benefit of society as a whole.  That's where we need to start 

building bridges, 



2270 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, is to look beyond our own self-interest. 

 

The member from Moose Jaw Palliser talks of driving wedges 

between rural and urban.  But the example I just used, Mr. 

Speaker, is one of those examples that does indeed drive 

wedges between us.  The member from Moose Jaw Palliser 

talks of the wedges, but it's his government, Mr. Speaker, and 

his partners in the unions that are driving that wedge between 

labour and farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have sat on the other side of the table.  I sat in 

wage negotiations, in benefit negotiations, with my employer 

on behalf of my fellow employees.  And it was a very 

worthwhile experience and very much of a learning experience.  

There are times when you will not agree, when you will never 

agree; but there are also times when agreements are possible.  

And I found and my colleagues found that it was much easier 

to get an agreement through co-operation and through 

discussion, through negotiation, than it was through 

confrontation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I did not belong to a union, but I did belong 

to an employees' association where we had some similar 

powers, some similar responsibilities and duties that a union 

would have.  And it did work well for us.  It perhaps even 

worked better than some of the union organization which took 

place within the same industry. 

 

I worked in the oil patch, Mr. Speaker, and I looked at how 

bridges were built within that industry between employees and 

managers.  Everybody worked together.  They were proud of 

the companies they worked for.  They worked to improve that 

company to make it better, not just for management, not just 

for the shareholders but also for the employees. 

 

And many times, Mr. Speaker, we see what's happening in the 

labour force, particularly so in large areas where you have a 

large number of employees in a plant.  It seems to be more of a 

confrontational style than a co-operative style. 

 

And we see it in this House.  We see much more confrontation 

than we do co-operation.  And it perhaps just builds over time, 

I don't know, Mr. Speaker, but it is in many times not 

conducive to the well-being of this Assembly or to the 

well-being of the province. 

 

The member opposite has talked of our reaction to the defeat of 

October 21.  Well there was some bitterness and there was 

some disappointment, Mr. Speaker, but I also see a similar 

reaction coming from the other side of the House, and perhaps 

that's why this confrontation takes place.  It happened in 1982 

and it happened again in 1991 where the winning side, the 

government side of House, said, now it's our turn and we are 

going to get our way. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that does not build bridges; that does not 

build co-operation.  And that is what we need in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, when we're looking at labour legislation, one of 

the items that we perhaps should be looking at is creating an 

atmosphere in which jobs can be built, in which we can 

increase the number of employment opportunities that we have 

within our province.  We have 

lost somewheres between 14 to 18,000 jobs since last fall in 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that hurts not only union members, it hurts not 

only employers, it hurts everyone within this province.  And 

part of the aim of labour legislation should be aimed at creating 

an atmosphere in which jobs can flourish, not an atmosphere in 

which jobs are removed from our society. 

 

More and more people are leaving this province, Mr. Speaker, 

because those jobs are not available; because we don't seem to 

be in an atmosphere where employers will come in, where 

entrepreneurs will come in and build a facility to hire anyone, 

whether they be employees . . . unionized or non-unionized 

employees, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I and my colleagues came into this Assembly 

prepared to work together.  And I found an attitude, Mr. 

Speaker, here of acrimony and of arrogance, of 

self-righteousness on both sides of the House -- on the 

government side, because they won, and on the opposition side.  

Mr. Speaker, we need to take a co-operative effort in this 

House and build out from here into society as a whole. 

 

We look at the idea of this amendment that deals with genuine 

public consultations.  We see legislation before this House, Mr. 

Speaker, that has very little genuine public consultation. 

 

We look at the GRIP legislation, Mr. Speaker.  There was a 

small committee set up to review the GRIP legislation.  There 

were a few additional members put onto it that had not been 

from organizations that were there before.  This committee 

comes back, reports to the minister, and it's all over and done 

with.  Where were the public consultations, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The previous government had drawn up the legislation, 

introduced it to the House, and then went out into the general 

public and held numerous meetings across this province where 

they heard the concerns of the farmers.  They heard their ideas 

and they then incorporated that into the legislation, into the 

actual operations, the regulations of the Bill.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that has not happened here. 

 

We look at other legislation.  The Minister for the Environment 

brought in a Bill dealing with pop cans and other recycleable 

drink containers and non-recycleable drink containers.  And yet 

it wasn't until after the beverage industry held a demonstration 

on the lawn of this legislature, Mr. Speaker, that there was 

consultation with that industry. 

 

That is not genuine public consultation.  That's telling people 

what we're going to do and if you don't like it, that's too bad.  

And then after the fact when they complain about it, then 

maybe you'll go and talk to them.  But, Mr. Speaker, that's not 

public consultation. 

 

We've seen the same thing in a number of other Bills.  Bill 3 -- 

there has been no public consultation.  And, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe that there is a need for that.  There is a number of items 

in that Bill in which many people are 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2271 

interested in where it affects the lives of many people, and yet 

there has been no public consultation.  The same as there's been 

very little public consultation on this labour legislation. 

 

It's easy to get 100 per cent agreement when you go out and 

talk to the few people that 100 per cent support you.  Then you 

can come back and report to the House, well we talked with the 

unions and they liked this legislation.  But there needs to be a 

balance, Mr. Speaker.  It's not just labour legislation.  It's not 

just dealing with employees.  It's dealing with employees and 

employers.  There's two sides to this coin. 

 

And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, if there is going to be labour 

legislation, and this labour legislation -- if I can find my quote 

from the Minister of Labour:  I've always thought the 

Department of Labour should be for labour, said the Minister 

for Labour, a deputy minister of Labour during the 1970s.  This 

is what we're trying to construct in Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if this labour legislation is just for labour, 

perhaps we also need some legislation in this Assembly in the 

province of Saskatchewan for employers -- an employer's bill 

of rights as opposed to a labour union bill of rights.  Because 

there's two sides to this coin, Mr. Speaker.  Without the 

employers providing the opportunity for employment, there 

would be no employees to unionize.  So we need to have a 

balance struck in this legislation.  And a monopoly situation, 

Mr. Speaker, does not mean balance. 

 

There is some things within this labour legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, that have some potential.  The one issue that I'm 

hoping is in this Bill, and I haven't reviewed it all yet, but I 

believe there needs to be an opportunity for part-time 

employees to have access to some of the benefits that a regular 

employee within that company, within that corporation, would 

have. 

 

If a part-time employee were to work for, say 20 hours a week 

as compared to a 40-hour-a-week regular employee, then I 

think it should be that that employee, that part-time employee 

should have available half of the benefit package that a regular 

employee would have.  Those employees are dedicated to that 

company, they provide good service, and they should be 

compensated for the work that they provide.  And part of the 

compensation is not just an hourly wage, but also part of the 

benefit package that those regular employees would receive. 

 

And I would hope that the Minister of Justice -- Minister of 

Labour, excuse me -- that the member from Moose Jaw Palliser 

or the member from Prince Albert would seriously take a look 

at that and give it some consideration.  Because I do believe 

that there is some opportunities there for some advancement 

within the labour field. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about genuine public consultation, 

when we talk about public consultation, not only the GRIP 

program did the government fail to consult with, but also 

FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment program), fuel taxes, 

livestocks, the livestock cash 

advance program.  There was no consultation there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I seem to have woke up the member from Moose Jaw Palliser 

with some of my comments, and I am hoping that he will 

indeed take a look at the idea of some benefits for those 

employees which are part time, for I believe that is an 

important aspect of an employee's life.  There are many 

employees in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, who do not wish to 

work full time but should still have access to the benefit 

packages that a regular employee would have. 

 

The only time it seems that some of the government cabinet 

ministers are prepared to go out and discuss with the general 

public some of the issues of the day, to consult with them, is 

whenever there is a large meeting in opposition to what they 

are doing.  The minister for Crop Insurance went down to 

Shaunavon because there was a large meeting in one of the 

government back-bencher's constituencies.  But yet when 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

held regional meetings across this province, no one showed up 

to consult with them.  And the SARM represents a broad 

cross-section of people across rural Saskatchewan.  They 

represent their constituents very well, and they should have 

been consulted with in dealing with many of the rural issues 

which have since come up. 

 

But the government style is to consult with their friends, but 

not to consult with anybody who is opposed to whatever they 

may be doing.  They seem to be more confrontational with 

those groups than they are co-operative. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Speaker, another one of the items in which the government 

did not seem to have any consultation with the public, the same 

as they are not consulting with the employers dealing with this 

labour relations . . . They have consulted with one group of 

employers.  They have consulted with the group of employers 

in the construction industry that is unionized.  Well it's very 

nice to consult with that group because they do represent a 

portion of the construction industry, but they should also have 

consulted with the vast majority of those members within the 

construction industry that are not unionized. 

 

Those unionized employers would like to see all of the 

government contracts go to unionized companies because that's 

the group they represent.  Why would they want to make it 

available -- those government contracts -- available to other 

non-unionized contractors?  But it's incumbent on the 

government, Mr. Speaker, to consult with all of the members of 

the construction industry, not just those that are unionized. 

 

The government did not consult, Mr. Speaker, when it cut out 

the natural gas distribution program.  That, Mr. Speaker, does 

not build bridges between rural and urban people.  Urban 

people have access, have had access to natural gas for a long 

time.  And yet it was only under the previous administration 

that people in rural Saskatchewan were actually given access to 

this very cheap source of fuel, a source of fuel generated in 

Saskatchewan that benefits Saskatchewan people, 



2272 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

benefits Saskatchewan producers and the distribution system.  

But there is a number of people across the province of 

Saskatchewan that are being denied that access.  Ten per cent 

of the program was left to be finished.  That 10 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker, would have created employment across this province 

this summer, this winter, and next summer likely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I agree with the member from Moose Jaw Palliser 

that we need to build bridges between workers and farmers, 

between management and labour, between rural and urban 

people in this province.  But to do so, you have to talk with 

both sides.  You have to talk with workers and with farmers, 

not just with workers.  You have to talk with both labour and 

management, not just labour.  And you have to talk to rural and 

urban people, not just urban people. 

 

Now the previous administration could be criticized for talking 

. . . for looking after rural people.  And the previous 

administration did try to look after rural Saskatchewan, because 

in rural Saskatchewan is where the economic generators of this 

province reside.  Agriculture is the number one industry in this 

province, and without agriculture we are in the state we are 

today.  Because agriculture has taken the brunt of the recession, 

the brunt of the economic hard times in this province, the rest 

of this province is in rough economic shape. 

 

But if you simply look at urban, as this government is seen to 

do, then you're forgetting where the main generators of 

economic wealth are in this province.  Farmers have to get 

back on their feet, Mr. Speaker, before the entire economy can 

turn around. 

 

But we have not only the farmers in rural Saskatchewan.  We 

also have oil production, the coal production, potash.  All of 

these industries must be returned to viability to build up the 

entire province of Saskatchewan.  We can build a service 

industry in Regina; we can build a service industry in 

Saskatoon; but if there is no one that needs that service, we still 

have no industry. 

 

We don't build bridges, Mr. Speaker, between rural and urban 

Saskatchewan by closing rural schools.  We don't build bridges 

by closing small rural schools to move students into larger 

urban centres.  We don't build bridges between rural and urban 

by taking classes out of small rural schools and moving them to 

larger centres. 

 

We build bridges, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by working together, 

by talking to the people in those communities, asking them: 

what do you want to see happen?  What are you willing to pay 

for?  And by working together, then we can build those 

bridges, but not by tearing things down and pulling them apart. 

 

And the same goes, Mr. Speaker, for rural hospitals.  While 

some of the government side, the Minister of Health, may feel 

that there are too many hospitals in Saskatchewan, that there is 

no need to have a hospital in Dodsland or in Oxbow or in 

Eatonia, Mr. Speaker, those people in those communities 

believe that there is a need for a hospital there.  And they 

believe that there is a need for a hospital in the other 60 to 66 

hospitals that could potentially be closed. 

Mr. Speaker, even the people in Eastend, they held a large 

meeting here not more than two weeks ago to say that they 

wanted to keep their hospital open.  Now it's very easy to say, 

well you know it's just a small hospital out in Eastend. It only 

has perhaps 10 beds. What's the point of it?  Why do you need 

it?  They can all come into Regina or they can all go to 

Saskatoon when they get sick. 

 

But the fact is, Mr. Speaker, if you live in Regina you only live 

10 or 15 minutes from the hospital.  But if you live out around 

the Eastend area and you don't have your hospital there, you 

could well be an hour away from the nearest hospital.  I 

suppose if the government wanted to put helicopters around all 

the province and fly everybody into a major centre, they have 

some possibilities.  But hospitals, Mr. Speaker, are not cheap 

either . . . excuse me, helicopters are not cheap either. 

 

And it is strange, Mr. Speaker, that when the member from 

Moose Jaw Palliser talks of building bridges between rural and 

urban Saskatchewan, there are also . . . The Minister of Health 

is talking of closing down new hospitals -- hospitals that have 

just opened their door.  Hospitals that are under construction 

are some of those hospitals which could potentially be closed.  

And that seems to be a shame, Mr. Speaker, a real shame. 

 

When we look at this labour legislation, Mr. Speaker, I believe 

we need to look at a balance.  We need to balance the rights of 

the employee against the rights of the employer.  They both 

contribute to the wealth of this province.  They both contribute 

to the building up of that company and to building our 

economy.  One without the other will not work. 

 

And one having all the power, Mr. Speaker, will not work 

either.  There needs to be a balance.  The employer needs to 

have the right to have labour perform the necessary tasks, and 

employees need to have the right to be in a position to perform 

those tasks without undue hazard to themselves and in a 

manner in which they can perform those tasks. 

 

I mentioned before, Mr. Speaker, that I represented employees 

in the company that I worked for.  And we had problems at 

times, Mr. Speaker, with management, when management felt 

that there was a need to perform a task in a certain manner, and 

we in turn did not feel that that manner was necessarily the 

safest way to do so. 

 

There needs to be some mechanism in place to iron that out.  

What we found, Mr. Speaker, was by consultation and 

co-operation we could achieve that end.  Confrontation would 

have only led to a worsening of the situation. 

 

So perhaps in dealing with this labour legislation we need to 

look at some sort of mechanism that diffuses some of that 

confrontation rather than enhancing it.  And to give one side of 

the equation all of the power will not aid in the balance. 

 

Some of the problems, Mr. Speaker, that arise when one side or 

the other has too much power we can see in some of the union 

hiring practices.  If you have a project -- and 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2273 

I'll use the Nipawin project, the power plant project as an 

example -- when that project was under construction, the union 

halls needed a certain number of people to come in to work.  

Did they go and hire local people?  No, Mr. Speaker, because 

that is not how the union halls operate. 

 

They went to Regina, they went to Saskatoon to look for 

employees.  And if there were not enough employees available 

that were qualified through that particular union hall, then they 

went out of the province to find those employees. 

 

Well those union members need jobs, true.  But also the local 

people needed some employment.  And the end result at that 

particular location was that it became an open site, I believe, 

and some people of the local people did get hired on. 

 

If I look at what happened here at Shand in the last year or two 

there were some union problems down there.  And that was an 

open site, Mr. Speaker.  But the problem was not between 

union and non-union employees.  In that particular site, the 

trouble was between two different unions: in this case, the 

boilermakers and the steelworkers. 

 

One of the groups received an contract to build the steel towers 

at the Shand plant and the other ones thought they should have 

it.  And there was an ongoing feud at that site.  It caused a 

number of problems.  There were labour disruptions because of 

it.  But it wasn't a fight, Mr. Speaker, between management and 

labour.  It was a fight between the two unions. 

 

So when you come to building bridges, Mr. Speaker, at times 

we need to build bridges between the two different groups, 

between two different unions, and sometimes between 

management and other management associations. 

 

Last fall, the Minister of Labour in some discussions stated that 

union sites are more efficient than non-union sites.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, perhaps on some occasions that's the case.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, on many other occasions, that is indeed not the case. 

 

Again comparing the Shand construction site, there were some 

lost days of work because of union activity.  But as I mentioned 

previously, that was between two different unions and not 

between management and union. 

 

You compare that to the Coronach site, construction of a power 

plant at Coronach.  There was a significant amount of 

management-labour conflict and there were many lost days of 

employment there.  And that was a closed union site, not an 

open site, not a totally non-union site.  It was in fact totally 

unionized.  So we see, Mr. Speaker, from those examples that 

those sites, union activity, 100 per cent monopoly, was not 

conducive to an efficient operation of that site. 

 

We also find, Mr. Speaker, when you look at some of the union 

activities that it's very strange.  Reading through some of these 

papers, you find that on a unionized site, you have one 

apprentice for each unionized member, 

each journeyman of his craft.  And yet on non-unionized sites, 

you can have as many as three or four apprentices for each 

journeyman. 

 

Well that's a significant saving for that company when they bid 

a tender to build that site.  And yet I find it hard to believe that 

journeyman, that apprentice would be following that 

journeyman all day long.  Surely there must be work available 

for that apprentice to perform given to him by the journeyman, 

and then the journeyman would go off and do something else. 

 

Well if he had three or four apprentices working with him, he 

could assign them each a job and supervise all of them besides 

performing his own tasks.  And it would seem a much more 

efficient way, Mr. Speaker, to utilize your journeyman and 

your apprentices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, according to Mr. Bruce Johnstone, that 

construction costs have come down in the last decade not 

because the skilled trades were getting less money, but because 

non-unionized contractors can use more unskilled labour to 

perform the necessary tasks around the site.  I find it strange 

that if I'm walking through a plant site some place that if there's 

a light bulb burnt out in a location that does not require a 

particular safety standard, that I could not change that light 

bulb if I was not an electrician.  I should be able to perform that 

task.  But on a unionized site, you can't do that.  Changing light 

bulbs, Mr. Speaker, belongs to the electricians, and the 

carpenters can't do that. 

 

So that just doesn't improve the efficiency of the system, and in 

fact it increases the costs.  Now if this happens to be a public 

building that you're dealing with, then that added cost is dealt 

with by the public purse. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, genuine public consultations indeed must 

take place in this labour legislation.  We need to be able to 

discuss this, and I would encourage the government to indeed 

go out and consult with the construction industry and all those 

others who would be particularly interested in this Bill.  Go out 

and talk with them; go out and talk with the union people. But 

talk to the other employees across this province also. 

 

We cannot gain.  We cannot build bridges by dealing simply 

with one side and not with the other.  If you deal only with one 

side, you can indeed get a unanimous decision if you deal with 

those that support you.  But it doesn't provide the balance, Mr. 

Speaker, that is needed.  And it doesn't provide, as in the 

member's amendment to the motion, genuine public 

consultations.  Mr. Speaker, it does not build bridges between 

the workers and the farmers, between management and labour, 

and between rural and urban people in this province. 

 

So I would encourage the government, Mr. Speaker, to indeed 

go out and hold those genuine public consultations where 

notices are given of a set meeting date that the minister will be 

there to hear anybody's comments, not just the comments of 

those that support this Bill. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



2274 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

The division bells rang from 4:01 p.m. until 4:11 p.m. 

 

Amendment agreed to on the following division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Murray 

Wiens  Hamilton 

Simard Serby 

Tchorzewski Whitmore 

Teichrob Sonntag 

Shillington Flavel 

Koskie Roy 

Anguish Scott 

Atkinson McPherson 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Penner Kujawa 

Upshall Crofford 

Hagel Harper 

Bradley Keeping 

Koenker Carlson 

Pringle Langford 

Lautermilch Jess 

Calvert  

-- 35 

Nays 

Devine Martens 

Muirhead Toth 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Swenson D'Autremont 

Boyd  

-- 9 

The division bells rang from 4:15 p.m. until 4:45 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Romanow Murray 

Van Mulligen Hamilton 

Wiens Johnson 

Simard Serby 

Tchorzewski Whitmore 

Teichrob Sonntag 

Shillington Flavel 

Koskie Roy 

Anguish Cline 

Atkinson Scott 

Kowalsky McPherson 

Mitchell Wormsbecker 

MacKinnon Kujawa 

Penner Crofford 

Hagel Harper 

Bradley Keeping 

Pringle Carlson 

Lautermilch Langford 

Calvert Jess 

-- 38 

Nays 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Boyd Goohsen 

Martens D'Autremont 

-- 8 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I understand from the Premier 

that he was going to be asking for leave to make a ministerial 

statement, and the opposition agrees with that. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Progress of Constitutional Negotiations 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, 

first of all I'd like to thank the opposition party and the 

opposition leader for accommodating.  I have a very short 

statement to make here. 

 

I thank all members of the House for giving us a chance to give 

a brief report on the status of constitutional talks. 

 

As members are aware, the first ministers have met twice in the 

past two weeks to discuss the process for proceeding and 

developing a new constitutional accord for Canada.  We have 

not of course reached a final agreement on such accord, but 

progress has been made.  And it's been made because it looks 

as though, although no final decision has been decided in this 

context, that there will be a meeting with respect to Premier 

Bourassa and others very shortly. 

 

Progress has been made in other fronts as well.  As everybody 

knows, we have in front of us the draft statement of July 7, the 

so-called Pearson accord, as a working model around which we 

are seeking to devise a new plan.  The Pearson accord, 

although far from perfect, represents a plan which nine 

provinces, the federal government, two territories, and four 

aboriginal groups have said that they can live with. 

 

What remains to be seen is whether or not we can, within the 

framework of that Pearson accord, craft a final position which 

suits the needs of the province of Quebec while remaining true 

to the legitimate concerns expressed by other partners in the 

Confederation. 

 

We must remember, Mr. Speaker, that this round, after all, is 

the round which is described as the Canada Round of 

negotiations, where the hopes and aspirations of all Canadians 

must be taken into account.  The task before us therefore is 

difficult but not insurmountable.  We've got to find a way to 

welcome Quebec formally back into the Canadian family but, 

in doing so, not excluding anyone else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's safe to say for all members of the 

House that our vision of Canada is one which has it as being 

inclusionary -- open to the strengths and the diversity that we 

all bring to it.  It's not exclusionary -- limited in view by 

narrow horizons.  That's why the Pearson accord, although an 

unfinished document, provides a valuable framework for 

further discussions in achieving this goal that I just described. 

 

In the Pearson accord we see protection for regional needs, be 

they the needs of Saskatchewan, Quebec, or Newfoundland.  In 

it we 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2275 

see the protection of the rights, privileges, and aspirations of all 

Canadian people.  In it we see steps taken specifically to 

provide economic strength, or better economic strength for 

such provinces such as Saskatchewan through the equalization 

provisions. 

 

Now as members will know, the Prime Minister has indicated 

that he is meeting his federal cabinet tomorrow to determine if 

another meeting takes place early next week.  We are all very 

hopeful that such will be the decision and such will be the case 

of the federal government.  If so, Mr. Speaker, we will then 

enter into a period of intense negotiations and, I might add -- 

departing from my script -- hopefully the final period of intense 

negotiations over the form and substance of a new 

constitutional accord. 

 

I hope to keep members of the Assembly as fully informed as I 

can and the people of Saskatchewan up to date on the progress 

of these discussions.  And I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and all 

members of the House for giving me the opportunity of making 

this brief report to you today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I just 

want to take a moment to thank the Premier for informing the 

House of the process that has been taking place regarding the 

constitution, regarding the debate that is taking place in our 

nation today.  And certainly members of this Assembly and 

people across Saskatchewan were quite well aware, in fact in 

some cases becoming somewhat bored and tired of the whole 

process. 

 

We trust that as the ministers meet and as they continue to 

grapple with the provisions for a constitution for this nation, 

that they are able to, through serious negotiations and through 

consultation and through conciliation, able to come up with an 

agreeable constitutional package that is acceptable to all.  

Although we realize there is . . . I don't think there's any kind of 

an agreement that can be reached that most people will really 

be happy with, but certainly something that they can work with 

in light of the work that is being done by the Premier today and 

by the government. 

 

We trust that even at the end of the day regarding the 

constitution, regarding the process of the constitution, that that 

same process would be able to work within the confines of our 

Legislative Building and session and in our province as well, 

and the fact of being able to work together to develop policies 

and even working together so that a government and opposition 

can come to agreements on many of the difficulties we also 

face, because the difficulties we face and challenges we run 

into are no different than many of the challenges that are facing 

first ministers today. 

 

And so while we commend the Premier, we trust that that same 

process of working together to come to an agreement, when the 

Premier is able to really give his time to this effort, would be 

able to bring that into this Assembly as well. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 42 -- Government Betrayal of Election 

Promises 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to again stand in this Assembly to speak to the 

Assembly.  At the end of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will be 

bringing forward a motion that reads as such: 

 

 That this Assembly condemns the government for its massive 

betrayal of Saskatchewan voters by introducing a budget and 

legislation that contradicts promises made during the election 

campaign, including imposing no new taxes, supporting rural 

Saskatchewan, increasing support to health, education and 

agriculture, conducting an open and honest government, and 

listening to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the past number of days and weeks we have 

been debating a serious . . . very seriously a number of Bills 

and amendments and areas that the government has brought 

forward, the government's vision for the province. 

 

One of the things that we have found over the past number of 

weeks, past number of months, and certainly since the election, 

is the fact that there are many people across this province who 

have become very disillusioned and very dissatisfied with the 

government and the actions that have been taken by the 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we certainly can reflect back to the election and 

prior to the election time on October 21, 1991 and the period 

of, say, the 1990 through the 1991 period when, at the time, 

Mr. Speaker, the former government was endeavouring to 

bring to the forefront and bring forward to the taxpayers of this 

province the fact that this government must and this province 

must begin to live within its means. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we endeavoured on many occasions when the 

Finance minister of the day came forward with restrictive 

budgets, Mr. Speaker . . . that we're not talking of new tax 

increases or we're not talking of major increases to the funding 

because of the fact that the funding was not available. 

 

And at the time, Mr. Speaker, on many occasions, we heard 

members -- and many members who are presently on the 

government side of the House -- for ever condemning the 

former government for its lack of commitment to 

Saskatchewan, lack of commitment in the area of health care, 

Mr. Speaker.  They spoke about lack of commitment in the area 

of education.  They spoke of lack of commitment to our rural 

. . . to our urban communities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I must indicate that I think the record will 

show that through the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, there was a 

significant contribution of the former government, by the 

former government, to the province of Saskatchewan.  There 

was indeed a commitment to education.  There was indeed a 

commitment to health care.  And we just have to look around 

this province, Mr. Speaker, and we find a number of facilities 

that were constructed in rural 



2276 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

Saskatchewan, much-needed facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we look back prior to the 1982 election, there was 

a moratorium on any further construction to take place in 

health care.  And because of that moratorium, there were many 

areas where facilities were desperately needed but were not 

made available -- facilities such as care homes, Mr. Speaker, 

care homes that would give men and women the ability to 

continue to remain in the community that they had grown up 

in, the community that they had worked so hard to build, the 

community that they had been a part of, that had been a very 

part of their lives and their families' lives. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, when we look through the 1980s we see 

that the former government -- the government under the 

leadership of the member from Estevan -- built, constructed 

some 2,400 new nursing home beds across this province.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, the thing is the government made that 

commitment and committed facilities to rural Saskatchewan, 

not just urban Saskatchewan, which we had seen for far too 

long -- the centralization of health care.  We strengthened and 

endeavoured to strengthen health care in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, yes, that did cost some money.  It takes 

money to provide the services and we must . . . and most 

people across Saskatchewan will admit the fact that if you're 

going to demand something of government, if you're going to 

ask for more services, then you possibly better consider the fact 

that it's going to cost you a little bit and maybe reach into your 

pocket a little deeper or decide how much you want for 

services, what services you want to have covered by the 

government.  And then the government could possibly then 

back up on its taxation and recover the costs either directly or 

indirectly for the services that are provided. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know the debate that took place last fall 

regarding the harmonization of the provincial sales tax.  And 

certainly the members opposite -- and I see some members 

shaking their heads -- did create a fair bit of debate.  Some 

major debate took place on the floor of this Assembly 

regarding harmonization. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what I find is as the government of the day 

. . . the then opposition members, certainly through 

misinformation and the comment that they would totally 

eliminate the provincial sales tax, the PST -- had many people 

believing that harmonization was a bad thing.  It was a 

detriment to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, the harmonization of the education and 

health tax with the goods and services tax, Mr. Speaker, would 

have given a break to small businesses right across this 

province -- from Prince Albert right down through to Estevan.  

It would have given a break to the farm community across this 

province, Mr. Speaker.  It would have given a break to low 

income families, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the opposition of the day spoke out against it and even 

campaigned against it, Mr. Speaker.  They campaigned on the 

basis that they would eliminate the sales tax.  They would do 

away with the PST. 

And the interesting part, Mr. Speaker, on many occasions they 

would talk about eliminating the PST very loudly, very firmly.  

And then quietly, towards the end of a speech, they would talk 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 5 o'clock, this House 

stands recessed until 7 o'clock this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


