




















































Hansard: August 21, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2845 

 August 21, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 9 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, I would 

move first reading of a Bill to amend the Saskoil Act. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 91 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Oil and 

Gas Corporation Act, 1985 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 

the amendments to the Saskoil Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 87 -- An Act respecting amendments to Certain 

Farm Income Insurance Legislation 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wonder if the 

minister might provide a little bit more explanation of why he 

has included section 10.1 and 10.2 in the Bill, which to most 

readers eliminates the ability of the ordinary person from going 

to court and protecting their rights in a contract.  It seems to me 

that those sections eliminate the individual right to go to court 

even if the government of the day might have broken the law or 

in fact changed the law retroactively.  Why did he think it was 

necessary to have those in there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to explain to the 

member opposite that those provisions are relatively narrow 

provisions that apply to the changes in '92, which have been 

made under the terms of the federal-provincial agreement, and 

the notice provision as was explained yesterday. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well would the minister just tell us what those 

provisions do exactly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm advised that the 

detailed examination of the clauses is most often left to the 

time when we get to that clause.  I will give a general rationale 

and if the member opposite, the Leader of the Opposition, 

would want us to get into the detail now so that when we get to 

the clause we can just skip over it, that's acceptable.  But I will 

first just give the general background of the coming to this 

position. 

 

As the member opposite may be aware, a year and some time 

ago his government at that time entered into discussions with 

respect to tripartite programming with the federal government.  

That discussion was brought to 

the farming community in early March.  The farmers began to 

respond as the members opposite engaged in public meetings 

about it.  Farmers were given program information on a 

word-of-mouth basis.  It's my understanding that when most 

farmers were beginning to seed after having had the program 

explained to them verbally by politicians at something in 

excess of 60 meetings, many farmers went to many meetings in 

order to try to capture the essence of the proposals that were 

coming forward. 

 

During that series of meetings, there were numerous changes -- 

I think in excess of 100.  At any rate the discussions went on 

with farmers.  And about May 1, the government published a 

pamphlet which they called the revenue insurance contract, 

which became another piece of explanation of what the 

program was. 

 

They published another document called the safety net program 

which was again a second piece of information in addition to a 

piece of information that farmers had earlier signed indicating 

an interest in participating in the program. 

 

Then farmers had their individual contacts aside from the 

public meetings with their crop insurance agents, and 

sometimes with the employees of the Crop Insurance 

Corporation, at the end of which farmers believed they 

understood what it was they had assured to them under the 

program. 

 

It was not yet fixed in legislation and in fact never was.  It was 

not yet determined in the federal-provincial agreement because 

it never was until September 18.  So farmers were engaging in 

program decisions based on communications that were word of 

mouth and communications that were never finalized in terms 

of defining in legislation what the program commitments were. 

 

These were changes and processes that were in place and 

taking place well beyond the period that was later defined in 

the pamphlet as March 15 as a time after which changes should 

not occur. 

 

So farmers were participating in word-of-mouth 

communication with respect to changes, changes in excess of 

100 changes in the implementation of a new program.  So that 

defines the background of where it came to be when we came 

to office. 

 

There was a piece of legislation passed, I think it was in June.  

But that piece of legislation did not define what constituted a 

contract.  Then a federal-provincial agreement was signed that 

provided for change in the . . . and the mechanism for change. 

 

The methodology for changing in the federal-provincial 

agreement is that changes may be made, and if farmers are 

unhappy with the program as a result of the changes, they 

would have the right to opt out.  That provision is inconsistent 

with the detailed notice provision that was also included in the 

pamphlet as part of an understanding of what may have 

constituted a contractual agreement. 



2846 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

We came to office in early November.  We put in place the 

review process that the member opposite had begun, that had 

been provided for in legislation -- the review process that was 

supposed to follow the first year of the operation of the 

program.  We were the only province that had legislatively 

established that review process.  And the member opposite, the 

Leader of the Opposition, then premier and minister of 

Agriculture, named a committee, a committee that represented 

a number of farm organizations in the province -- most of the 

farm organizations that represent the greatest number of 

farmers in the province. 

 

(0915) 

 

That committee was . . . what we did was ask the organizations 

that had previously been on the committee, as appointed by the 

Leader of the Opposition now, to confirm their representation 

on the committee.  We asked them to name changes if they 

wished there to be change.  We made an addition to the 

committee.  We added the National Farmers Union who had 

been left off of the committee originally, and we added two 

ministerial appointments.  That committee went to work and 

brought forward a report within the time frame set out in the 

legislation passed by the members opposite a year ago. 

 

In the process of coming to their conclusions, this committee 

had heard from and met with in excess of 300 individuals and 

organizations.  They brought forward their report to me signed 

by the . . . there was a majority report signed by I believe 10 

members of the committee on February 11, and a minority 

report signed by two others with respect to the nature of the 

program changes. 

 

When we brought those changes forward, there was a period of 

protracted delay by the federal government with respect to 

blocking the recommended changes by our committee.  That 

was somewhat confusing to us since four of the members on 

the committee named by the members opposite and continuing 

on the committee had been a member of the national GRIP 

review committee and had been in communication with respect 

to the nature of the changes they had suggested.  And they in 

fact believed that the changes that were being brought forward 

were consistent with the existing federal-provincial agreement.  

They also believed that those changes should automatically be 

brought forward by the federal government as a result of the 

recommendations that were here. 

 

Well the unfortunate fact was that the federal government 

delayed this process, in fact in the end requiring Saskatchewan 

to engage in an unprecedented process of seeking our own 

provincial support for these changes -- that in the face of 

changes having been made last year, in the year of 

implementation of the process, by the provinces of Alberta and 

Manitoba, to correct some of the very same errors that the 

original program in Saskatchewan had, and those changes 

having been not only carried forward by the federal 

government but those changes involving additional money 

from the federal government, an amount of money equivalent, 

if it were applied to Saskatchewan, to 40 to $60 million 

additional federal money with respect to this program change. 

But in Saskatchewan -- and the motivation for this is unclear, 

but there is no other evident motivation other than simple 

politics -- in Saskatchewan the federal government chose to 

block the recommendations of this committee.  And finally as a 

result of seeking provincial support for our changes on March 

13 -- the earliest time possible for us to make changes -- 

brought forward the recommendations of the committee and 

gave notice to the farming community on March 13 by public 

press release. 

 

The consequence of the lack of definition of the contractual 

obligation, as it was originally constructed in the spring of 

1991, was that there could be 50,000 independent 

interpretations of what the government's commitment to a 

farmer was.  Since there was no piece of paper and no 

provision in an Act that anywhere described this contractual 

commitment, nowhere in regulations was there a full definition 

of this contractual commitment. 

 

So that in essence a farmer who had been told something by 

their crop insurance agent could believe one thing about their 

contract and every other farmer could believe something else 

about their contract.  And nowhere was it defined what in fact 

was the real contract that the farmer held. 

 

It was therefore necessary in implementing our report to clarify 

that, so that in the provisions that are in the Act as brought 

before you and in the clause that the member opposite makes 

reference to, it was believed that there were two clauses; that 

there was a clause in the previous agreement that caused some 

difficulty because it was impossible to know what constituted 

notice under the . . . because of change, because it was 

impossible to know what each farmer believed to be their 

contract.  So that it was impossible to determine what in fact 

constituted proper notice. 

 

And therefore in the process of reconstructing . . . in 

constructing the new legislation, several things were done.  The 

first thing that was done was voided the requirement for notice, 

so that in this Bill there is a voiding of the notice requirement 

because it is difficult to determine what in fact constitutes legal 

notice.  And with 50,000 people independently determining 

what that was, it would be an ongoing difficulty to try to 

determine that legally. 

 

It was also believed that, as a result of past practice and the 

functions -- and to be consistent with the federal-provincial 

agreement -- that the purpose of those notice provisions was 

simply to allow farmers to understand program options and 

allow them to make decisions about their program options. 

 

In the original crop insurance program, the March 15 deadline 

was a deadline that the Crop Insurance Corporation used before 

the days of crop insurance agents where there was more 

personal contact.  In those days -- early days -- the contract 

would . . . the program features would be mailed to a farmer, 

and the farmer would have 15 days to respond.  So that before 

March 15, farmers would receive a description of any program 

changes in the current year, and then the farmer would 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2847 

have up until March 30 to respond. 

 

That worked when that was the only option that was necessary 

to determine.  But in recent years, there has been much more 

personal contact.  There have been numerous program changes.  

The members opposite, in many years leading up to 1991, 

ignored the March 15 provisions because they understood, as 

farmers understand, that the purpose of that was simply to 

inform farmers so that they would be able to make informed 

program choices. 

 

It was most often that the decision time for farmers was 

extended to April 30 or May 15, if there were considerations 

that farmers needed to be given.  And that again was done this 

year.  Farmers were given notice for the purposes of meeting 

what the intent of notice was, which is that farmers could 

understand the program and could make their decision about 

participation. 

 

What has been done in this legislation, because of the previous 

lack of clarity in the program, is that this legislation defines 

what the 1991 contractual commitment was, because it has not 

previously been defined in law.  And it voids the requirement 

for notice.  And the clause the member opposite refers to then 

extinguishes actions with respect to those narrow provisions, 

the notice provisions, for the reasons we have brought forward, 

and the program changes having been made consistently with 

the federal-provincial agreement. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I don't know if anybody was 

listening to your answer but you didn't address the question.  

And as a result of your rules changes in here, maybe you think 

you'll just talk long enough so that in fact you can just run out 

the clock, even if you don't make any sense. 

 

I asked you specifically if you would respond to section 10(1) 

and (2), particularly section (2).  Could the minister sincerely 

and accurately explain what section 10(2) does -- 10(2), what it 

does? 

 

I read it to him and then if he would just address that clause.  

Section 10(2) says: 

 

 Every cause of action against the Crown or a Crown agent 

arising from, resulting from, or incidental to anything 

mentioned in clauses (1)(a) to (d) is extinguished. 

 

Would you care to explain that to the public and to a farmer.  If 

a farmer asked you what that meant, Mr. Minister, what would 

tell him that part of the Bill does? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think it's important 

to explain, not only to the people listening but to the members 

opposite, the background for the legislation which is now being 

introduced.  The . . . and I will explain it again because the 

member opposite doesn't possibly -- maybe I haven't explained 

it properly -- understand the relevance of the history to the need 

for the present legislation. 

 

The history, as I just described a few minutes ago, leaves 

farmers in the circumstance that in the year that the 

program was constructed of not having defined what their 

contractual expectations should be.  Farmers in a general sense 

knew last year what the program offered them.  But in the legal 

sense that the member opposite describes, there was no 

definition of it.  And so if it were to come down to a legal 

examination, no one could describe what the legal obligation of 

government was in the program.  It was therefore necessary, 

because not knowing what the legal obligation were to be it 

would also be impossible to determine what would constitute 

legal notice of changes. 

 

And so it was our desire to meet the intent of the notice 

provisions by, as early as possible, giving notice of the changes 

in this year.  But there is lack of clarity about what in fact could 

constitute legal notice this year of changes because of the lack 

of a basic understanding of what the original commitments 

were.  It was therefore necessary in this legislation to first of all 

define the 1991 contract which had not previously been 

defined, and then to clarify the legal entanglements by voiding 

the requirement for notice.  So in this Bill the requirement for 

notice is voided and the . . . there are provisions in this Bill that 

would prevent lawsuits with respect to a narrow range of 

circumstances that result from the clarification of the program 

in 1992.  So the Bill will prevent, and the clause the member 

refers to, prevent lawsuits with respect to changes in the 

program -- the changes in the program which are made 

consistent with the federal-provincial agreement. 

 

Because of the lack of clarity, there were two kinds of 

provisions around change and they were not possible to be put 

together, as the member opposite would know, because they 

were not put together last year.  So that in order to prevent the 

constant expanding of resources and time on the legal details 

around that, this Bill simply clarifies that with respect to those 

matters, that lawsuits are prevented, including amendments to 

the contract and the federal-provincial agreement.  Because the 

federal-provincial agreement in fact is part of the contractual 

commitment and is part of and has within it the process of 

change that says when the federal-provincial agreement is 

amended, that that becomes the new program. 

 

That becomes the new program regardless of when it happens.  

The old federal-provincial agreement was signed on September 

18 last year.  When that agreement was signed, it defined the 

program that was begun and supposedly in place on March 15.  

So April, May, June, July, August, September, five months 

later the contractual commitment is defined in the 

federal-provincial agreement -- impossible to have given notice 

on March 15 of changes that are only enshrined in a 

federal-provincial agreement on September 18. 

 

(0930) 

 

Then it was also there to prevent lawsuits with respect to any 

claim with respect to any representation of a contract other than 

that which is described, because of the circumstances again that 

I described earlier with respect to the origins of the program.  

There was only a piece of paper that farmers signed that said 

they were interested in participating in the program.  There 

wasn't even a pamphlet describing the program until . . . where 

it said 



2848 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

this is the revenue insurance contract until May 1 and 

thereafter.  And I'm sure all farmers did not receive it.  And 

what the nature of that information was is part of the dilemma 

because was there an obligation to mail this to every farmer?  

Was there an obligation to mail it by registered mail?  What in 

fact constitutes legal notice?  That was unclear.  And what else 

constituted an agreement? 

 

So that because a contract could be conceived to have been the 

representations by the crop insurance agent, the representations 

by other employees of the Crop Insurance Corporation, or the 

representation of ministers at meetings when the ministers were 

touring the province, this provision prevents lawsuits with 

respect to those kinds of changes.  And this provision also does 

provide for a defence in the actions already commenced. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I've asked you three times 

now if you would justify or explain and then hopefully justify 

why you are removing the government from any legal action.  

In other words, if farmers signed a contract with you and you 

broke the contract, they can't sue you.  They can't take you to 

court.  Section 10.1 says: 

 

 No action or proceeding lies or shall be instituted or 

continued against the Crown (against the government) . . . 

 

If you think you're so right, why do you have to protect 

yourself from the farmers?  That's the question.  If your history 

is valid and the last hour of your discussion is valid, why do 

you have to protect yourself from them going to court?  It isn't 

logical.  It doesn't follow.  If you're valid and you have all of 

this nice history, why are you so afraid that you have to bring 

in this legislation that takes away the individual's rights and 

probably -- and no doubt we'll see and I'll present to you -- 

violates the Charter of Rights and Freedoms of the country. 

 

Why do you have to do that?  It's all the way through the Bill.  

The whereas's in the Bill set out your weak attempt to justify 

reducing . . . or removing the people's rights.  Then you go on 

and say what they did do was void.  And then to even add 

insult to injury, you say, but you can't sue me because I might 

just be wrong.  The NDP (New Democratic Party) government 

might just be wrong, but you can't sue me.  So you've taken 

away their rights. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Charter of Rights and Freedoms in Canada 

says this: 

 

 The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees 

the rights and freedoms set out in it subject only to such 

reasonable limits prescribed by law as can be demonstrably 

justified in a free and democratic society. 

 

Legal rights: 

 

 Everyone has the right to life, liberty, and security of the 

person and the right not be deprived thereof except in 

accordance with the principles of fundamental justice. 

 

Under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms in this country, 

people have rights.  One of them is access to fairness, access to 

the courts, access to the legal system.  And if they've been 

violated, they have to turn to someone.  They have to turn to 

the courts.  That's part of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  

And you have denied them that.  And all the history lessons 

and all the whereas's will not justify, one, morally in the minds 

and hearts and souls of people across Saskatchewan that you 

can take away their rights. 

 

And secondly, I don't think there's a court in the country that 

wouldn't like to get their hands on you and just test this, 

whether it's a court of appeal or the Supreme Court.  You can't 

take away people's rights to defend themselves, particularly 

given the history of what you've done in this Legislative 

Assembly to impose this law.  You've limited my right to speak 

and to represent my people who duly elected me in democracy, 

through unilateral changes in this Legislative Assembly.  Then 

you imposed time allocation, and this debate will end on 

Monday. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Hear, hear. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- And the members say, hear, hear. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We're sick of . . . 

 

Mr. Devine: -- The NDP member from Humboldt says he's 

sick of hearing the truth about this.  Mr. Chairman, isn't it 

interesting when we get up to speak about the truth and taking 

away the rights of individuals, then the NDP members come 

alive over there in their seats, as if they had something.  If the 

member from Humboldt has something intelligent to add to 

this, perhaps you could allow him to speak on it. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I make the point that all the history lesson that 

the minister's been going through to waste time doesn't change 

the facts or the truth.  The truth is you're wrong.  This is 

unpopular, and it's illegal, it's unparliamentary, and it's 

undemocratic. 

 

And now you can have all the history stuff you like . . . And 

your Bill clearly lays that out because the preamble is a very 

legal, constitutional preamble to protect you but that isn't 

enough.  Then you go on and void everything that was there.  

And then you protect yourself from any legal actions so the 

individual farm family can't get at you. 

 

What a cowardly act.  What a cowardly act.  And all the history 

lessons will not change that.  People across the province, and 

people across Canada are looking at the NDP administration 

and the NDP Minister of Agriculture as a political coward 

hiding behind unilateral changes here, changes that he couldn't 

pass without dramatically changing the rules of the House, and 

changes that he couldn't bring to the farmers, that would be 

popular. 

 

On Monday there will probably be a handful of farmers, as you 

know, asking you all kinds of questions.  And I hope that they 

give you 16 hours to explain section 10(1), (2), (3), which of 

course they won't.  You'll get laughed out of the country. 

 

If there are a few hundred or a few thousand people show 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2849 

up to hear you do what you did here this morning, it's a joke.  

You should be ashamed of yourself.  You're elected as the 

member of a rural community to stick up for farmers, and 

you're using this Legislative Assembly and hiding behind it and 

hiding behind the law so they can't get at you, and they're 

losing their farms in the crisis that you campaigned on.  It's 

pathetic.  What a cowardly act; how shameful. It's pathetic. 

 

I couldn't understand how an agricultural person and an ag grad 

and a rural person could do this to his neighbours, and have this 

history.  I'm going to read to you what your Premier says about 

rights, what people say about rights, what farmers say about 

rights, what people say about your attitude towards the rights of 

individuals. And you can't change that.  It'll be in Hansard.  It's 

in the editorials; it's in the papers; it's in the speeches.  And 

you're there being hung out to dry. 

 

You are genuinely seen as a serious political liability for the 

new NDP Premier of Saskatchewan because of this legislation 

and the way you've handled this -- public knowledge 

everywhere. 

 

And I asked you a sincere question about why you have to take 

away the rights and you go on for another half an hour, all over 

the map, as if that's cool.  Is that really productive?  Is that 

sophisticated?  Is that the proper thing to do?  There's no 

bearing on it at all. 

 

Other people aren't in court.  You can provide some help to 

farmers.  You can modify some GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program).  You can do the right kinds of things in a reasonable 

way.  Sit down and talk to them. 

 

The last one I'm sure that you haven't got pinned up over your 

bed is Randy Burton of the Star-Phoenix took a run at you that 

summarized a whole bunch of your mistakes.  It's funny you're 

not in court over all kinds of things.  The result of this squabble 

in GRIP was an embarrassing court case, heavy-handed 

legislation, and a legislative walk-out by the Tories.  All this 

makes Wiens a considerable political liability for Romanow. 

 

So you're not wise politically.  And you're illegal.  You're 

unconstitutional, undemocratic.  And how are you doing so far?  

You're only eight or nine months old as a minister.  And all this 

because you won't help farmers, because you're afraid to 

co-operate in a national program. 

 

And you say, well but crop insurance changes were never made 

before.  We've made crop insurance changes for the last 50 

years, certainly in the last 10 years.  Year after year after year.  

We never got into any of this stuff. 

 

The salvage program -- big change to crop insurance, the right 

thing to do.  Probably you endorsed.  People didn't go to court 

over it.  The article goes on to say, your honeymoon is over.  

Now you flip-flop, flip-flopped on all kinds of things. 

 

The problem with this one is you've dug yourself in legally 

where you are affecting the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  

And you're putting up this legislation so that . . . You must 

admit you're wrong or you're way over here and largely guilty 

or very vulnerable or you wouldn't 

have this section in here that says, well I can void your rights.  

But just in case I might be wrong, I'll take away your rights to 

sue me or your rights to have access to the courts. 

 

That is the biggest admission that you're haywire that there is.  

Anybody can see that.  Any farmer will see it.  Any lawyer will 

see it.  Any of the people that drafted this knew exactly what 

they're doing.  This is dangerous stuff, folks.  We'd better put 

lots of whereas's.  We'd better really be careful with this void 

stuff and deemed to have done.  But then we'd better really 

cover our backsides.  They can't get us. 

 

That's what that section's all about.  People have been denied 

their rights and freedoms.  And I don't know over what.  

Because GRIP is complicated?  Agriculture contracts are 

complicated?  Of course they're complicated.  It's a 

multibillion-dollar operation.  You have individual farmers.  

They all have different circumstances and different 

commodities.  Of course it's complicated.  But you don't have 

to take away their rights because you can't figure out how to 

deal with agriculture or different farmers who farm different 

commodities. 

 

You're quoted, Mr. Minister, in this House saying a couple of 

things.  This is August 11 and it was a response to a question 

that I asked you: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, as I have already once indicated to the member 

opposite, this matter (this GRIP matter) will continue to be 

dealt with by the courts. 

 

That's what you said.  Earlier you said: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, the member opposite ought to be aware that the 

courts will continue to deal with these matters. 

 

So you're bringing in this law and you're telling us in question 

period, this will be dealt with by the courts.  Your leader 

essentially said the same thing about GRIP and about your 

legislation which he is not happy with -- publicly admits he's 

not happy with.  And I quote the NDP Premier: 

 

 I worry about contracts and all of that.  I mean, one has 

certain rights.  That's where the merit of the PC walkout is. 

 

Now that would be interesting in a court of law where the NDP 

Premier says, I'm worried about people's rights.  That's the 

merit of their argument and their walk-out. 

 

You said in the legislature, this will likely be settled in the 

courts; this will be before the courts; Mr. Speaker, I've 

reminded the member of the opposition, this is going to be 

done before the courts. 

 

So your Premier says it's going to be before the courts.  He 

goes on to say, the NDP Premier says on August 7:  The courts 

will have to decide that. 

 

And the Saskatoon lawyer, an NDP lawyer, says this is 

unconstitutional, will have to be decided before the 



2850 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

courts.  And I quote: 

 

 The bill would also make it impossible for anyone to sue the 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corp. or the government over 

the changes cabinet makes to GRIP. 

 

 In court actions already proceeding against the government, 

the bill states (that) "a court shall not consider any principle 

of law or in equity that would require adequate, reasonable or 

any notice with respect to any amendments or change to the 

contract." 

 

(0945) 

 

Audrey Brent says this, and I quote: 

 

 I think that is the most disturbing aspect. 

 

 First, she would argue that GRIP is a tripartite program 

involving the farmer, province and federal government.  This 

bill affects the federal government and because provinces 

can't make legislation binding Ottawa, the Bill is 

unconstitutional, she said. 

 

 Second, she would argue the bill contravenes the Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms. 

 

You have an NDP lawyer who agrees with the Premier this is a 

violation of rights.  You don't have access to the courts.  You 

yourself admit in this legislature that this is going to be settled 

in the courts.  And a legal academic and practising lawyer and 

supporter of yours says this is unconstitutional, and it violates 

the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  And when we ask you 

questions about it here in the legislature, you give us a history 

lesson how it is that we have to change GRIP and crop 

insurance, as if it's never been changed before. 

 

Imagine if you've had somebody on the stand and said, did you 

change crop insurance in '82?  Yes.  Eighty-three?  Yes, sir.  

Eighty-four? Yes.  Eighty-five?  Yes.  Is it changed every year?  

Yes it is. 

 

But only when this minister gets in power do you end up in 

court, where in fact you cannot even sue the government even 

though they break the contracts, break their word.  Farmers are 

out millions of dollars.  Only under this administration with 

this minister do in fact you lose your rights. 

 

Mr. Minister, when we ask you to defend the fact that you are 

taking away rights, you don't even address the question.  And 

the minister says from his seat, ask me again and I'll defend it 

again.  You haven't defend . . .  You haven't even been close to 

it, not close to it. 

 

You've got your members, your Premier, yourself, admitting 

that this will be settled in the courts, and you've got a whole 

section in here that says you can't go to court.  What are you 

talking about?  How do these farmers get access to go to court 

when you don't let them have access to you?  Did you ever . . .  

Did you take time to explain that?  How are you going to 

explain that to several hundred or 

several thousand farmers if they meet and want to talk to you 

and say . . .  You'll just have to say this.  This will be settled in 

the courts.  The Premier said it's going to be settled in the 

courts; I say it's going to be settled in the courts.  Then you'll 

have to hold up the Bill and say, but you can't take us to court. 

 

That's pretty brave, isn't it?  Isn't that really logical?  How 

sound is that?  Why would you do that? 

 

And when we go at it in here, and you not only change the 

rules . . . Why do you duck and say, well we can't handle that; 

it'll be settled in the courts?  Why do you say that?  Why do 

you say this is going to be settled in the courts if you're not 

absolutely convinced in your heart of heart, number one, 

morally and ethically you are wrong, but legally you are wrong 

as well?  And you violated the constitution and the charter of 

rights. 

 

Why do you keep jumping back to the courts?  And the 

Premier jumps back to the courts.  And he's in the paper saying, 

I'm worried about rights.  That's the validity.  That's the part 

that the PCs (Progressive Conservative) are right about -- 

people's rights.  And then we ask you about it, and you jump 

back to the courts, and then don't let them have access to the 

courts. 

 

Why?  What is going on in the back of your mind or in the 

back of the caucus of the cabinet over there that let's you dig 

this hole so deep that this is far beyond agriculture and far 

beyond crop insurance?  It's far beyond your officials in Crop 

Insurance. They've got nothing to do with this.  You probably 

don't want them hauled into court, and I wouldn't blame them 

for not wanting to go to court either.  But why have you taken 

this so far out of agriculture where you're now violating 

fundamental rights and freedoms of people in Canada. 

 

And then you must have had some advice to say, well it's going 

to be settled in the courts, knowing that they can't get at you in 

the court.  You have denied them access to the courts.  Because 

this section that I've been reading to you says you can't sue the 

government. 

 

Now if you are so sure, Mr. Minister, with all your history 

lessons that you've been making up, rewriting history, if you're 

so sure that you're right, number one, why is it in here, that 

section?  And number two, why don't you just refer it to the 

Court of Appeal in Saskatchewan and let them take it right up 

to the Supreme Court?  Then we'd all know, Mr. Minister, we'd 

all know. 

 

But no, you won't do that.  So you refer to the courts over and 

over again -- this is going to go to the courts to be settled.  You 

deny people the right and then you deny the request, which is a 

normal request that we've done.  We did it with the 

jurisdictional boundaries Act, electoral boundaries Act. We just 

said, refer it to the Court of Appeal, take it to the Supreme 

Court.  They dealt with it right away.  I bet your farm, Mr. 

Minister, the courts would deal with this very quickly -- very, 

very quickly. 
 

If you want to clean this up before the public and before your 

cabinet colleagues and before farmers, refer this today.  Don't 

hide behind closure and time allocation and long-winded 

speeches about the history of GRIP and crop 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2851 

insurance.  What malarkey.  You don't look good doing that.  

Nobody believes you, don't believe you at all.  I don't think 

your family believes you.  I don't think your neighbours believe 

you.  Certainly your constituents don't believe you. 

 

If you think you're so right, you just have a couple of things 

that you can do. Pull this section that denies people right to the 

courts, or refer the whole thing to the Saskatchewan Court of 

Appeal and let it go from there. 

 

Now that's an honourable thing to do.  It shows a little bit of 

courage.  Your drafters may be tested to see if they really knew 

what they were doing.  Your principles would be tested.  You 

might be right and you might be wrong.  But you're hiding.  

You're hiding behind the rule changes.  You're hiding behind 

this legislation so that you can't be sued.  And yet over and 

over and over again, you and your cabinet colleagues, 

including the Premier, said this will be settled in the courts, and 

you won't let them have access to it and you won't refer it. 

 

For Heaven's sake, what a weak argument.  It's terrible.  And 

on top of that we say, why do you do this?  Is this part of your 

reason to be elected, to go deny the rights and freedoms of 

individuals, break the constitution, violate the constitutional 

rights?  Is this going to help them get money into their pocket? 

 

You campaigned on a rural crisis and they're still . . . and the 

crisis is deepening.  There was frost last night in Melfort.  

There's still drought.  Income problems are severe.  You've got 

foreclosure notices coming out.  Rural communities are dying.  

Rural population is declining.  And you're in court and 

legislation here denying them having access to you. 

 

And that's something you're going to campaign on?  Is that 

what you thought you would do when you got elected?  You're 

a farmer.  You know about GRIP.  You know about crop 

insurance.  Is that what you thought you were going to do?  

You certainly campaigned the opposite. 

 

Lots more money; cost of production; we'll be there to help 

you.  We'll get more money from Ottawa.  You failed on all of 

those.  You didn't get more money from Ottawa.  You didn't 

get them the cost of production.  You've dramatically changed 

their contracts and then when you did it illegally, you're doing 

it retroactively and then to cover yourself, you can't even be 

sued.  What a legacy. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, you see why I asked you about that section.  I 

asked you about that section.  Let me give you this quick 

summary of why I want you to address that section.  Your 

Premier says he's worried about rights being violated.  He says 

this will be settled in court.  You say this will be settled in 

court.  I ask you then, why do you have this section that denies 

people the right to have access to the courts, and violates their 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms?  Why do you do that?  Why is 

that in here? 

 

And number two, why don't you refer this Bill to the Court of 

Appeal in Saskatchewan and let them take it from there, if you 

think this should go before the courts, which you said it should 

and it would, and the Premier said it should and it would. 

There are only two ways to get it there, and you could facilitate 

either one of them.  Pull this part of the Bill and let them have 

access to you if you think your void stuff is fine and you deem 

to be fair enough and all of that.  Let them take it to court and 

test it out.  Don't hide.  Or two, refer it, and then you'll know. 

 

Because if you won't do either one of those, how can you keep 

saying this should be tested in the courts; this should be settled 

in the courts?  That's where you've . . . people don't understand 

that.  And they don't want a 25-minute lecture on history that's 

been rewritten by your imagination.  Why has this section been 

put in the Bill and how in the world do they settle it in the 

courts if you're hiding behind the Legislative Assembly that 

denies them that right?  And why in the world won't you just 

refer it if you think the courts are going to deal with it? 

 

The member from Quill Lakes, Mr. Chairman, the member 

from Quill Lakes should probably be on his feet describing 

this.  Yes, the member from Quill Lakes hides in the 

legislature, and now he's chirping from his seat.  Because if he 

has any legal experience at all, he knows that the Premier is 

right.  He is worried about the violation of rights and freedoms.  

People do have rights.  People do have rights.  And the member 

from the Quills doesn't care. 

 

And now they're starting to chirp up from Regina North.  Mr. 

Chairman, now the minister is anxious to answer the question.  

He's just sitting there, anxious to answer.  He hasn't answered a 

question in the last three days.  He's all over the map -- all over 

the map.  You deserve to be politically tarred and feathered -- 

politically tarred and feathered for this kind of cowardice, 

cowardly act, hiding in here, imposing unilateral changes.  Big, 

big majority, really right, really good, really sensitive, really 

kind, buoyed on the history on the back and the memories of 

Tommy Douglas.  This is so kind and so good, not only for 

farmers but for individual rights and freedoms.  You are so 

righteous and self-righteous. 

 

Even your members of your caucus who are members of the 

clergy are ducking and hiding their heads for the things that 

you've done in this Legislative Assembly -- things they said 

they would never have any part of.  And now they've gone way 

beyond that to where they even deny the rights and freedoms of 

individuals to go before the courts.  And then tell people to go 

to court and they don't let them go.  What a pathetic excuse for 

people that are elected. 

 

And these are NDP . . . these are democrats, these new-found 

democrats.  They don't like democracy; they don't like 

individual rights; they don't like to listen to the people.  They 

just think, well we got a majority, we'll change it the way we 

like, and we will deny everybody their rights and freedoms . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . And the member from Quills says, 

why don't you accept the fact that we lost an election.  Well 

they campaigned on an awful lot different that this, Mr. 

Chairman.  They campaigned on they'll give you the cost of 

production; they'll get you more money.  And what did they do, 

Mr. Speaker?  They didn't tell the truth.  It's political perjury -- 

political perjury.  It's falsehoods to the highest order. 



2852 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

They campaigned on cost of production, helping farmers, open 

government, freedom . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order, order, order.  I don't know 

what the point is of the interruptions.  Members have an 

opportunity to be recognized and heard in these debates at the 

appropriate time.  There's simply no reason for them to 

interrupt anyone who has the floor. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It's interesting 

that the members will not stand up and speak on it, but they'll 

chirp from their seats, and then they'll say but they won on a 

falsehood.  They didn't campaign . . . 

 

On the rural crisis they said they were going to help people.  

They had new ideas for agriculture.  New ideas for agriculture, 

can you believe this?  This is the new plan.  Boy, if they'd have 

ever told them what they were going to do, there wouldn't be 

any of them here.  They could go out now in rural 

Saskatchewan and say, this is the new plan folks; here's what 

we're going to do.  Vote for us.  And they would get kicked so 

hard they wouldn't have their deposit.  And you know it, Mr. 

Chairman, and so do I and so does the public. 

 

And teachers are saying, well maybe they could do that to our 

contracts.  Nurses are saying, maybe they could do it with our 

contracts.  Unions are saying, well you mean if we signed a 

contract, the NDP could break the contract and bring in 

legislation so we couldn't sue them?  And he's going to justify 

that with a history lesson about unions or a history lesson about 

teaching or a history lesson about the nursing profession. 

 

Now they're bringing in changes where they're going to lead to 

the demise of rural Saskatchewan, close facilities all across 

rural Saskatchewan on top of this legislation.  And you watch 

them close them. 

 

(1000) 

 

We've got technology that allows them to have rural health 

centres, rural agricultural centres, the best technology you can 

have.  You've got fax machines, telephones, computers, 

satellites.  And these the NDPers say, no bring it all to Regina.  

Bring it all to Saskatoon.  We'll consolidate that. 

 

Oh for Heaven's sake.  And then they promised that they 

wouldn't stop decentralization.  Member from Humboldt said 

right on the radio, we won't stop this.  And they've cut it right 

off at the knees and then off at the neck and then off at the belt.  

Mr. Chairman, this bunch over here that got elected on this 

falsehood and on this political perjury deserves to have their 

face rubbed in it.  And this Bill is the epitome of that hypocrisy 

and that falsehood. 

 

Mr. Chairman, this minister who gives us a two-hour history 

lesson about crop insurance when we're asking about the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms and campaign promises isn't 

worthy of sitting on any cabinet bench.  This is pathetic.  And 

his colleagues know it.  Nobody can justify this.  You can't 

justify this in the world in any jurisdiction, let alone a 

democracy, and certainly not somebody who says they come 

from the roots of Tommy Douglas, based on the foundation of 

heart and soul and 

caring and co-operation for rural people.  For Heaven's sake. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who wound you up this morning? 

 

Mr. Devine: -- The member from Quill said who wound me up 

this morning.  Well when you look at this Bill and you take it 

anywhere in the province, Mr. Chairman, you just have to show 

it to them and show them the sections, and they're all wound 

up.  For Heaven's sakes, I'm calm compared to some of the 

receptions you're going to get, Mr. Member.  They're not going 

to forget this.  They're not going to forget this. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- How was your reception October 21? 

 

Mr. Devine: -- And the Finance minister says, well how was 

the reception on October 21?  How was it?  What did you 

campaign on: honesty, open government, access, the cost of 

production, helping farmers, all of that stuff?  You campaigned 

on that.  They didn't have any idea at all of implementing any 

of that.  They said they were going to reduce taxes; they've 

increased them.  They said they were going to help rural people 

with their roads; they're cutting them off.  They said they were 

going to help health care; they charge for it.  And you're going 

to help the seniors; and they take away their pension plan. 

 

They back out of upgraders.  They back out of energy 

agreements, and they back out of agriculture agreements.  They 

have just whistled through their teeth.  It's the biggest political 

misconception in the history of Saskatchewan.  And all they 

can say is oh, but they won.  Hey they won -- well, well, well.  

Here's the result.  Here's the Bill.  Here's what you get when 

they win.  Here's what you get when they win.  You're denied 

your rights in your Charter of Rights and Freedoms -- what 

courage, what bold people. 

 

The member from Quills, who fancies himself as some legal 

beagle, says where do you find that in the Bill.  Well we've 

asked the minister for three days if he'd explain why he's doing 

this, and he doesn't, Mr. Chairman.  And he knows, he knows 

he can't justify it.  So I'm going to let the member give us 

another history lesson, give us another history lesson on legal 

rights and the farmer's rights as an individual Canadian, 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms and his constitutional rights, 

his contracts that he signs, why you can say that they're not 

valid and retroactively rewrite that, and why you then protect 

yourself from letting him have access to the courts so you 

violate his Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

When your Premier and yourself says this . . . He's worried 

about rights, and he can be quoted.  He could be called into a 

court of law.  Are you worried?  Would you explain these 

rights?  Mr. Minister, maybe that's something else you could 

do.  Would you explain . . . or do you agree with the Premier 

about his concern regarding rights and freedoms?  And 

individuals have rights associated with the violation of rights in 

this legislation.  Would you talk about that? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Yes. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- The minister says yes.  H will talk about 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2853 

the violation of rights and freedoms and the worry that the 

Premier has about the violation of rights and freedoms 

associated with this GRIP legislation.  That's what I'd like him 

to explain, and why he thinks this section that takes away the 

right of access to the courts is the right thing to do and why it 

will not violate the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

And then could he explain, if he's got to have it in there, why 

he won't then at least refer this to the Court of Appeal?  And 

third, why does he say this is going to be settled in the courts?  

And how would that happen if in fact he denies people the 

rights to the legislature or he won't refer it?  And he certainly is 

. . . That's where we are today. 

 

The clock is ticking.  You have muzzled the opposition.  You 

say, well if I just give them enough history lessons, we'll kind 

of get through this.  But today the way it is, farmers have had 

their rights violated.  They can't sue you. 

 

Number two, you won't refer it to date, and we're asking you 

to, to the Court of Appeal to have it tested.  And three, the 

Premier's worried that he's violating rights and freedoms as he's 

changing the constitution here.  And four, you said and he said 

and others have said in this House, this will be settled before 

the courts.  The Attorney General says the same thing.  How 

does it get to the courts if you have hidden behind this 

Legislative Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 

I believe has asked two questions.  The why violate -- we do 

not believe we have violated.  The court proceedings in Canada 

are still alive and well.  And if someone believes their rights 

have been violated, they can have that tested, and they will.  So 

in that sense . . . There can be no violation in that sense because 

the court structure is there to test those matters, and that will be 

done. 

 

With respect to why not refer it to the court, the Attorney 

General can only take the step of a reference on the 

constitutionality if he genuinely believes there is some doubt 

about the constitutionality.  And the Attorney General does not 

have such doubt; therefore it would be inappropriate to refer it 

to the court at this time. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I notice that you didn't really say 

that with a straight face.  Maybe you might try that again. 

 

You're saying that there is no reason to believe that this 

legislation that we have before us has any concern that it might 

be unconstitutional or violate the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms.  You just finished saying that.  And the Attorney 

General doesn't think there's anything legitimate there, 

therefore he won't refer it.  Now you've said that.  And he's 

shaking his head.  You said that. 

 

I just read to you where NDP lawyers, on the front page of the 

Star-Phoenix, believe it's unconstitutional and violates the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  And you're standing in here 

with a smirk on your face, saying well the Attorney General 

doesn't think there's any validity to this. 

 

You have got farmers suing you.  You're going to have 

hundreds or thousands of them coming out to find out 

what you're doing.  You have got people concerned as high as 

the Premier's office.  And the Premier himself says this may 

violate rights.  And you've got historic legislative changes here 

and debate, and you've changed the rules in the Legislative 

Assembly, and you've hidden behind this Bill and you say, oh 

he doesn't think there's anything to this. 

 

Where have you been for the last four or five or six months?  

Isn't this whole argument about the validity of GRIP legislation 

that you've brought in?  Are you just saying . . . slapping across 

the face, these NDP lawyers and other legal people who have 

said publicly to you and to everybody, this violates the 

constitutional rights, the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. And 

you stand up and say, well the Attorney General doesn't think 

there's anything there. 

 

That's not valid.  There's lots there.  There's stacks of stuff here.  

Your precedent, your violation. The Bill itself, the way it's 

designed, admits there's lots there.  All the whereas's and the 

voids and the deems, and then going from there to say, well 

you can't get at us because we kind of think we're wrong 

anyway.  Why did you have this section in here if you think it's 

valid?  Why not just let them sue you?  What are you ducking 

and hiding for? 

 

You can't give me that and stand up and say, well gee, I don't 

think there's anything here.  There's all kinds of people who 

think there's lots here to sue you on and that they have their 

constitutional rights violated, denied. 

 

How do you justify saying what you just said, that there's 

nothing here that would indicate that there are problems with 

this Bill, given the history and the editorials and the legal 

advice and all of the rest of it.  In fact you're being sued, all of 

that -- why don't you just clear it up?  Either pull this part that 

says if you can have access to the courts, which would show 

some courage, if you think you're absolutely right. 

 

If the Attorney General is absolutely right, there's nothing to 

worry about, then pull this section of the Bill.  Or else you're 

whistling through your teeth.  So either pull this section of the 

Bill or refer it.  You can't have it both ways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I hope the member 

opposite will clarify his request because I think he's asking us 

to refer the same section of the Bill he's asking us to pull.  So if 

it is the constitutionality of the clause that he wishes to have 

pulled, that he wants tested, I wonder if he could clarify which 

it is he would really like. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, you go on in section 5.4 and 

you've voided everything that took place up until March 15.  

And then you go on and you remove yourself from any legal 

action.  Section 10.1 says: 

 

 No action or proceeding lies or shall be instituted or 

continued against the Crown or a Crown agent based on any 

cause of action arising from, resulting from or incidental to: 

(all these changes) 

 

 (a) any amendment to the GRIP . . . 

 (b) any term, condition, warranty, contract . . . 

 (c) any failure or alleged failure to comply with the 



2854 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

notice . . . (See?) 

 (d) the enactment or application . . . of this Act . . . 

 

And then you go on to say: 

 

 Every cause of action against the Crown or . . . agent arising 

from, resulting from, or incidental to anything mentioned  . . . 

is extinguished. 
 

So you made your funny little changes here and then you go in 

a whole section that denies people access to the courts.  And 

the Charter of Rights and Freedoms are violated because you 

have no access to you. 
 

What if you're wrong?  What if you've broken the contract and 

you've violated their rights?  And you broke the contract which 

is one, and then you didn't give them access to this -- you've 

got yourself a serious problem. 
 

So the farmer or the individual person is saying, well why is 

this section in the Bill?  Why are you afraid to see whether 

you've done it right or wrong?  You're big; you're a 

government.  You're certainly bigger than a farmer or farm 

family.  Why can't they sue you over the contract? 
 

Because you've got in here a section, 10.1 -- bottom of page 7, 

top of page 8 -- that is one of the ugliest sections that lawyers 

have seen ever, where you've just clearly violated people's 

rights in the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  Why is that in 

there? 
 

Why don't you just pull that part of the Bill and get on with 

your -- you've deemed this appropriate and all of that stuff. 

And if they've got a problem then they can at least have 

recourse.  If you're right, it won't be a problem.  The courts will 

say you're right.  And if it's wrong, then you've given them 

their normal rights under the constitution and before the law.  

Why are you hiding behind this section?  Why can't you just 

pull it? 
 

Secondly, if you can't pull this and you think there's no issue, 

then refer it to the Court of Appeal.  And then you'll know. 

Because they can test this -- and quickly.  I'm sure as I'm 

standing here, I'd bet my farm that it would go to the Supreme 

Court, and you know it. 
 

So this is destined.  What we're asking -- and I'm sure you've 

read this part of the Bill, Mr. Minister -- why is it in there?  

Why are you hiding behind this piece of legislation? -- this part 

of the Bill that gives people the right to say, I'm not sure you're 

right on this contract, Mr. Minister; I have rights and freedoms 

as well as the government.  I want to test that.  Why is that in 

there? 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe I explained twice 

this morning and the member opposite suggests that I shouldn't 

at such length explain the reason why that clause is in there.  I 

won't again, unless he insists, go through that because that's 

what he describes as the history lesson. 
 

It is in fact the factual foundation that required legal action this 

year.  That is why it is in there, and if the member wants me to 

repeat it I would comply, and hope that he would then 

appreciate that further explanation rather than to suggest that it 

is an unnecessary history 

lesson.  And it is for that reason that it was put in -- for a 

reason.  It was put in for the reasons previously explained, that 

it won't be pulled. 

 

On the question of referral, the member opposite continues to 

make reference to the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  Well 

there is a process in law by which that can be determined, and 

it could be done by referral.  But it can only be done by referral 

if the Attorney General legitimately believes there are grounds. 

 

We have legal opinions from the Department of Justice as well 

as from MacPherson, Leslie & Tyerman confirming that the 

legislation is constitutionally sound and that there is no 

grounds.  Therefore there is no reason to refer in that situation. 

 

If the member opposite believes there is, in disagreement with 

substantial legal opinion, then the member has the right of 

access to the court to determine whether the legal opinions that 

we have are wrong.  And that is how the justice system works.  

That's how law has become defined over time.  So that's the 

answer to the member's question. 

 

(1015) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Again you find it very difficult to say that 

there's no concern in here, with a straight face.  There's lots of 

concern.  It affects tens of thousands of families.  And there's 

legal people who have said it's unconstitutional and violates the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  You can get legal advice, you 

can buy legal advice.  What are the probabilities of success on 

this piece of legislation?  Did they put a probability on it? 

 

If you're so convinced, then pull this part of the Bill and let 

them have access to you.  And if you're not convinced, then 

you're not telling it as it is.  Because he's really afraid to take it 

and refer it.  That's the truth.  You're afraid to go to court, or 

you wouldn't have this in here.  You're afraid of the farmers.  

And that's what they're going to say about this.  You're afraid to 

refer it and you're afraid to take it on the chin and at least let 

them have their day in court.  That's where it is. 

 

And all the whistle and all the talk and all the history and all 

stuff that say this is narrowly defined, is balderdash.  It's not 

narrow at all.  It covers all of rural Saskatchewan, and it covers 

their contracts, and people have had contracts and changes in 

those contracts every year since crop insurance started.  I 

testify to that, your officials could testify to that; and it happens 

in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, every place else -- they change. 

Agriculture policy changes.  And only under you do we end up 

where you can't even change the contract without going to 

court and then you know the government's wrong but you can't 

sue them. 

 

So that's not valid.  You have seriously changed this.  And 

you've done it because you said we can't give the farmers that 

much money.  And you said that over and over again in this 

Legislative Assembly.  That's on the record, Mr. Minister.  

That was your justification when you first got into this 

boondoggle.  You said there's no money, therefore we can't 

give.  Whether it's 23 million or something else, we can't do it.  

So that's on the record. 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2855 

And if you go to court, people are going to quote that back to 

the judge or to the jury, and saying he's doing this because he 

says there's not enough money.  The Minister of Finance told 

him to save some money.  Go and negotiate.  And if you have 

to, do what's necessary. 

 

Well he did what's necessary.  And then he brought in 

retroactive legislation.  He didn't tell the truth to the media.  

We got him saying that . . . the advisory board telling him one 

thing, and then him outside saying oh no, they didn't talk about 

that.  And they sure as heck did talk about that.  So he's got 

himself a serious problem here. 

 

Again I go back to you.  If you think this is so good, then pull 

this part of the Bill.  Pull this part of the Bill.  What's so 

difficult about that?  I mean why are you afraid to go to court?  

If you are absolutely convinced, and the Attorney General's 

advice, MacPherson, Leslie & Tyerman say that this Bill is 

valid, well let's test it.  Why are you hiding?  If your Justice 

people say it's valid and your legal people say it's valid, then let 

people test it.  Give them their rights.  You've got to do that. 

 

You've got to let them test this, pull this part of it, let them test 

it.  Or else take it to the Attorney General, refer this to the 

Court of Appeal.  One or the other.  I mean either you're right 

or you're not.  And if you think that there's no problem, then 

pull this.  Or keep it in and refer it right now, and we'll be out 

of here. 

 

But if you don't do either, it shows everybody, everyone, and 

will show them for ever, exactly what you've done and why 

you've done it.  You got caught; you made a mistake.  And 

you've changed the Legislative Assembly.  You've changed the 

law.  And you were too ornery to admit that there was a way 

out of this.  Pull this part of the Bill or refer it.  Either one, 

you're out of here. 

 

That's a reasonable offer -- on behalf of farmers, charter of 

rights, constitutional rights, your political career, the political 

career of a lot of rural members, the NDP history in agriculture.  

You've got a lot riding on this, Mr. Minister -- a lot riding on it.  

Big decision.  And life is choices.  Campaigns are choices. 

 

So again I come back to you.  If you're absolutely convinced 

your lawyers are right and your legal advisors are right, then do 

one of two honourable things: pull the section that allows . . . 

that disallows farmers to have access to the courts, or again say 

to the Attorney General, you know there's serious public 

concern about this -- legal and public.  Refer this to the Court 

of Appeal. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to respond to 

the member opposite again by saying that I would be happy to 

review the reasons, which I gave several times earlier this 

morning and a number of times yesterday, why the provisions 

in this Act are necessary.  I would be pleased to do it, if he 

would make that request again, but it is for those reasons that it 

will not be pulled because it is necessary for the reasons 

already given, which I can repeat if the member opposite wants 

me to. 

 

The member again asks why this is not referred to the Court of 

Appeal.  And I can only repeat again that an 

appeal to the court by the Attorney General, a reference to the 

court by the Attorney General is only appropriate when the 

Attorney General believes there is doubt about the 

constitutionality -- genuine doubt about the constitutionality -- 

of the provision the member opposite would like either pulled 

or referred. 

 

The Department of Justice and a significant law firm in 

Saskatchewan have said that there is no such doubt, that the 

law is constitutional.  And while the member opposite refers to 

other legal opinions expressed in the paper, it's not been 

common for government to determine their actions on legal 

opinions expressed in the paper.  I think it's much more sound 

administration to in fact get legal, written opinions fully 

analysed to have on record, and that is the circumstance that 

we're in.  And it would therefore be inappropriate to refer it . . . 

for the Attorney General to refer it. 

 

I do repeat that the court system in Canada is constructed so 

that people who believe their rights have been violated have 

access to the court.  And I believe the member opposite's 

appropriate action would be, if that were a sincere belief on his 

part, to pursue the clarification of that in the courts.  That is 

why we have the legal system we do, so that people's rights in 

fact can be protected. 

 

It's clearly the reason why the present Premier and once 

attorney general said he is concerned about the people's rights 

because in all that we do, we must be concerned about it which 

is why we were very careful to make sure that the legislation 

brought before us is constitutional because we are concerned 

about people's rights.  And it's appropriate that they should be 

respected. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well you're just digging yourself into a deeper 

hole, and all this is public.  I don't recall, in all the pieces of 

legislation that we've been trying to pass here, where the 

Premier, the NDP Premier talks about his concern over the 

rights of individuals and the rights of individuals with respect 

to the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  He's only talking about 

this Bill. 

 

Now when you get the Premier talking about his concern over 

the rights being violated, the Attorney General saying this'll 

likely be settled in court, yourself admitting that this is going to 

be settled in court, lawyers saying this is unconstitutional and 

violates the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, you can't say, 

well we're okay because we've designed this Bill with enough 

whereas's and enough protection that we might be legal.  It just 

flies in the face of everything that you're saying on the other 

side -- behind the rail, outside in the media, and the individual 

members. 

 

All of the individual members on your side of the House say, 

we absolutely messed this one up.  And they talk about it all 

over their ridings.  They talk to us about it.  They talk to 

farmers about it.  If they were brought into a court of law, 

they'd have to admit that. 
 

And now you've got the NDP Premier, your boss, saying I'm 

concerned about the rights of people in this Bill.  And that's 

where the PCs have their point.  This isn't about some other 

Bill.  This is about your Bill.  So you've got all these people 

who have admitted that you've made a 



2856 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

 serious mistake.  Caucus let you get away with this.  Got 

caught.  And you're saying, oh the lawyers tell us we're fine.  

Well what's the probability of you being fine, given this piece 

of legislation?  Not very good. 

 

And certainly, you say to me in your history, the essence of 

your history lesson was, that well it's a little complicated.  

When we look at the contracts for farmers, they're a little 

complicated.  Therefore we have to have this provision here in 

case they interpret it one way or the other.  Well, well, well. 

 

Because of the complication of agriculture, you're going to 

have to hide behind this Bill that doesn't allow them to get fair 

treatment.  I don't like what you've done in the Bill.  I don't like 

what you've done in GRIP.  And it is complicated.  I don't like 

what you did with speciality crops.  And I don't like what 

you've done in all kinds of agricultural things. 

 

And a lot of people disagree with you on fundamental 

principles.  And yet you've hid behind here, because you say 

it's complicated.  And people may have the wrong impression 

of what you've done.  Or their contract on this, or barley, or 

canola, or various lines of defence, may not be clear, so that 

you'd better protect yourself so that you can't be sued.  That's 

all that was in there. 

 

And then you can say, well this will . . . somebody will take it 

to the court.  I think you asked the farmers if they'd come up 

with $750,000 to sue you.  Why would you do that?  Mr. 

Minister, why would you . . . why do you put all these barriers 

between the farmers and justice?  Why all these barriers? 

 

The farmers don't have $750,000; they're going broke.  Rural 

Saskatchewan is in a crisis.  And you say, well you can go to 

court and the Premier says we'll go to court and the Attorney 

General says we'll go to court.  And then you say, but the 

farmers have to come up with three-quarters of a million 

dollars to get access to court.  But just in case they did have the 

money, I'll tell you what we'll do -- we'll make sure that they 

can't get access to the government because we'll protect 

ourselves and hide behind this Legislative Assembly and this 

Bill.  And to make sure that they don't get access to us, we 

won't refer it to the Court of Appeal. 

 

Again, everybody, everyone, your caucus knows it's a cowardly 

act, let alone the public.  Over what?  Because you can't 

co-operate or negotiate with neighbouring provinces or the 

federal government because they're Progressive Conservatives 

and you're New Democrats -- is that what it's all about? 

 

And it's so important, and you dig in and you get so partisan 

you can't even talk about the benefit of farmers and families 

and Saskatchewan people?  That's what it's all about.  You've 

locked yourself in.  You look extremely partisan, ornery. 

 

So here we have all of the front bench admitting publicly and 

privately now, that this is a mistake.  They're publicly worried 

about rights.  They're in the newspaper talking about people's 

rights.  It should be in court.  You've got lawyers saying it's a 

violation of the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms.  And you're standing in here, and say well we have 

to have this Bill because, on this hour lecture on history, it's 

complicated out there.  We have to have this protection so in 

case the farmer sued us on one part of this contract, he couldn't 

take us to court. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you again -- and I suppose you can go on 

at length -- but would you again tell us why you think it's 

necessary not to let a farmer sue you or take you to court on 

changes that might affect his contract? 

 

You see, you say there will be no action or proceeding against 

you on anything that you do in here -- amendments to the GRIP 

agreement, gross revenue insurance contract or crop insurance, 

any term or condition or warranty or contract or inducement or 

promise or enticement, representation or other understanding 

that is collateral, any failure or alleged failure to comply with 

the notice of provision. 

 

(1030) 

 

Why, Mr. Minister . . . say, well you know, we make some 

mistakes now and then.  Contracts are contracts.  I know they're 

complicated.  Why are you hiding behind this section which 

doesn't let him clarify it?  To go to court clarifies it; it clarifies 

it . . . Say, well here it is. 

 

You might be wrong on some of these.  Fair enough.  Which 

therefore if the farmer is right and you are wrong, you deny 

him right to justice. And if all of these things and tens of 

thousands of farmers . . . You've got cases where you have 

violated his contract.  You might be wrong.  He can't exempt 

himself from his obligation to the contract, but you have.  Why 

do you have to do that?  Why can't you just say we think we're 

right, but if you want to clarify it for justice, for justice's sake, 

you can take us to court.  We can work it out there.  Why can't 

you do that? 

 

Because what that also does is keep you reasonable, keep you 

co-operating, and keep you compromising so that you are 

working with farmers and not against them.  This is totally 

against them. 

 

Again, could you explain why you are ducking on this and will 

not let the farmer have his day in court on these crop insurance 

contracts? 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I didn't want again to 

be accused of making up long history lessons or taking up 

limited time that the opposition believes they have in asking 

these questions.  But I think the member now is asking me to in 

fact to review those circumstances again, and I therefore will 

do it briefly, as briefly as I can. 
 

First of all, a couple of clarifications on other matters.  There is 

no bond provision, as the member opposite suggests, with 

respect to requiring farmers to put up money before they go to 

court.  That's not so. 
 

Secondly the member opposite was inferring that I had said 

earlier in my review of the circumstances that it was because it 

was complicated that legislation was necessary.  It's not 

because it was complicated; it's because it was screwed up 

originally that it was necessary. 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2857 

And let me just give you a brief review of that.  The provisions 

of the federal-provincial agreement that the members opposite 

signed on September 18 last year, which in fact theoretically 

for the first time put in place the federal-provincial agreement 

with respect to the contract that the province had theoretically 

previously engaged in with our farmers in March, the 

federal-provincial agreement itself provides for an amending 

mechanism.  The member opposite is probably aware of that.  

He probably participated in approving it.  The amending 

mechanism is if the required numbered of provinces 

representing the appropriate amount of production in Canada 

agree on changes.  Then changes to the federal-provincial 

agreement can be made. 

 

Those changes are at that point effective on participants in the 

program.  So that if today there were sufficient provinces 

representing sufficient production of grains in Canada agreed 

to a change in this federal-provincial agreement, it would 

immediately become effective on the farmers that it affected, 

not on March 15, not on any other day, but today.  That's the 

provision of the federal-provincial agreement that the member 

opposite signed. 

 

In the beginning of the program, because I believe there was a 

hurry to put into place a program because there was an 

impending election and the member opposite, not knowing 

whether he would call it in April or June or October, believed it 

was necessary to quickly put into place a program, a program 

that cost Saskatchewan taxpayers and Saskatchewan farmers I 

believe $157 million last year -- $157 million that is loaded on 

top of another $14 billion or $15 billion of debt in this 

province. 

 

This was a cost that had previously been borne by the federal 

government with respect to another program.  But the member 

opposite participated in making that agreement in a hurry and 

bringing into that agreement details of the previous crop 

insurance program which required in the crop insurance 

program a specific notice provision, the specific notice 

provision that by March 15 farmers should be notified in 

writing of program changes so that they could by March 30 

respond. 

 

Now because I've already explained this twice, I'd appreciate it 

if the member opposite would listen to the explanation so that 

those who heard it the first two times wouldn't have to bear 

with me in explaining it again.  If the member opposite would 

listen so that we can engage in a reasonable dialogue about 

this, I would appreciate it. 

 

So that last spring when this was put together hurriedly, the 

provisions of the March 15 deadline were brought into an 

agreement which would eventually, when six months later the 

federal-provincial agreement was signed, together become part 

of a package. 

 

The March 15 deadline in the first place, even as it was being 

brought in, was ignored because changes were made on an 

ongoing basis beyond that.  Because the nature of the 

interaction of the crop insurance program with the 

federal-provincial agreement which described the revenue 

insurance program was never defined in 

law, nor the revenue insurance program was never defined in 

law, farmers nor the province ever knew what the legal 

contractual obligations were.  Because in fact the document 

which is entitled revenue insurance contract, that document, 

that pamphlet that was handed out -- and I don't know what the 

mechanism was; I suspect it would be very difficult to 

determine that every farmer actually got one of those because 

unless it was done by registered mail that would be unable to 

be assured -- that document was not put out till May 1. 

 

So that the information on which the farmers based their 

conclusions about what their contractual rights were with the 

government last year, were based on the communications they 

had had verbally with their crop insurance agents, from 

communications that ministers engaged in in over 100 public 

meetings that were held -- 100 public meetings in which I think 

virtually in every one more changes were brought forward in 

the program, right till the meetings ended. 

 

So that the understanding of what the contractual obligations 

were, were many and varied.  Therefore farmers could, on the 

assumption that their communication with their crop insurance 

agent represented their contractual obligation, could hold the 

government up for that because there was nothing defining that 

that was not so.  So that there could in fact potentially be 

50,000 farmers saying, I believe this was my right under this 

contract; and another one saying, I believe this was my right. 

 

Well it's not useful expenditure of time either for the farmer or 

for the government to get involved in that when the basic 

principles of the program were understood and followed last 

year.  Farmers maybe didn't like the program and farmers 

eventually responded to that by attending rallies by the 

thousands last fall, saying this program does not give us 

adequate income, but they understood what their basic rights 

were under the program, that if they seeded X number of crops 

then the detail would be such and their payments . . . their 

premiums would be due on day X and their payments would be 

coming in three stages.  And that was their understanding of 

the program. 

 

But nowhere was that defined in law.  So when we began to 

implement the new program, it has been necessary to define 

what the 1991 contract was.  We have voided the requirement 

for notice.  The member opposite has repeatedly talked about 

the breach of rights in that regard.  Well the intent of the 

motion of the notice provision is so that farmers have an 

opportunity to receive information about the program and have 

time to respond. 

 

In our procedures this spring, as I explained earlier, at the 

earliest possible time we gave notice to farmers through a press 

conference.  We subsequently with other information, written 

and through meetings and through individual contacts, 

provided additional information.  And we extended deadlines 

for farmers until May 15 in order for them to respond. 

 

The question of whether that constitutes . . . whether our 

actions constitute legal notice or not, is a question that only the 

courts could ever determine after a great deal of difficulty 

around trying to determine what in fact the contract was.  I 

think no one knows for sure whether that 



2858 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

would be adequate notice or whether it would not be.  But it's 

clear that on March 13 we announced the program at the 

earliest possible date. 

 

And we substantively met the intent of notice by informing 

farmers about the program and giving them a lengthy 

opportunity to understand the program and to respond.  What's 

been done here is that we have voided the requirement for 

notice because it's impossible for us to know what would 

constitute legal notice under the circumstances of the undefined 

program last year. 

 

So that we have in this legislation defined that the 1991 

contract is as defined in the pamphlet that was sent out, which 

was previously undefined, and that we have voided the notice 

requirement.  And the members opposite know that they have 

as well ignored that March 15 deadline, but because it's also 

absolutely impossible to put together the provisions of the 

federal-provincial agreement and a specific notice time. 

 

So what the new legislation provides is notice that says as soon 

as there is an amendment to the federal-provincial agreement, 

that producers will be informed.  Because there is no other 

practical way around bringing together the federal-provincial 

agreement and the need for farmers to know.  So it is very 

much in the interests of farmers that that clarification has been 

made.  I think that answers the questions the member opposite 

asked. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't think that answer 

would stand up before a judge or a jury.  As everybody knows 

that other jurisdictions made similar changes.  There were no 

campaigns going on in Alberta and Manitoba, and they went 

through the same process of changes, a national program.  

Provinces are co-operating on a national basis. 

 

So you come up and say, well we had to do it in Saskatchewan 

this way, and the changes were here only because there was an 

election.  That's not the fact.  These changes, GRIP changes, 

revenue insurance changes, discussions on third line of 

defence, went on in Ontario, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, B.C. 

(British Columbia), Alberta -- all over the place.  So that's not 

valid, not valid at all. 

 

Did we initiate change in crop insurance?  Absolutely.  The 

PCs have always been there to listen and to respond quickly to 

changes that might be necessary for rural people.  And we were 

instrumental in making changes in a national program so that 

they would help Saskatchewan, particularly in the event of 

drought.  And that was respected by people in Alberta and 

Manitoba.  And as a result of meetings and campaigning and 

working hard and lobbying in Ottawa, we got in excess of $13 

billion extra cash coming into Saskatchewan's coffers that's 

spent all over the province. 

 

Mr. Minister, we don't buy the argument that this was so 

loosely defined and undefined that you had to bring in all this 

protection so you wouldn't be sued.  You didn't even address 

that.  You have no idea why . . . and the public doesn't after 

your description and explanation.  It's not an explanation. 

I wonder if the minister would describe to me what he thinks 

the farmers' options would be in the event this Bill passes -- 

and the farmers are suing him now -- what impact this Bill will 

have on the court case that is before the courts now.  And if in 

fact this legislation -- which you hid from the public; you 

wouldn't let them see this legislation, but you hid it -- and 

finally if this legislation passes, what implications this would 

have for the farmers that are suing you now in the case they 

have.  And then what could they do?  You say they can always 

have access to the courts.  What else could they do? 

 

(1045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I just wanted the member 

opposite to remember that we attempted to introduce the 

legislation implementing the 1992 GRIP program on June 10.  

There was no attempt to hide it and there was no attempt to 

treat it any differently than any other piece of legislation.  It is 

now ahead of my farm debt legislation which hopefully will be 

coming here soon as well. 

 

We attempted to introduce it on June 10 and it was in fact 

hidden from the public for several months as a result of the 

blockading efforts of the members opposite.  It's been our 

intent from the outset to respond to appropriate guidance from 

farmers and that's the process that's here been followed. 

 

In terms of the program that's being implemented, the member 

opposite ought to be aware that there was a press release went 

out last fall inviting farmers to respond, to indicate what kind 

of program changes they wanted, on the heels of an election 

that made it clear that the farmers of Saskatchewan were 

unhappy with the kind of leadership they had received from the 

members opposite, on the heels of rallies at which between 10 

and 12,000 farmers gathered. 

 

The committee that the member opposite himself put in place 

began to do its work, asked for public input, received 

information and briefs and discussion from 300 groups and 

individuals, so the public had as broad an input as the member 

opposite designed the process to give, as broad access as the 

time that followed the election allowed, since there was not 

significant work done by the committee before the election. 

 

So the committee did a very thorough piece of work leading up 

to the middle of January, the middle of February.  The 

information was made available on February 11.  A number of 

discussions followed that.  The program was announced 

publicly on March 13.  So there has been an open process of 

consultation, an open information sharing, and a very broad . . . 

I think a broader attempt to make sure farmers understood the 

changes than have ever . . . has ever occurred before. 

 

I believe if the members opposite had engaged in as broad a 

process in coming up with the program, the original concerns 

might well never have appeared in the legislation or in the 

program.  We have a producer committee report which has 

guided this new program, a committee representing major 

organizations in the province, representing the United Grain 

Growers, 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2859 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, western wheat growers, SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), the cattle 

feeders, the soil conservation association, the canola growers.  

There were -- and I may have left some out -- there was a broad 

representation by these people. 

 

I don't know if the member opposite has a committee report to 

offer the public recommending the actions they took in the 

spring of 1991.  I might ask the member to address that.  What 

was the basis of consultation?  What was the basis of public 

input that caused the program to be brought forward in the 

fashion that it was in the spring of 1991?  I don't think anybody 

knows that. 

 

So the fact is that there was broad consultation and open 

information sharing.  And I want the member opposite to 

know, having acted on the recommendations of the committee 

this spring, that we intend again to give the opportunity to the 

farmers to respond to this program as we continue to try to 

make improvements in farm support programs for farmers in 

Saskatchewan, as we continue to fight for their due rights for 

income protection from the federal government, the federal 

government that has committed itself to that end, the federal 

government that the members opposite have accepted several 

hundreds of millions of dollars of off-loading to the province, 

off-loading to a province that has only 4 per cent of Canada's 

taxation capacity, the responsibility of paying for one-half of 

Canada's bill on fighting the international trade wars while the 

treasuries of the United States of America and the treasury of 

the European Community pay for their farmers and fight on 

their behalf. 

 

The member opposite has made arrangements over the last 

number of years to accept, on behalf of the federal government, 

the responsibility for Saskatchewan taxpayers for 4 per cent of 

the tax capacity of Canada to pay for one-half of Canada's 

liability as a result of the trade wars.  That's the reason farmers 

are hurting in Saskatchewan and that's the reason we'll continue 

to fight to make sure that the federal responsibility is met, and 

we'll continue to try and make improvements to the program 

through consultation with producers. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm just going to make a couple 

of quick points and I'm going to refer some of the information 

to my colleague.  I point out, Mr. Minister, that you would not 

show the public the Bill because you knew it was this 

Draconian.  You showed them Health Bills; you showed them 

other Bills; and we asked repeatedly, just show us what you're 

going to do.  And as this Bill turns out to be, it was a cowardly 

act and you were afraid to show the public the Bill before 

because you had this awful paragraph in there.  Why were you 

afraid to show them?  Now that's fact.  You can't blame us for 

that.  You can't blame the farmers for it.  You did that. 

 

Secondly, this GRIP and NISA (net income stabilization 

account) program was national.  Why do you say it was only in 

Saskatchewan?  All across the country -- it's a national 

program, that we've signed up.  Saskatchewan initiated many 

changes, and people are happy with that.  Alberta farmers are 

happy with the things that we've done over the last 10 years, 

Manitoba, Ontario people as well. 

Third, I'll point out the cost per capita of our programs, Mr. 

Minister -- and this is where you're really out to lunch, really 

out to lunch -- the cost per capita of GRIP is $160 in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And in Ontario it's $4.  Right?  He 

nods.  The benefit to Saskatchewan people is $1,090.  The 

benefit to Ontario is 27.  And you've turned that down.  Some 

sort of wild logic where you say, oh we have to put up more. 

 

But what if you get, not $27 back per person but a $1,090 back 

per person.  Would you turn that down year after year after 

year?  And you'd say, oh my gosh, the Tories and Grant 

Devine, they charged you $160 and they only charged Ontario 

people $4.  Right?  What did you get for that investment?  

Billions and billions and billions of dollars came in here, which 

was way more than our investment.  One thousand and ninety 

dollars is what you got per capita here for that investment; in 

Ontario you got $27.  Not a bad arrangement.  Thirteen billion 

dollars came in here.  And now you've cut all that off, and 

you're saying you're going to get more money from Ottawa. 

 

Number one, the changes were national.  Number two, you 

never got any more money from Ottawa.  Number three, now 

farmers who have suffered from drought -- admitted by Hartley 

Furtan and others and academics that there's no protection in 

'91 -- now suffer from frost, serious frost that went across 

northern Saskatchewan last night.  They don't have access to 

any kind of coverage that they had before. 

 

And a farmer could be out . . . If he had a thousand acres -- 500 

of wheat, 300 acres of canola, a couple hundred acres of lentils 

or beans -- '92 versus '91, he is out tens of thousands of dollars 

on his farm as a result of what you've done.  And Saskatchewan 

people are out literally, literally out hundreds and hundreds of 

millions of dollars, which added up to billions of dollars 

because you won't invest $160 to get 1,090 back. 

 

And you stand up and say, oh well but we can't be involved in 

this insurance program because it costs Saskatchewan people 

more.  It costs them more, but why don't you talk about the 

benefit that comes back to the farmers?  I'll tell you, on 

Monday you tell farmers how good they are, how well off they 

are -- with drought and frost and the loss of '91 program and 

the fact that you can't participate. 

 

And your Crop Insurance Corporation, which is a multibillion 

dollars corporation set up for insurance, can't honour contracts 

in insurance.  It's an insurance company.  If there's a hail-storm 

goes across Regina and you're insured by SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance), SGI covers it.  If there's a drought and 

some other things that happen in agriculture, that's what crop 

insurance is for -- not to hide in here.  Cover it.  That's why 

people take out insurance. 

 

And you stand up and give us a history lesson about well gee, 

we've changed things.  Well they changed in Albert and across 

the country.  You're the people that have hid the Bill.  You're 

the people that are in court, and you're the people that are going 

to have to explain to all these farmers that haven't got any crop, 

why the only thing that you can really do under your particular 

program is hope 



2860 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

you get a crop, hope you get a crop.  And then maybe you'll get 

some money on top of it. 

 

And the ironic part is that . . . And you were beating all over 

these people who were growing specialty crops.  And you say, 

only because of these crazy moral hazards are they there.  And 

they're way up this year, all the acreages.  Lentils are up, 

despite your mistakes, because they're drought resistant, and 

they're good cattle feed.  And prices are higher -- $10 a bushel 

for lentils and $2 for wheat, what would you grow?  Come on. 

 

Anyway, I haven't heard a valid argument of any of this stuff 

that you've been talking about this morning.  And the 

information that I've got is that you haven't got any valid 

arguments.  You got caught.  You made a serious mistake.  

Nobody else is in court.  People aren't doing this in Alberta and 

Manitoba and Ontario and any place else.  The other Ag 

ministers or people that I talk to across the country, they just, I 

mean they can't understand it. 

 

So I've had no satisfaction in you describing any justification 

for what you're doing here.  You obviously haven't dealt with 

the part of the Bill that protects you from legal action.  Nothing 

to do with it.  You said it's complicated or it's the same in 

Alberta and the same in other jurisdictions.  They've made 

changes.  But only here do you do this. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, you can give us all the history lessons that 

you like and all the arguments how you've got all this money 

for people.  There is a serious income problem there.  The 

federal government has never put so much money into 

agriculture.  And yes, we put money up and leveraged it to a 

very, very large extent. And you've cut all that off.  You even 

had offers now from the federal government to go out and help 

more, and you said no. 

 

As the editorials say, you've backtracked on so many things.  

All we're saying is the honourable thing to do in this one would 

pull the provision of the Bill that denies people rights, or at 

least refer the Bill and then we can all get at it and talk about it. 

 

But if you won't do that, all you've done is admitted to me and 

to the public that you're wrong. You're hiding behind the 

legislation. You didn't have the courage to tell us what it was 

about to start with, and you don't have the courage now to refer 

it to any kind of court. 

 

And you still never told me what farmers do if this Legislative 

Assembly denies them rights to the court, what do they do 

now?  What do they do now?  So you can address all of those, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Just briefly on the final point before I 

address some of the other points the member asked.  The 

process farmers would use would be to continue their actions 

that they have begun.  The government would use in its 

defence the legislation once passed.  The farmers would, if they 

believe the legislation was unconstitutional, challenge it.  If 

they were to win that, then they would come back and continue 

to fight their case in court.  If they were to win that, then they 

would have the option of suing the government for damages 

with respect to the matters raised.  That's the simple 

answer to what the member opposite suggests. 

 

I want to respond to a number of the things the member 

opposite has raised.  Because he again puts into question the 

recommendations of the body that he originally put into place. 

 

The GRIP-NISA review committee structured under the 

legislation passed by the members opposite which didn't bother 

to contain within it the description of the program but did 

contain within it the process for review of the program. 

 

The committee that was put in place, the committee of 

respected farmers who also sit as representatives of their 

organizations on a variety of bodies and represented their 

organizations at this committee, identified a series of 

difficulties with the old program.  They raised the issue that 

they call moral hazard in the program.  The issue of moral 

hazard they describe as incentives in the program to farm 

differently than one would if one didn't have the program. 

 

(1100) 

 

And the member opposite raised the question of farmers 

responding to the market with respect to lentils.  That's very 

good.  That's what farmers like to do.  That's what farmers have 

always done.  That's what farmers did until, as the committee 

observes, until the new GRIP program in 1991, the old GRIP 

program.  When that came forward, the committee observed -- 

not I -- the committee observed that the program demonstrated 

moral hazards including causing farmers to use fewer inputs 

than they otherwise would have. 

 

Now the choice of input use by farmers is their legitimate 

decision.  Some choose to use none; others choose to use many.  

The committee's observation was that the program had a moral 

hazard because it encouraged the reduction of input use and 

encouraged inappropriate farming practices.  I'm not saying 

that; that's what the committee said.  In each case they say the 

net returns are maximized by reducing farmer costs and 

maximizing GRIP payments.  This is the committee's analysis, 

the committee that the member opposite constructed. 

 

The committee responded by making a number of 

recommendations which I'll get to in a minute.  But the 

contention of the committee was that in a farm program 

farmers ought to be able to expect that if they make an 

additional investment in their operation, whether that be in 

technology that results in better production; new equipment 

that does a better job of seeding, for example, a direct seeding 

kind of technology; if they engage in different cultivation 

practices, for example, the wide-blade technology that reduces 

the removal of trash from the surface of the soil; if they engage 

in chem-fallow in order to retain trash -- these are all choices 

that individual farmers have in terms of their farming practices.  

And they need to assess whether those practices allow a return 

on their investment in those practices. 

 

Now the observation of the committee was that under the 1991 

GRIP there was no incentive for farmers to consider 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2861 

additional . . . (inaudible) . . . It doesn't mean they didn't do it.  

Lots of farmers still did it, of course.  Lots of farmers still said, 

well I want to do this because that's how I believe I want to 

farm. 

 

But it removed any opportunity for them to be compensated for 

doing it because under the old program, whether you got a 

5-bushel crop or a 40-bushel crop, you got the same return. So 

that a farmer who anticipated producing better than he had in 

the past or better than she had in the past by engaging in 

different farming practices, responding to new research and 

new information about better farming practices, would have no 

way of recovering that additional return from farming because 

of the program.  And therefore the committee observed that 

that was a moral hazard in the program. 

 

They identified adverse selection, that because one of the 

serious flaws in the program from a number of perspectives, 

the 15-year index moving average price, because it has no 

bearing relative to the current market, gave signals to farmers 

that were completely inappropriate because some specialty 

crops had very high guarantees.  And even some traditional 

crops had high guarantees relative to other traditional crops. 

 

And in the example used by members opposite yesterday, for 

example durum, a very common crop in Saskatchewan -- there 

are several millions acres of it grown -- the guarantee under the 

program was $4.56 a bushel, whereas hard red spring was at 

$4.15 a bushel. 

 

Well for most of us the yields on those two crops tend to be 

quite close, so that such a price difference in the program 

would significantly give a signal to a farmer who was wanting 

to maximize their returns. 

 

And if the farmer believed that in constructing a program the 

government knew what it was doing and therefore responded to 

that signal and said I think it's a good idea, it seems like the 

government thinks it's a good idea, it looks like I should grow 

this crop, in spite of the fact that at this very same time that that 

additional 30 or 40 cents was being signalled by the program 

for durum, the market was saying to the tune of 50 to 70 cents 

lower, that one shouldn't; i.e., the program guarantee for durum 

was 30 or 40 cents higher than hard red spring.  The market 

was 50 to 70 cents lower for durum.  The committee identified 

that as a problem that would cause producers to make 

selections on crops not based on the market-place.  And they 

called that adverse selection. 

 

With respect to the issue of resource neutrality, they said 

because one can, in the old program, convert the use of lands 

and maximize profits, that there was a temptation to convert 

forage and pasture lands into grain land.  Now those wouldn't 

have been decisions farmers would have made without that 

signal.  But their conclusion is that the seeding intensity and 

the use of land was impacted by the 1991 program.  And they 

said that was a resource . . . that was a negative effect on 

resource neutrality. 

 

And they said program administration was a problem.  The 

GRIP required too much administration.  They required 

establishing long-term individual yields.  Under the 

circumstances that were there before, caused 

difficulties.  And measuring bins caused difficulty.  So there 

were three areas of efficiency that they addressed. 

 

And of course they said farmers were upset about the 

complexity of the program.  They said one common theme 

farmers expressed to them was why can't the program be 

simpler? 

 

They addressed the concern, that because of these 

circumstances in the program there was a large premium load 

in the program.  The premium methodology for GRIP includes 

a load for the moral hazard and program abuse and adverse 

selection factors.  So that the committee identified a number of 

things that caused premiums to be higher than one would 

otherwise like them to be. 

 

And they addressed the concern about the IMAP (indexed 

moving average price) formula, to say that the long-term 

average moving price had no reflection of current world price.  

They examined a number of options in which to deal with this.  

Just so the members opposite are aware, the Leader of the 

Opposition, several minutes ago, referred to changes that were 

made in Alberta and Manitoba.  That's true.  They were made 

last year.  They were not made by the members opposite.  In 

Manitoba and Alberta last year, they used the Jackson offset 

and they used the superior management adjustment to make 

changes.  There were other alternatives in different parts of 

Canada that were used in order to define how the program 

should work. 

 

The fact is that the program combinations across Canada were 

different in every province.  And in the West, when the 

members opposite suggest that there was common program 

features, the fact is that Saskatchewan stayed with a very strict 

interpretation of what they believed the program should be.  

While already last year, Manitoba and Alberta made changes 

that moved away from the kind of interpretation Saskatchewan 

gave the program last year, Saskatchewan didn't move with 

them.  Saskatchewan didn't go with the common program in the 

West last year.  Saskatchewan stayed firm to a full offset 

program, while in Alberta and Manitoba, changes were made in 

that regard. 

 

The committee concluded, having observed the changes that 

others made and understanding the federal-provincial 

agreement -- because four of the members on the committee 

were on the national GRIP committee -- they concluded that 

significant changes should be made in the program, but within 

the context of the federal-provincial agreement. 

 

They concluded that GRIP should be provided a separate crop 

insurance and revenue insurance programs.  They concluded 

that the crop insurance program should operate as it was prior 

to 1991 and that the crop insurance price be set at the same 

level as the market price used in the revenue insurance 

program. 

 

They concluded that the revenue insurance program should 

operate more as a deficiency payment type program.  They 

concluded that no offsets between price and yield should be 

included in the revenue insurance program.  They concluded 

that both crop insurance and revenue insurance should reflect 

the management 



2862 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

abilities of individual farmers in determining coverage and 

payments.  And they concluded that only the revised program 

be offered to farmers in 1992.  Current GRIP should not be 

continued as an option to farmers. 

 

Well the Leader of the Opposition has been attacking the 

recommendations of this committee.  I ask the Leader of the 

Opposition whether he has a similar document from a broad 

group of producers in Saskatchewan that encourage the 

members of the opposition to implement the GRIP program as 

it was implemented in 1991.  I don't believe there was such a 

consultation process.  I don't believe that there was any basis 

on which to assume that producers favour the kind of GRIP 

program that was introduced in 1991. 

 

And I will be the first one to admit that the changes that the 

committee has recommended and the changes that we have 

implemented do not correct all the flaws in GRIP.  We are not 

in a position where we can unilaterally change that.  The 

members opposite have talked about unilateral change.  Well 

we are not in the position where we can unilaterally change a 

federal-provincial agreement.  We are stuck with the GRIP 

program constructed by the members opposite.  And a group of 

producers have said we need to alter it.  And the program has 

been altered consistent with the recommendation brought 

forward by the producers that were asked. 

 

Now I've said it before, and I'll say it again today.  You can't 

make a silk purse out of a sow's ear.  So we've tried to make 

some improvements, but clearly the indexed moving average 

price is an inadequate response for farmers.  Clearly the nature 

of the pay-outs are unacceptable to farmers.  The cost of the 

program is unacceptable to farmers.  That is not within our 

capacity to unilaterally change.  The changes that have been 

brought forward this year are consistent with the provisions of 

the agreement.  And they will be reviewed again over the next 

year. 

 

The member opposite in his earlier comments had referred to 

what our government has done with respect to farmers in this 

province.  Well I need to review for the members opposite the 

fact that we have been engaged in exercises with farmers since 

the day we were elected, the day we took on the challenge of 

putting on the national agenda the income crisis for 

Saskatchewan and for western farmers, a challenge that was 

not joined in by the members opposite. 

 

The Leader of the Liberal Party joined in.  The Agriculture 

minister from Manitoba joined in, representing the Alberta 

province of the same political stripe as the members opposite.  

Other western leaders joined in. But the Saskatchewan caucus 

of the Conservative Party did not join in.  Members of the 

opposition did not join in in this effort to identify nationally the 

income crisis facing farmers. 

 

That was the first initiative and we succeeded in putting back 

onto the national agenda the issue that had been forgotten 

during the recent term of the members opposite. 

 

We began the GRIP review as we've just discussed with respect 

to correcting the flaws of the program that the 

members opposite began.  We began the process of reviewing 

the farm debt difficulty of farmers in Saskatchewan, an 

initiative avoided by the members opposite, an initiative that 

had been ignored by the members opposite. 

 

Again a broad group of farmers and lenders and others sat 

down around a table and co-operatively designed a solution to 

address farm debt in Saskatchewan, concluding that farmers 

ought to have the right to stability of tenure when as a result of 

the circumstances that they find themselves in financially, that 

they have not been responsible for creating, that they would 

have security of tenure on their land if they suffer the 

unfortunate tragedy of having to give up the land that is their 

home. 

 

That legislation is in the process of being put in place and again 

I ask the members opposite to co-operate to assure that their 

colleagues in Ottawa co-operate on behalf of farmers.  It's an 

initiative that is essential to the maintenance of security for 

farmers. 

 

The members opposite talked about these measures being 

budget driven.  Well the committee report was driven by the 

analysis of the people on the committee.  When this program 

was recommended to government, clearly it was of interest to 

government that we should try to use programs that represented 

the best use of taxpayers' dollars in Saskatchewan.  And so it 

would have been folly to have rejected a program that more 

appropriately used tax dollars than to reject it and so that's what 

we did. 

 

(1115) 

 

The members opposite say that we have removed substantial 

amounts of support for agriculture in Saskatchewan.  Well I 

want the members opposite to know that 80 per cent of the 

Department of Agriculture and Food's budget continues to go 

to agricultural support.  To say that in the process tough 

decisions have not had to be made would be not telling the 

truth. 

 

I tell you that every ministry, every department of this 

government made tough choices this spring.  Every department 

had to make tough choices, because the first priority of this 

government on behalf of farmers, on behalf of taxpayers, on 

behalf of all the residents of the province, small business and 

large business alike, is to bring the financial management of 

this province under control. 

 

It caused a great deal of difficulty for each of us, because each 

of us had to make tough choices about programs, about 

balancing programs.  And yes, in the Department of Highways 

we took a significant reduction in the amount of money spent, 

as in every other department of government.  And the result of 

that kind of analysis suggested that we needed to take some 

measures in reducing both capital cost and maintenance cost.  

And yes, we have $5.4 million fewer in the 1992 budget for the 

maintenance of low volume, thin asphalt surfaces in 

Saskatchewan than we had before.  And yes, that has an impact 

on communities affected by that. 

 

But I want to tell the members opposite that we will talk to the 

public and consult with the public in terms of how 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2863 

they would have us address that.  Because the public knows we 

have no money tree.  The public knows that when we have 

tough choices we need to decide where we take money from 

and where we do not. 

 

And if the members opposite have some magic solutions about 

whether they want to take money from the Education budget to 

add to the maintenance budget for Highways, or whether they 

would like to take it from the Health budget to add to the 

maintenance budget for Highways, or whether they would want 

to take it from the Agriculture budget to add to the maintenance 

budget of Highways, let the members opposite consider those 

very tough priorizations.  Because that's the action we've taken 

as a government this spring and that's the action we will 

continue to have to take as we face the future trying to bring 

the financial measure of this government under control. 

 

And within the budget of the Department of Agriculture we 

have also taken tough measures, as the members opposite have 

sometimes criticized us for doing.  Yes, we have had to change 

the livestock cash advance system within our department, not 

because we didn't believe farmers could use that but because 

we had to reduce our expenditures somehow across the board 

in government in order to secure the financial stability of the 

province. 

 

And I know that farmers and business people alike across the 

province believe that it's important to put the financial dealings 

of the province in order so that we have a long-term stability in 

the province, so that we have an ability to service the programs 

that we can still afford within the province.  Nobody's denying 

that these have not been tough choices.  Nobody's denying any 

of that. 

 

But I want to also say that in response to some of the tough 

measures, we have engaged in consultation with the industries 

affected.  We're going to be analysing collectively with farmers 

in Saskatchewan, the transportation issues.  We have looked at 

the debt issues with farmers.  We've looked at the GRIP issue 

with farmers.  And we are going to be looking, as soon as we 

get a chance to set it up, at a collective examination of the red 

meat industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

The red meat industry has come together to talk to us to finally, 

after 10 years of non-consultation by the members opposite, 

finally they're going to have the opportunity to work with 

government, to look to the future, to see where our 

opportunities are.  Yes we know those opportunities are going 

to have to be addressed in an environment where there is less 

government money.  That's just a fact of life. 

 

The fact of life is that when you have a $14 billion deficit and 

when you have a $760 million interest bill, that everybody has 

to live with a little bit less.  That's the unfortunate fact that we 

inherited. That's an unfortunate fact that all of the people of 

Saskatchewan understand.  And the only people that do not 

understand it is the 8 or 10 members opposite, that sit here and 

pretend that this reality is not so. 

 

So the overwhelming first priority of government is to establish 

on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan . . . 

An Hon. Member: -- Point of order, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: -- What is your point of order? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- We suspect on this side of the House that 

he's only moving his lips and there's a recorder going inside. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  That's not a point of order.  I caution the 

member to not interrupt speakers for less than valid reasons. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well I want to say that it is our 

commitment to work with farmers in an environment of fiscal 

restraint to design better programs, to design programs with 

farmers, and not by us for them.  We want to work with them 

to design the kind of future that is consistent with the fiscal 

reality in the province and consistent with the very positive 

energy that farmers have and the very positive future that 

Saskatchewan's agricultural sector has if we put it on a sound 

footing. 

 

I want to say that the member opposite has talked about the 

idea of how we have attracted federal money to this province.  I 

want the member opposite to answer for me how this seems to 

be a calculation he is proud of.  How much money did we 

spend in 1987 on the crop insurance program?  He says that our 

money attracted federal money.  Well that simply isn't so.  The 

federal government paid half of the bill for crop insurance until 

1989, at which point they took half of their share and gave it to 

Saskatchewan.  Now how is that attracting federal money to the 

province?  That's a cost of 40 to $60 million. 

 

We had a drought program in 1988 that the members opposite 

committed $100 million of Saskatchewan money to, again in a 

crisis in Saskatchewan.  In a crisis in Saskatchewan when 

Saskatchewan needed help, Saskatchewan was asked to put up 

$100 million.  And we're beginning now -- in the face of this 

kind of budget crisis -- now in 1992 we're faced with the 

prospect of paying back a commitment made in 1988 for a 

drought program that had traditionally been federal 

responsibility.  And in 1991 the member opposite says we 

attracted federal money. 

 

Well tell me, how much provincial money was spent on 

western grain stabilization program which preceded the GRIP 

program?  No provincial dollars were spent on that program.  

And the replacement program, the GRIP program, cost $157 

million.  That's the fact.  The federal responsibility has been 

taken over by the province.  It has been off-loaded to the 

province and the province is hard pressed to be able to pay that 

bill. 

 

But accept the fact that that commitment was made by the 

members opposite.  Accept the fact that that is the reality in 

which we live.  That commitment to those kinds of funding 

arrangements was made in exchange for a commitment by the 

federal government that they would provide emergency 

funding for circumstances -- when incomes were reduced -- by 

circumstances beyond the control, by unforeseen 

circumstances. 

 

Well unforeseen circumstances and disasters include 



2864 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

drought; they include frost; and they include international 

trading practices of other countries.  Those are not the 

responsibilities of farmers and the province which is driven to 

near bankruptcy by those realities.  We ought not to be asking 

farmers, when their incomes are at an all-time low, to be 

paying more and more and more towards their own survival.  I 

mean, I have said it before and I will say it again, that's like 

trying to give yourself a blood transfusion when you're 

bleeding to death.  Farmers cannot do that and the province 

cannot do that. 

 

So I ask again for the members opposite to change their mind 

on the position of asking the federal government for their 

appropriate level of support, the support they committed when 

the province took on those major funding responsibilities that 

I've just described.  I ask them to stop voting against the 

question of third line of defence, to stop trying to take the 

federal government off the hook, and join the farmers of 

Saskatchewan and the Government of Saskatchewan, and the 

government of the other western provinces and the farmers of 

the other western provinces, to ask the federal government to 

meet the commitment that will provide some relief for the 

income pain that farmers experience. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The minister 

has gone on ad nauseam here for at least 35 minutes on a 

question.  He's taking up all the time that is allocated for this 

under closure, when we're only allowed a certain amount of 

time.  He's been flapping his lips and gums for over 35 

minutes, and yet he has been spewing verbal garbage such as 

the Minister of Agriculture from Manitoba attended the 

conference in Ottawa and represented Alberta.  Well, Mr. 

Chairman, that is absolutely not the case.  If the minister of 

Manitoba was there, I'm sure he was representing the people of 

Manitoba, not the people of Alberta. 

 

I will keep my question very short, Mr. Chairman.  The 

minister has talked about how farmers under the '91 program 

used market signals . . . or did not follow market signals and 

market values in determination of what they would seed.  I'm 

just wondering, how has the minister determined exactly what 

the market value was for durum in 1991? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Excuse me.  I was briefly interrupted at 

the final moment of the question.  Could you repeat it?  Then 

I'll try and answer it briefly as well. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- How has the minister determined what 

the final value is for durum grown in 1991 crop year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The final value of durum grown in the 

1992 crop year will be determined at the end of the crop year as 

always. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well the minister has been talking that 

farmers didn't observe market signals and played games with 

the GRIP program because they somehow knew what the value 

was going to be for their crops.  I'm just wondering how has the 

minister determined for the 1991 crop year how the farmers 

knew what the prices were going to be.  So how could they 

play with the signals? 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I'm not sure I'm understanding the 

question correctly.  But with respect to how the program 

determines its assumptions for the program, is by using the 

national grains bureau's numbers.  The national grains bureau is 

asked to make its projections for pricing in constructing the 

program Estimates.  Is that the question? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, you 

said earlier on here this morning that the market signal was 

clear that showed that durum was 50 cents a bushel higher than 

wheat.  And that was the reason why farmers opted for durum.  

And you're suggesting that that was indeed the case, that the 

market will bear that out.  Now I'm just wondering how he 

knows whether indeed the final payment for wheat and durum, 

when it's realized later on this fall . . . winter, into early winter, 

how he knows indeed whether that will be the case. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I may have misspoken myself, if that is 

what the member understood from my previous comments.  I'll 

try and clarify it briefly. 

 

The comment I was making was that in the 1991 program, the 

program estimate for durum was $4.52 or $4.56 per bushel 

against the wheat program price of $4.15 a bushel.  The market 

reality, as we have moved through, has seen durum priced 

substantially lower than hard red spring -- not higher, lower 

than hard red spring. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- How do you know that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well that's been the market signal at the 

time.  Certainly the end of the year numbers aren't finalized till 

later.  But those would have been the signals at the time, if one 

reads the market. 

 

So that what . . . the point I was making was that under the old 

program the market signal could be in conflict with the 

program signal, and the observation the committee made was 

that there ought to be market neutrality with respect to the 

program.  That's the only point that was made, that the program 

ought to be market responsive.  That is to say that the program 

should be designed in such a way that farmers would make 

their decisions in the same fashion that they would if no 

program were there. 

 

(1130) 

 

And I know that's very difficult to achieve.  I think yesterday 

the member from Arm River said that there was still moral 

hazard in the program with respect to guiding farmers.  I think 

that's so.  I think the officials that I've had look at it, both 

internally within the department and externally, suggest that 

about 80 per cent of that influence on farmers has been 

removed by the program changes and about 20 per cent 

remains.  I don't think anybody would quarrel with the fact that 

there is still some guidance to farmers in the program, but that 

the largest part of it has been removed.  Their object in the 

program was to leave . . . to make a program design which left 

farmers free to make their decisions based on as normal a 

circumstance as possible, trying to respond to the market and 

what they can best grow in their farms. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, there's no way that 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2865 

anybody could determine that because the market signal, while 

you say it was 50 cents a bushel difference, there's no way that 

you or me or anyone else knows what the final price is going to 

be realized at the end of the day.  And indeed it's not 50 cents; 

it's closer to about 35 cents; 37 cents is what it is -- 4.15 to 

4.52. 

 

The fact is that you don't know that the market signal did show 

that, and I don't know that the market signal showed that, 

because the Canadian Wheat Board prices aren't transparent.  

We don't know what they were selling it for.  We can only 

assume that their market price, there may have been a 

difference in there, but there's no way that any of us know that. 

 

Mr. Minister, the market signal cannot be determined 

particularly just because the Canadian Wheat Board asking 

price for one is higher than the other.  We've seen 

circumstances lots of times in the past where the market price, 

the realized market price relative to the asking price of the 

Canadian Wheat Board changes, and changes rather 

dramatically.  It can go anywhere from a low of about 50, 60 

per cent all the way up to a high of, in some cases, a deficit 

situation where the Wheat Board has been paying an initial 

price higher than what the actual market return was. 

 

So I don't see how you can stand and say to us that the market 

signal clearly showed that durum was going to receive less than 

wheat was when you don't know that and neither does anyone 

else.  The best guess that your officials might be able to 

provide for you is still a guess and still an estimate. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I'd like for you to stand up and tell all the 

durum growers in Saskatchewan that the market signal was 37 

cents a bushel difference, and that will clearly be borne out 

when we see the return at the end of the day. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I don't need to tell the durum producers of 

Saskatchewan anything with respect to their conclusions about 

growing and marketing durum.  They well know how to read 

the stocks-to-use ratio in the world.  They well know how to 

read the supply relative to the demand.  They well know how to 

read the international markets in terms of what's happening. 

 

The fact is that for a number of years durum traded at a 

substantial premium to wheat on the international markets 

which is then rolled in to the 15-year indexed moving average 

price.  But the fact is that now . . . but now it's flipped, and it's 

flipped for a reason.  It's flipped because of a market reason. 

 

And the farmers did make a determination of what caused them 

to grow crops in the time before there was GRIP, and that 

determination was made by their reading of the market.  

Sometimes it was made by their reading of government.  I 

know of farmers who try to see what government was 

encouraging and then do the opposite because they felt that was 

the smart thing to do.  Farmers have used many kinds of 

rationale in terms of deciding what to grow. 

 

But they all have access to current market information.  They 

all have access to good information on the world 

supplies.  They all have access to the outlook reports to say, 

where do we think this market's going over the next period of 

time, and what is the world supply? 

 

And the conclusion -- I hope the member opposite is not 

challenging me on this -- it is the recommendation of the 

committee that there should be market sensitivity in the 

program, that there should be market neutrality in the program 

-- not a particular bias but market neutrality. 

 

I am simply reflecting in legislation, and have accepted, the 

recommendations of a producer committee which did a much 

greater in-depth study of this than I personally have done.  This 

committee has access to the resources of the organizations that 

they represent.  This committee has access to all of the market 

information that others have.  And they had access to each 

other, so that could be integrated in them putting together a 

recommendation for government. 

 

And it is their recommendation that there should be market 

neutrality so that in fact we don't, through a government 

program, pay producers to grow something that the market is 

not crazy about having.  Because that in the end results in 

serious cost to taxpayers and an inefficiency in government 

programming. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's you that made the 

comment that the market would show that durum was 50 cents 

a bushel difference than wheat.  It wasn't anyone else.  I didn't 

make that comment.  You made that comment, that market 

signals showed that they . . . durum . . . the reason why a lot of 

people went into increased durum production was because the 

program showed that they could receive more. 

 

And yet, Mr. Minister, if you look at actual farm situations 

you'll find on almost every circumstance that when you take 

into account the premium differences between durum and 

wheat, substantially higher premiums on durum than on wheat, 

you'll find that the difference translates down to less than a 

dollar an acre in a lot of situations. 

 

So the market signal was neutral at best between durum and 

wheat, I would suggest to you, sir, if you look at the difference 

in the premiums as well as the difference in the price relative to 

those grains. 

 

I'm just wondering about one other quick question I have 

before I turn it over to my colleague, and that's with respect to 

the '92 program.  I wonder if you could give the producers of 

Saskatchewan an update on when they can expect the first price 

. . . the initial . . . or I mean the first payment under the GRIP 

'92 program, the second payment under the '92 GRIP program, 

and the third payment under the '92 GRIP program, both with 

respect to the crop insurance component and the revenue-side 

component. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, just briefly to respond to 

the point on durum, I don't pretend to be a durum marketing 

expert or to pretend to know what a market difference was on 

any particular day.  I was suggesting as an example 



2866 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

of the observation that the committee made about the program 

not being market neutral, an example of what that might be, 

and I think it's an example that it's fairly close to the truth in 

terms of the numbers at the time. 

 

With respect to pay-outs, the pay-outs under the 1992 program 

will be exactly the same as the pay-outs under the 1991 

program because they are determined by the federal-provincial 

agreement.  Now the exception is that farmers should be able 

to, under their crop insurance program, receive payments as 

they always did under the crop insurance program because 

those programs do not need to be phased.  The revenue 

insurance will be paid out in the same manner as last year, with 

35 per cent coming in November, up to 75 per cent in March, 

and the final payment, after all the calculations are done, I 

think are now expected for last year to come in February 1993 

and will be expected to come for the new program after the end 

of the crop year, sometime in early 1994. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- We can expect the same relationship to the 

revenue-side component of the equation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I possibly didn't make myself clear.  The 

crop insurance, where people chose the fixed-price option, will 

be payable in fall or could be deferred by the producer as they 

choose, under the new program.  So that you return to the old 

structure that Crop Insurance functioned in when it was 

independent. 

 

With the market-price option, because we need to wait until the 

final prices are determined, it will be paid out in a staged 

fashion like the revenue insurance, and that was the schedule I 

gave you before, was the expectation for revenue insurance.  

And it will be paid out 35 per cent in fall, 75 per cent in March 

. . . up to 75 per cent in March, and then the final payment will 

come shortly after the beginning of the year of 1994. 

 

I should say again that if the Estimates . . . if pricing changes in 

the market-place affect program payments, the same feature 

that has frustrated many farmers -- angered them this spring -- 

where a change in the price resulted in a conclusion that they 

had been overpaid in the fall period and that they in fact have 

received more than 75 per cent of their eligibility up to that 

March payment, the rules still apply that those people would be 

required to pay back the excess before they receive their final 

payment. 

 

That's a frustration, I know.  It's a part of the federal-provincial 

agreement.  Part of the . . . one of the things that is an irritant to 

farmers, and clearly one of the things that ought to be 

addressed. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Just one final question.  

You had suggested that you were not an expert on durum 

marketing, you're not an expert on wheat marketing, you're 

probably not an expert on any of the marketings, I would 

hazard a guess, and neither am I.  But why then, Mr. Minister, 

did you send a letter out to farmers in the spring, suggesting 

that they should opt for the market-price option, when you've 

suggested yourself that you're not an expert; but why then did 

you say to farmers that that was an option that you suggested 

would be a good option for them to look at? 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't believe I sent 

that letter out.  But my honourable colleague, the minister in 

charge of the Crop Insurance Corporation and the Minister for 

Rural Development and the minister for Parks and the minister 

in charge of the Water Corporation, this honourable colleague I 

believe sent out the letter. 

 

And what I recall from the letter . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And is he an expert? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- He is an expert in fact on many things, and 

a fine gentleman too.  As I recall the letter, the letter said . . . 

you may recall in spring there was substantial concern about 

where members opposite and their federal colleagues had 

described to farmers a circumstance where they could receive a 

very small pay-out if they made a particular set of choices 

under the new program. 

 

In fact the program, by some of its detractors, was defined as 

having a very small pay-out base, a pay-out base that could 

only happen in the event that farmers made a particular choice 

and then the markets did a particular thing and then the farmers 

had a crop failure.  In other words, the worst-case scenario that 

was distributed by members opposite in order to encourage 

people to be afraid of the new program suggested -- that they 

didn't say if -- they just said: a farmer could receive as little as 

80 per cent of $3.00 a bushel on their individual yield, which is 

a very small coverage base considering the premiums that the 

farmers have paid. 

 

That scenario, when this fear was being spread, could only be 

achieved if a farmer selected the $3.00 fixed-price option for 

crop insurance, if they had a crop failure at the same time, and 

then if the collective construction of the prices in the 

market-place rose to the equivalent of $4.07 for wheat, so that 

there would be no revenue insurance pay-out.  That was the 

circumstance described. 

 

There was sufficient fear in the drought area that this pay-out 

was in fact such a very small possibility that the minister in 

charge of the Crop Insurance Corporation and the other 

ministries I mentioned sent a letter that said if you are 

concerned about a drought and the price is rising, and if that's a 

concern to you, then it would be wise to consider the 

market-price option.  Because with the market-price option, if 

the price were to rise, then the crop insurance coverage would 

rise.  So that if the price in fact rose to $4.07 a bushel, the crop 

insurance coverage would rise to $4.07 a bushel as opposed to 

the fixed $3 rate. 

 

(1145) 

 

So it was in response to a substantial amount of fear and 

misunderstanding that had been planted by members opposite, 

that it was necessary to clarify for producers how to protect 

themselves, to maximize their income in the event of a drought 

and the prices rising.  That was the tone of the letter.  I think if 

you have it before you, if you were to read it, you would find 

that that's what the letter said. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2867 

discussions with the farmers in my area, one of their major 

concerns with the changes to this program, other than the fact 

that it's going to be retroactive, that no notices were given, that 

they're not going to be able to allow . . . not going to be 

allowed to take this to court, is the concern of basket approach 

to all of the crops or the individual coverages. 

 

And I have the recommendations for changes to the gross 

revenue insurance program, GRIP, submitted by the advisory 

committee on February 11, '92.  And they have a number of 

figures in here which I have gone through and used in some 

examples.  And these are calculations for area average 

payments per seeded acre.  And they total up to, in these 

figures, using their numbers . . . you would get an average of 

$45.51 per acre as a pay-out under the GRIP program. 

 

Now if you take it and look at individual crops and how the '91 

program would have worked and how the '92 program would 

have worked, if you look at flax as an example, because flax is 

a commodity that is grown fairly extensively in our area, under 

the '91, or just not even necessarily '91 but if you take the flax 

acres here, 24,000 acres at 16 bushels to the acre, $7.21 at 70 

per cent of IMAP, you come up with a figure of $2.7 million or 

$115 an acre is what you would generate under those figures. 

 

If you take a market value as they did in the example from the 

GRIP committee of $3, you end up with $48 an acre, or a 

shortfall there of $67.  You add on the $45 an acre that under 

the basket approach you would get as a GRIP pay-out and you 

end up still $21 short of the $115 at the IMAP price times the 

bushels produced.  You go through all of these examples.  

Canola you end up with 19 cents more than the IMAP prices; 

in spring wheat you end up with $1.62 more; in barley you end 

up with $7.26 more; and in lentils you end up with $18 less. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, to me this looks like one farmer who is 

growing a particular crop is subsidizing those other farmers 

that are growing, in this particular case, wheat, barley, and 

canola.  Do you feel that this is a proper thing to be doing and 

do you support this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I do support the changes.  

They were brought to me by the producer committee and they 

recommended the changes for a series of reasons.  I want to 

read to you from the National GRIP Committee meeting report 

on future program design.  It states: 

 

 The goal of . . . a highly individualized program which is 

fully predictable for producers, (and which) is crop specific 

and maintains full price-yield offsets at the individual level, 

is in direct conflict with the objective of maximizing the level 

of market responsiveness and minimizing the potential for 

moral hazard and program abuse. 

 

Now the intent of the committee was to design a generic 

payment that accurately reflected the agriculture in a particular 

area so that the amount of support you would receive would be 

independent of the specific crop.  Because the 15-year moving 

average price signal, which 

is too low overall, which is too low overall for everyone, but 

that signal bears no necessary relationship to the current 

market-place.  Because over a 15-year period it is almost 

certain that there'll be a shifting relationship between products.  

And therefore the 15-year moving average price is both an 

inadequate compensation level and is also an improper signal 

about what one ought to grow.  And yet the program defines its 

price targets by those individual products. 

 

So it was the committee's conclusion -- the committee made up 

of representatives from the organizations I listed previously, 

virtually every farm organization that represents major groups 

of farmers in Saskatchewan -- it was their conclusion that the 

kind of design which neutralized the impact of the individual 

crops on what a farmer would grow, but respected the 

individual farmer's productivity and farming practices was the 

kind of program that should be put in place. 

 

So they recommended a program where crop insurance was 

separated out, but the crop insurance returns will be based on 

an individual-yield basis.  So a farmer who has a higher 

individual yield than the area average will get compensated,  

will have a higher level of coverage because of that. 

 

And on the revenue-insurance side, while the farmers cannot 

choose coverage by individual crop, because they believed that 

that was a distorting factor, that farmers should be 

compensated in a generic fashion for the price shortfall on 

crops in their area, for the price of the crops that are generally 

grown in their area, and that they should then be compensated 

for their individual productivity again.  So that if there is a 

payment calculated for an area of $40 an acre, respecting the 

crops that are grown there, relative to the world market price, if 

the payment is $40 an acre, and if I have a 10 per cent better 

record of production than the other people in my area, that I 

would receive 10 per cent more. 

 

So the program respected the individual productivity of the 

individual farmer, so it was very fair in that regard, but 

removed from reality the program as an indication of what 

prices ought to be grown because there was no necessary 

relationship between the price signals in the program and the 

market-place. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'll ask you a very 

simple question.  Do you personally support the concept of an 

individual farmer subsidizing another individual farmer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I think the whole idea of safety nets and 

insurance and all of these other matters that we've been 

discussing over the last couple of days makes an assumption 

that each of us in that circumstance makes a contribution to a 

program which then may pay out to someone else but may pay 

out to me.  So that there is cross-subsidization in any kind of 

insurance program. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, again I ask you: do you 

support that concept personally? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I support the concept of insurance 

programs where risk is shared and benefits are distributed 



2868 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

according to a pre-arranged agreement.  If that's the question, 

yes. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- The question, Mr. Minister, is whether 

or not you support one farmer subsidizing another. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I will say again, that insurance programs -- 

whether they be fire insurance, crop insurance, hail insurance, 

any other kind of insurance -- work on the assumption of 

shared risk.  The member can describe it as one farmer 

subsidizing another.  I will use my language to describe it.  

That's the nature of insurance.  It's sharing risk.  If you want to 

call it cross-subsidization or one farmer subsidizing another, 

you can describe it in your way.  But it's clear to me that no one 

engages in an insurance program without believing that there is 

a risk sharing happening as a result. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well in a roundabout way, Mr. Minister, 

I'll take that as a yes.  Am I to also assume then that your 

government also supports that point of view? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- If you accept my answer previously as a 

yes, then I would, rather than repeat my previous answer, again 

answer yes. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, would you say that those 

organizations then that were represented on the GRIP review 

committee also support that position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe that anybody that 

participates in the design or in the program delivery of an 

insurance program, implicitly agrees in sharing risk. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, we have another 

program in this country called the Crow rate which, while it 

may not necessarily be an insurance program, it is a financial 

method to spread cost and risk.  If you talked to some of those 

organizations that were represented on the GRIP review 

committee, they will tell you that they're opposed to the idea of 

one farmer being able to take advantage of a program which in 

effect subsidizes one farmer from payments due to another. 

 

If a farmer who delivers grain receives a payment under, say, a 

producer payment scheme for the Crow rate, ships his grain, 

then that subsidy is paid for him for his shipments.  But another 

farmer down the road who may have the same amount of land, 

the same amount of grain, receives the same payment under a 

pay-the-producer program, but does not ship his grain -- he 

either feeds it or he sells it as seed, or goes to the crushing 

plant, however method he disposes of it, but does not use the 

rail system -- those organizations feel then that that farmer is 

being subsidized in his production by the farmer who actually 

ships the grain. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, to me this is exactly what you are doing 

under the new GRIP program.  You are using this program to 

have one farmer subsidize another farmer's production. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I'm not sure exactly the point that's being 

made, but I want to respond on the Crow benefit question.  The 

question was flipped a bit when the 

member said, payments due to another.  Because I think it's an 

implicit assumption that just because I make a contribution to a 

program, an insurance program, that somehow that I should 

expect that amount coming back to me.  In fact it is the 

participation in the sharing of risk that defines what is someone 

else's due. 

 

So as national policy with respect to the rail question you 

mention, it is a matter of national policy that it is in the 

common economic interest, that it is all in our collective social 

and economic interest, to have an accessible and affordable and 

efficient rail transportation system.  And so each one of us 

benefits collectively and individually by the establishment of 

that system. 

 

The contention that somehow a particular portion of that is my 

due, ignores the fact that the Canadian public established the 

Crow rate and established Crow benefit as a particular program 

for serving economic interests in Canada.  My due is the 

service I get out of that kind of a network.  It isn't some 

calculation that that's for Saskatchewan; one sixty-thousandths 

of that is mine.  It is the collective benefit that's described, 

that's for the economy as a whole. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, once you make a 

premium payment you may not necessarily receive a return for 

that amount.  But under the individual coverage, if a farmer has 

produced a significant crop, if his price is high enough, he may 

not indeed get a return.  But his neighbour's crop may not have 

been as significant or the prices may have been lower, therefore 

he would receive a return.  But under your scheme, that portion 

of his return will be divided over all the acres in the area 

including his neighbour's, who did not deserve a return but he 

will receive it.  And so the farmer who should have received 

the return is subsidizing the farmer who would not have 

received one. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I think the point the member makes is in 

direct contradiction to the assumption of the committee, that 

somehow the 15-year moving average price reflected what was 

deserved return.  Because what is that deserved return? 

 

The belief of the committee was that the international 

market-place has affected a variety of products and represents a 

particular impact on producers, so the producers should be 

compensated for their particular broad damage by the 

international market-place. 

 

And the committee's conclusion was it should not be done on 

the basis that somehow the indexed moving average price was 

an accurate reflection of that.  It was their conclusion that it 

was the collective impact on the crops grown in that area that 

ought to be the reflection of that, and that farmers should 

therefore benefit by the collective damage done to themselves.  

And that the farmers should then, collecting that amount of 

money first, then grow the crops that they think best respond to 

the market-place.  They believed that created a market neutral 

program. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  It being 12 noon, and pursuant to a 

special order of the Assembly, this committee will recess until 

the afternoon's routine proceedings are concluded. 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2869 

Routine proceedings will begin at 2 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 

 


