




















































Hansard: August 26, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3085 

 August 26, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

like to lay on the Table this afternoon more petitions.  I'll just 

read the prayer. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, perusing these 500-plus petitioners, I find out that 

they represent a cosmos of the entire province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a 

petition I would . . . some petitions I would like to present to 

the House. 

 

 To the Honourable, the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan in Legislature Assembled: 

 

 The petition of the undersigned concerned citizens of the 

province of Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 That in the 1991 general election, the voters of the province 

voted 62.62 % to prevent the Government of Saskatchewan 

from paying for abortion procedures; 

 

 and that this margin far exceeds the support of any political 

party represented in the Legislature; 

 

 and that the government is placing greater and greater costs 

on Saskatchewan people for an already financially stressed 

health care system; 

 

 and that it would be to the benefit of our democracy for 

governments to listen to the duly expressed will of the voters 

as well as to the benefit of our health care system to more 

judiciously husband our health care dollars. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to stop the funding of 

abortions in Saskatchewan. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come mainly from the Regina and Saskatoon 

areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7), they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate the Farm Fuel 

Rebate program. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you 

and through you to the other members of the legislature some 

members of our family that showed up in the gallery this 

morning by surprise and are again here this afternoon -- my 

cousin Gert and her spouse Wayne Scramstad from British 

Columbia, and my cousin Wally and his spouse Alice 

Schellenberg from Regina.  And I want to also say that my 

Uncle Pete and Aunt Tina Schellenberg had been here this 

morning visiting. 

 

I would ask you to join me in welcoming them to the 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I'd also like to introduce to the Assembly 

and ask the members of the Assembly to welcome along with 

me two friends from the National Farmers Union, Lloyd 

Stanhope and Ken Imhoff. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce 

to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly here today 

in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, an old friend of mine, Donna 

Greschner.  She's well-known to the Hon. Bob Mitchell and 

also to our Premier and also to many of my colleagues here as 

well. 

 

She teaches law at the university in Saskatoon, was involved in 

the constitutional team in the negotiations in Toronto and in 

Ottawa.  But what many of you may not know, Mr. Speaker, is 

that Donna and I went to school together all the way through 

our classes from grades 1 to 12 in Goodsoil and grew up less 

than a mile apart as the crow flies. 

 

We were reminiscing over breakfast this morning, Mr. Speaker, 

that some five or six years ago I think it was, when we were 

back in high school, she ran as president one year and I ran as 

vice-president; and the alternate year I ran as president and she 

ran as vice-president.  So there's something to reminisce. 

 

So I'd ask everybody to join with me in welcoming Donna here 

today.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Utilities Installation Charges 



3086 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question today, 

Mr. Speaker, is to the minister in charge of SaskPower.  Mr. 

Minister, last week I received a call from a constituent by the 

name of Bryce Weiss of Maple Creek.  He had moved a house 

onto his ranch.  And prior to moving the house he had received 

an estimate for lifting, cutting, and moving of power lines of 

$3,000. 

 

After the project was completed, he received a bill from 

SaskPower for $6,000.  And when he inquired, he was told that 

this was a new rate structure that SaskPower was working 

under. 

 

Will you explain this new rate structure and how and when it 

came into effect. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to take 

notice of that question so that I can apprise myself of the exact 

details and undertake to provide the answer at a later time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The minister might 

also like to take notice of a couple of other questions at the 

same time so that we can get to the bottom of this whole matter 

because it expands a little bit further. 

 

Madam Minister, the moving contractors are also very worried 

and concerned about this particular problem.  These extra costs 

will make it economically unfeasible to move many buildings 

in our province in the future.  This means not only losses of 

jobs in the moving industry, but it also means the loss of many 

good buildings that will probably be demolished as a result of 

not being able to be moved. 

 

We have one contractor in the province from the Canora area 

that has a more immediate problem.  This small company, 

Madam Minister, has signed a contract under the old rules to 

move 22 homes for the Department of Indian Affairs.  Caught 

in this contract now with these new formulas in effect this 

individual under the old formula had no charge of this kind to 

worry about and no prior notice required.  Under the new rules 

he now has to give 48 hours notice of move and will lose 

thousands of dollars in moving charges. 

 

How can these people get out of these losses, Madam Minister, 

and will you ask SaskPower and order them to reverse this 

policy?  Or is this your idea of justice in Saskatchewan today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as with the previous 

question, I would like to take notice, meet with the member 

perhaps to make sure that I understand the exact details of the 

specific contracts that he refers to, and provide the answer. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- We are happy that you will commit to that, 

Madam Minister.  And there is another bit of a follow-up that 

you must also then consider if we are to resolve this whole 

messy situation that your administration has created. 

Madam Minister, and Mr. Speaker -- I address my question to 

the same minister -- Madam Minister, SaskPower has this 

policy, SaskTel also has a similar policy, and Sask gas now 

also has a similar policy.  An individual now setting up a new 

farm home or a farmstead in rural Saskatchewan, Madam 

Minister, is faced with the effects of all of these increased costs 

that you and your government are now putting onto these 

people.  This will effectively stop anyone from ever setting up 

a new farmstead in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

My question to you is: will you change this policy now and 

allow continued expansion of farm buildings in the province 

and allow people to move buildings that still have good quality 

in them?  Will you notify Mr. Weiss and the moving industry 

of that decision so that they can continue on and not become 

bankrupt? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, after the election in 

October of 1991 all of the policies, installation policies, and 

cost recovery of installations of services was reviewed.  There 

had not been any changes since 1989, although there's been a 

considerable increase in cost. 

 

The gas program, for instance, was highly subsidized.  SaskTel 

installations are highly subsidized to at least 90 per cent or 

more in most cases.  And we are, as we did undertake in 

SaskTel, reviewing all of those schedules to make sure that we 

do move closer to cost recovery without causing harm to the 

economy generally.  And I will take notice of the specific parts 

of the question.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Supplementary to 

the same minister.  Madam Minister, as the minister in charge 

of at least one of these Saskatchewan corporations, you have to 

know the answers to the general policies and you have to know 

that the costs to an individual on a farm, having that kind of 

background yourself, of going from $2,600 -- to install gas up 

to one instance that I have on record -- to $8,000, totally 

unexpected bill by this individual, having his telephone rates 

rise from a simple matter of a few dollars for a hook-up from 

his old home to his new one related now to a cost that goes 

back from the nearest town or the nearest substation measured 

in kilometres at a rate per kilometre all the way to the farm, in 

spite of the fact that the old line exists in the yard in the old 

home where the old phone used to be, simply a matter of a few 

feet away . . . The same with the gas hook-up now gone from 

2,600 to 8,000 across a yard, a farm yard, and the same thing 

occurring now for the power situation.  Not just for the 

hook-up but also for the moving of the buildings to get there. 

 

Madam Minister, surely you can do better than to stall us and 

tell us that you don't know what's going on, that you have to 

come back at a later time.  Surely you can make a commitment 

to the people of Saskatchewan that you can do better than this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I have undertaken in this 

House at an earlier time, approximately a week ago, to make 

public very shortly the details of a revision to the 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3087 

provision charges that SaskTel charges.  I would like to remind 

the members opposite that it was their administration that 

double-dipped the dividends of SaskTel, placing it in financial 

jeopardy, that bankrupted SaskEnergy to the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I call the member from Morse 

to order, please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- I think it's obvious, Mr. Speaker, that 

in order to recover from the precarious financial situation that 

the Crown corporations were left in as a result of some of those 

misguided programs -- as I say, the rural gasification program 

bankrupted SaskEnergy and left SaskTel in a very precarious 

financial situation -- measures have got to be taken to return 

them to a profitable situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, to the same Minister, to the 

minister of Telephones.  You talked about SaskTel being in a 

financially insecure position, yet they made over $40 million in 

profit last year. 

 

Last week you talked of rate reductions for the installation 

charges that you had jacked up this spring.  When people 

phoned SaskTel to find out about it, SaskTel said there is no 

such thing going to happen, that rates are not going to change. 

 

Madam Minister, when are you going to inform SaskTel that 

the rates are going to be dropped?  And when are you going to 

give rebates to those people who have already paid these 

excessive charges? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, as I undertook 

approximately a week ago and as I said to the member opposite 

then, the time frame that we've been indicating to people who 

have written us is approximately the middle of September.  

Prior to that there will be an announcement made. 

 

Work is being done at the administrative level to refine the fee 

schedule, and in due course we will make the new fee schedule 

public.  And of course prior to that time the employees at 

SaskTel will be apprised of what the new schedule is so that 

they can give the highest level of service to their customers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I would think that at 

some point in time, and sooner rather than later, you would 

inform SaskTel that the rates are going to drop so that they can 

advise their customers when they phone in. 

 

Another issue that came up last week . .. . my colleague from 

Maple Creek asked you about community-based cable co-op at 

Gull Lake which has been meeting resistance from SaskTel.  

You said you would have it checked and get right back to the 

House; but, Madam Minister, that has not happened. 

You also said the main reason SaskTel would not want 

communities to establish their own cable co-ops is that the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) has again got into the media 

business and that service to small town Saskatchewan would be 

supplied by your government cable company. 

 

Madam Minister, is it the policy of the NDP government 

opposite that no new cable co-ops will be allowed so that you 

may establish your own cable television monopoly in rural 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, on the first point, with 

respect to inquiries made to SaskTel about the rate change.  I 

think it's very, very important that when customers make 

inquiries they be given the correct information.  As I've said, 

that the administration is working on a new fee schedule.  It has 

not yet been entirely approved.  So I think it's much more 

important to give customers accurate information.  So the staff 

that communicates at that level, at the customer level, will be 

told as soon as the rates have been finalized so that they can 

give accurate information. 

 

On the question of the cable co-op -- the question that was 

raised by the member from Maple Creek last week -- I happen 

to have brought a note into the House today to speak to him, 

because I have communicated with SaskTel and they are 

unable to find any reference to a representation to CRTC 

(Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 

Commission) and they are entirely unaware.  So I was prepared 

to ask the member from Maple Creek today for some further 

elaboration later on as to the specific case, because I have not 

been able to substantiate the claims that he made with respect 

to interference or representations to the CRTC. 

 

Again with the investment . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Madam 

Minister, I do believe that it is important that SaskTel pass on 

accurate information to their customers and the accurate 

information in the case of the installation rates is that they are 

going to be under review.  So when a person phones in and 

says, what's it going to cost me to connect up a new telephone, 

they should be able to say, we don't know, rates are under 

review. 

 

Madam Minister, on the cablevision, on the cable connections, 

I would ask you for a direct statement of policy that SaskTel 

will directly and enthusiastically support any application by a 

Saskatchewan community to establish its own 

community-based cable television co-operative.  Will you 

make that statement now please, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I have stated that I will 

make inquiries -- and I have made inquiries -- into the specific 

cases of cable co-ops mentioned by the member from Maple 

Creek last weekend and again in the 



3088 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

House today.  There is no record of SaskTel or the Government 

of Saskatchewan ever having opposed any such an application. 

 

And further, on the Regional Cable Systems, I am astonished 

that the members opposite keep referring to this in a negative 

tone when what SaskTel did was, in order to diversify its 

revenue base so that we can continue to hold down the rates of 

domestic telephone service, make a 29.9 per cent investment in 

a regional cable company which brings the head office and 25 

new jobs into the province of Saskatchewan, guarantees a 

high-quality service to rural Saskatchewan.  That's our 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan.  We do not have a policy 

of interfering with the broadcast . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm not calling the minister to 

order.  I want to call the member from . . . the Leader of the 

Opposition and his seat mate to order.  If they have a question 

for the Minister of Agriculture, I wish they'd direct it to him.  

Okay? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In the case of 

the cable company that SaskTel purchased, you paid $7 million 

for a company that's losing money, Madam Minister, and has 

been losing money for a good period of time.  We're negative 

about the SaskTel's operation in this because they were 

opposing the Gull Lake co-op from getting a licence to operate 

further than what they already were.  This is the impression at 

least that the cable co-op in Gull Lake has. 

 

Madam Minister, I'm asking you a yes or no question.  Yes or 

no -- do you support communities establishing their own cable 

television co-ops? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all on the 

reference to the Regional Cable company, this is . . . Regional 

Cable Systems is a publicly traded company, so financial 

information on the operation is readily available.  And where 

the member opposite has got his information from, I do not 

know.  But it is a profitable operation and we do expect to be 

receiving dividends as early as 1993 on that investment. 

 

In terms of the cable co-ops, there is no record or history of 

SaskTel opposing a community cable co-op at any time.  And 

rather than make these references in the House, I wish that . . . I 

call on the members opposite to substantiate those claims 

because I am unable to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I believe it 

should be noted in this House that you are outright refusing to 

support community cable co-ops. 

 

Madam Minister, it's clear that you intend to take over 

small-town television in this province through your new little 

enterprise.  You will pay a price for this refusal in Shaunavon 

and Gull Lake, Madam Minister, and Nipawin and other 

communities that you have harmed by this lack of support. 

 

Madam Minister, I'm going to ask you one last thing.  Will you 

please go back to your officials and find out how 

many communities were served by cable television when your 

people tried the same route with Cablecom, and then check 

how many communities obtained service under the previous 

government. 

 

I think you will have to agree, when you bring back those 

figures to the House, that the comparative numbers from 1981 

and 1991 . . . so we can exactly see which policy was more 

successful -- the previous NDP government's in 1981 or the 

previous government's for the last 10 years, Madam Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I think that it is very 

important to emphasize again that our investment in Regional 

Cable Systems is a commitment to make sure that rural 

Saskatchewan has access to the most modern 

telecommunications.  The operation is a good fit with the 

technology that SaskTel is very advanced in, being fibre optics. 

 

We have never opposed community regional cable systems.  

And in terms of our motives, SaskTel's motives in buying a 

portion of Regional Cable Systems, it's a financial business 

decision.  We have no intention of changing the previous 

policy of Regional Cable Systems. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crop Insurance Repayments 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is to the minister responsible for Crop 

Insurance.  Mr. Minister, a situation has arisen in my riding 

that I find to be extremely unfair.  And I'm told that it is also 

occurring in other areas of the province.  People that had 

signed up for the 1991 GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) program that received a payment last fall and were 

told at that time that they would receive a second payment 

basis the '91 program are now being sent dunners saying please 

pay back the second payment. 

 

The instance in my riding that I wish to bring to your attention 

is of an $11,700 second payment which was paid out, basis 

information that was given in October, the cheque came in 

April, and now in August they are sent a letter saying, you have 

until January 1 to pay back the $11,700 or you will be charged 

interest as of January 1. 

 

Mr. Minister, how can you possibly justify that kind of a letter? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I just ask the members please 

not to interrupt when the member is asking his question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister . . . or Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Minister, how can you justify that type of approach to 

people that have just been devastated by losing their 1991 

program, replaced with a program that doesn't have near the 

cash impact for them, and now you are sending them dunners 

nearly a year later saying pay back the money that they, upon 

checking last October, was told was rightfully theirs?  How can 

you do that, Mr. Minister? 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3089 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I find it strange that 

the members opposite who fought so hard to keep the flawed 

program that we had last year would be criticizing me for 

operating the program that they set up in '91.  That's part of the 

program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The '91 program involved spending 

$7 million to send bin police out to measure how much grain 

was there so that we could get an estimate of payments, and not 

surprisingly some of those Estimates are not dead on.  And you 

end up with the situation you have now where some of the 

people are asked to pay back overpayments.  That is one of the 

flaws of the program and to a large extent will be fixed by the 

corrections we made to the program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Well, Mr. Minister, it's interesting that you talk 

about the measurement of bins.  When this particular family 

received their second payment in April of this year, they 

checked with Saskatchewan Crop Insurance -- this is six 

months after you were a minister -- to make sure, because there 

was some budgeting that had to be done on that farm.  And you 

know what, Mr. Minister?  Now that the money has been 

demanded back in August '92, guess what the problem appears 

to be?  Lack of measurement on the bins. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you can't have it both ways.  You can't, as 

an election promise, get rid of the bin measures in this province 

and then, nearly a year later, demand back $11,000 from a farm 

family because there was nobody there to measure the bins.  

Mr. Minister, how many more families are like this in the 

province?  How many dollars, and is this a fair policy, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Again, Mr. Speaker, the old 

program required measuring and somehow determining exact 

number of bushels that each farmer grew which is a very 

complicated process . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'd like to call the member from 

Arm River to order please.  I'd like to call the member from 

Rosthern to order too . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Is the 

member from Rosthern saying that the Speaker is not being 

fair?  If he's saying that from his seat, he better not challenge 

me. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You've named three of ours and none of 

theirs. 

 

The Speaker: -- I'm warning the member from Rosthern for 

the last time.  If he's challenging the Speaker from his chair, 

he's jeopardizing his position in this Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again I say, that is 

part of the problem with the old program.  It is part of the 

federal-provincial agreement.  We are scheduled to make 

payments as per fixed date and we must make those in 

accordance with the federal-provincial agreement. 

 

Now if there's a particular case -- and this does seem a 

straggler, because there were many people in my constituency 

who had to pay back the payments that they got.  Very many, 

many of my friends and neighbours paid back part of the 

payment that they got in the spring because of differences in 

measurement, because of increases in grain prices -- and if 

there's a particular case, if there's a particular hardship, I would 

be prepared to look at it. 

 

But again I say, Mr. Speaker, that is part of the problem that we 

had with the old program.  Administratively it's expensive -- 6 

or $7 million to hire bin police to find out exactly how much 

grain was in the bin; people's payments being mixed up and 

having to wait until the final sales come in to know exactly 

what their levels were.  And the new program is much simpler 

and will work much better in that respect. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Minister, this straggler, as you call him, from my 

constituency, have spent the money because they were assured 

after double checking -- and you, sir, were the minister, your 

administration -- that that was their money. 

 

On contact . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I want to call the member from 

Regina Rosemont to order, please. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- This farm family upon contacting your 

department and looking for some reasonable solutions to this 

were simply told, tough luck, tough luck. I guess somebody 

administratively screwed up somewhere down the line and 

you're simply going to have to pay the money back. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, if that is the approach that your department 

is going with farm families that don't have any money, this 

province is in a lot of trouble.  I want your assurance today, 

Mr. Minister, that you're going to take this situation, which I'm 

going to give you after question period, and you're going to 

treat people like this decently and others around the province 

that are in the same condition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I will certainly 

appreciate getting the details of this case.  I don't know . . . 

4,000 bushels or so seems a large amount to be out.  I think, if I 

have staff members who are not being civil or not treating 

people fairly, I will certainly look into that. 

 

But again I point out that the problem with these sorts of things 

is built into the old program and it makes it very, very difficult.  

I think our staff did an excellent job of administering a program 

that was very, very difficult, and expensive, I might add, to 

administer. 



3090 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

GRIP Speciality Crop Final Payments 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is for the 

minister for Crop Insurance or the Minister of Agriculture, 

whichever would like to . . . If the F minus minister doesn't 

want to answer the D minus minister could, if he likes. 

 

The Speaker: -- Can the member just get to his question . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . All right if the members in the 

opposition don't want to ask another question, I'll call it the end 

of question period, because we've reached the end of question 

period. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition has been chirping from his desk 

throughout the entire question period and I haven't called him 

to order.  Now when I ask the member from Kindersley to not 

make reference to the minister personally and ask his question, 

he takes exception to that.  I think I've been fair to him today. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wonder, Mr. Minister, 

if you would confirm that officials from your Crop Insurance 

Corporation in the Kyle customer service office have been 

advising specialty crop growers that they will receive their final 

payment in September.  And now your officials are backing out 

of that commitment and saying that the specialty crop growers 

of this province will not receive their final payment under 

GRIP '91 until the final Wheat Board payment calculations 

have been done on all crops. 

 

Mr. Minister, you know full well that those calculations do not 

have to be made in order to pay out on the specialty crops in 

this province.  Mr. Minister, will you give this commitment 

today, your commitment today to the specialty crop growers of 

this province, that their final payment under GRIP '91 will be 

paid out in September of this year, like the plan originally 

called for? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, as you know, the plan 

originally . . . '91 plan there would have been no way they 

could be paid out in September because they wouldn't have had 

their harvest done yet and they couldn't have had their bins 

measured. 

 

But I will make a commitment to the specialty crop growers 

and to all the other farmers that we will pay out all the 

payments as quickly as we can in compliance with the 

federal-provincial agreement by which we are bound.  And that 

is very much determined by the federal government. 

 

But I will make the commitment that we will pay out the 

farmers, all farmers, the payments as quickly as we possibly 

can within the framework of the federal-provincial agreement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 57 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I asked the minister a question before dinner, 

and would he please answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, before I begin I'd like to 

introduce another official who I did not introduce this morning 

because he came in later.  Stuart Kramer, the deputy minister of 

Agriculture and Food, is on my left.  Now the other officials 

are as they were this morning. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I and all the participants in this process have, 

like the member opposite who asked the question, a desire to 

make this committee as absolutely good as it can be.  And I 

appreciate the comments of the member opposite in that regard 

and would welcome any specific direction from the member 

opposite with respect to creating the committee which has 

absolute public confidence. 

 

What we have done to this point in that regard is we have asked 

a number of organizations to forward to us names for 

nomination, and our commitment is to consult with them on 

those names when selected so that there is comfort that they 

represent the impartial interests of all Saskatchewan people. 

 

The people that have been consulted, the people and 

organizations that have been consulted to forward names to us 

include Mr. Gerry Edwards, the chairman of the Saskatchewan 

committee of the Canadian Bankers' Association; Mr. Russ 

Holm, the vice-president of the Farm Credit Corporation; Mr. 

Norm Bromberger, the chief executive officer of the Credit 

Union Central; Ms. Marjorie Skotheim, the chairperson of the 

Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan; Mr. Garf 

Stevenson, the president of Saskatchewan Wheat Pool; Mr. 

Bernard Kirwan, the president of Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities; Mr. Hubert Esquirol, on behalf of the 

Western Canadian Wheat Growers Association, the president; 

Mr. Ken Imhoff, from the National Farmers Union; Mr. John 

Feige, the president of the Saskatchewan Stockgrowers; Mr. 

Richard Wright, the chairman of Sask Pork International 

Marketing Group; and Mrs. Margaret Cline, the chairperson of 

Saskatchewan Women's Agricultural Network. 

 

A number of names have come forward, I think in excess of 20, 

possibly over 30; I'm not sure of the exact number.  Some 

names appear a number of times nominated mutually by a 

number of individuals.  The intent is to create a committee of 

nine which could function on three sites with a chairman or 

vice-chairman functioning with two board members at any 

given time. 

 

And again the need for this group to have the confidence of the 

public is obvious. And it's our intent to proceed with the 

establishment of that committee in a way that will engender 

public confidence. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, I 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3091 

think as I've gone through this, it has become more and more 

evident to me that the power that the board will have will be 

very significant.  And I just want to read an enforcement of 

orders explanation for the members of the Assembly to 

understand that an order of the Farm Tenure Arbitration Board 

may be filed with the Court of Queen's Bench for enforcement. 

 

Now we're talking about some very serious implications if 

they're going to provide the enforcement or be required to 

provide the enforcement.  Then it goes on to say that once it 

has been filed an order of the Farm Tenure Arbitration Board 

will be enforced as a judgement of the court. 

 

Now under due process the procedure has, many times, 

people's arguments heard before the public in a jury fashion.  

But once it has been filed here it will be an order of the court to 

determine that the individual will have no recourse.  And then 

27.41(6) says applications before the courts will be handled in 

a similar fashion as applications to the Farm Tenure Arbitration 

Board.  The court can make any order which the board could 

have made. 

 

Now that tells me that you can either go to Queen's Bench 

Court or go to the Farm Tenure Arbitration Board and you will 

get the same recourse.  And I wonder at the appointments that 

you're going to make.  And I respect all of the people that you 

talked about but, as I pointed out before lunch, there is a 

serious function that these people have to provide.  And what 

you have to have is consistency in the law. 

 

What you're going to have -- and the observation you made -- 

you're going to have three here and three there and three at a 

different place.  If there isn't consistency in the decisions being 

made by individuals, you'll have this thing blow up in your face 

before you even get started.  And that has serious implications, 

not only for your program but for how people are going to 

establish whether or not they're going to have a fair treatment 

either as a lender or as a farmer. 

 

And so I guess my view would be that, number one, you don't 

have a legal value set on the proceedings . . . or you have a 

legal value set on the proceedings and the proceedings have a 

legal value, and they're bound by a court, and the Queen's 

Bench is going to have to enforce them. 

 

And so if we're going to have a typical appointment process 

that has been dealt with by other boards and commissions that 

we've seen, that isn't good enough for what we're anticipating is 

going to be happening here.  And we would expect that these 

people need to have, number one, some experience in a court of 

law, some experience in dealing with agriculture -- because I 

don't want that value to be lost -- and some experience in 

dealing with credit and credit values in relation to mortgages. 

 

And I think you have to be very careful how you choose them.  

And the reason I say that, if you choose individuals who have 

experience in one of these areas, you are going to have a 

serious distortion in some of these committees that you're going 

to set up.  And so I'm not very sure that 

I'm very happy with the way you've got that set up, with the 

power they have to deal with the functions that they're going to 

provide.  Can you give me an explanation of that. 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well first of all, I would like to invite any 

suggestions from the members opposite in terms of any 

strengthening of the process or the personnel that have been put 

forward. 

 

I believe the financial institutions that have been participating 

in the negotiations on the Bill, and who in fact designed the 

farm debt arbitration process that has been recommended to the 

government, have the interests of justice at heart in making the 

recommendations they did to us about how the process should 

be structured. 

 

I want to say that this Farm Tenure Arbitration Board does not 

take action unless somebody is appealing to it.  The fact is that 

farmers can first access voluntary mediation before they even 

enter into foreclosure actions or other negotiations on debt with 

their lenders.  They then presumably will engage in 

negotiations with their lender with respect to the settlement of 

the debt and with respect to any leases that they . . . the 

conditions of the lease that they would undertake under this 

Act.  And it is only after the negotiations have happened and 

only if negotiations are not satisfactory to the farmer that they 

would appeal to the Farm Tenure Arbitration Board. 

 

It's my understanding from present mediation processes that 

ignoring negotiations, where I presume most of the deals are 

settled presently under the Act, 75 to 80 per cent of those cases 

not settled in negotiations are successfully dealt with in 

mediation.  That continues to be an opportunity, and so the 

expectation is that it will be a minority of cases that will come 

before the board, and the board will be working in the context 

of strictly defined regulations in order that there may be justice 

done in every case.  And if there are suggestions from members 

opposite in terms of considerations with respect to that process, 

we'd be only too pleased to hear that advice. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, there are some people 

who have had significant experience in some of these areas.  

And I'm not sure that I know all of them, but we have from 

various parts of this province legal counsels who have been 

handling work on behalf of farmers.  And I think that they 

would have a very clear understanding of what was going on.  I 

would also say that we have had significant representation, I 

think, of very good value of the Mediation Services Board that 

have been providing, I believe, some very fair assessments to 

the courts for the process that has been involved. 

 

And some of these people who have had experience in this area 

are needed on this board.  And I don't think you're going to find 

them just by going down a list of farm organizations.  I think 

you need some very, very precise experienced people in 

dealing with the kinds of things we're talking about. 

 

I would make this suggestion to you, Mr. Minister, that the 

Saskatchewan bar association needs to be asked for qualified 

people who have dealt with farm debt and dealt 



3092 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

with it in the courts and understand it in the courts.  I believe 

you need farm people who have been involved in mediating the 

opportunity and the responsibilities, and we've had significant 

experience of that in the past five, six years. 

 

We have . . . the head of the Mediation Services is a very 

strong individual, has very capable attributes in delivering the 

kinds of things that I think we want to have in this board.  Your 

Farm Land Security Board have also got some individuals who 

have experience.  Your Farm Debt Review Board has also got 

experience in relation to this. 

 

But if you want to take and make a legal person -- because he's 

going to have to make decisions in a court -- if you want to 

make him be a lawyer in short course, you're going to have 

serious problems because you can't challenge this in a court 

situation.  You can't give a balance to the decisions being 

made.  And you have to have consistency and it has to be 

established over a long period of time. 

 

And I think that that is very significant in dealing with the 

issues that we have to deal with as you've established them in 

this Bill.  And I want to have some response from you on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to answer the last 

point first with respect to access to the courts.  Before the 

parties access the Farm Tenure Arbitration Board, if they are in 

doubt about the . . . or if they lack confidence in the process, 

they can access the courts in advance. 

 

I want to say that, with respect to the nominations, the agencies 

that we have consulted all bring the same concern and respect 

for the need to be disciplined about that as you are suggesting 

here, and it's our observation from the names they have sent 

forward that they are not asking for representatives from their 

organizations.  They are submitting to us names of people that 

they respect who bring the qualities that you describe. 

 

I can say that in fact some of the organizations are concerned 

that in order that the boards may have impartiality and to be 

seen to impartial, that they do not want people linked too 

closely to their organizations.  I know when I met with the 

Canadian Bankers' Association, they were concerned that 

someone on the board not be seen to have a banking bias that's 

sitting there.  They want good, independent people sitting on 

those boards that will represent a fair and just tribunal that can 

look at these issues. 

 

I want to say with respect to the people that you have 

suggested, who are very qualified and experienced people in 

that area, I can only agree with you.  One of the facts is that 

these people are in one stage or the other presently still going 

to be involved in the process with farmers and their expertise 

will be accessible.  As well, under the Bill, it's stated: 

 

 The board may: engage the services of any legal counsel, 

consultants and technical advisers that it considers 

appropriate to assist the board in carrying out its 

responsibilities; 

So that there are two options.  One is that we can consult and 

we will consult the Canadian Bar Association, Saskatchewan 

branch, for advice on the question that you raise with respect to 

legal advice with respect to the board.  So there are two 

options: one is to have people who are respected in farm law 

actually sitting on the board; the other is that they be accessible 

to the board on a contractual basis.  And we will again ask 

those questions and clarify those points before the final board 

appointments are made. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- If I could be so bold as to make another 

observation that I think is necessary, I would suggest that a 

policy be followed similar to the counselling and assistance for 

farmers, where the farmer had the capacity to choose.  Now 

because we have the lender and farmer both involved, I would 

suggest you do it in an arbitration-based focus where you have 

the individuals on a list.  The farmer could choose which one 

he wanted to have; the lender could choose which one he 

wanted to have.  And if you had a common individual to 

co-ordinate that, that was selected by both of them, then you 

would have a basis for a decision making that would have the 

vested interests of both parties plus a common individual who 

understood all the aspects of what he was responsible for. 

 

And I would make this suggestion that that's the kind of 

process you use in dealing with the matter.  Then you could 

have the individual say I was represented by the individual who 

I chose.  And it would also lend itself, Mr. Minister, to this 

very important point -- that those people who were providing 

the best service would get the demand for the service, and then 

it wouldn't be arbitrarily put on by the board.  And I think that 

that kind of process would enhance the credibility of the board 

in its own self-determination. 

 

And I think that that's a very important . . . would be a very 

important asset to the continuation of stability in the board.  I'd 

like to have your comment on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the 

suggestions of the member opposite, and I'll ask our officials to 

consider that. 

 

There is a difference between the CAFF (counselling and 

assistance for farmers program) situation and the situation here 

which I think again only re-emphasizes the member opposite's 

point, and that is that we will have only nine people on the 

committee.  And if client A is selecting three or two with an 

independent chair . . . or one pair of the lender and the farmer 

choosing two and someone else would like also one of the 

members . . . it may become a bit of a difficult process 

logistically. 

 

But the point is well made with respect to consideration of 

allowing the client to choose.  Can make no promises on that. 

 

In the CAFF situation, I think there were probably 40 or 50 

people from whom the farmers could make their choices, and 

here we have a smaller number.  But I think it does 

re-emphasize the need for having nine people in whom 

everybody would have confidence and who are seen to 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3093 

be impartial in every case. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I think you need to seriously take that 

into consideration because then . . . I'm not sure I explained it 

right because as you explained it back to me, I didn't think that 

that was what I had said.  So what I will do is just give it to you 

again. 

 

In the CAFF, the individuals selected the three people to be 

involved, and I say just do it like a arbitration where . . . like 

wage negotiations or anything like that where each party 

chooses one and let the third be mutual choice in settling the 

disagreement.  And that's what I would say would be a step in 

the right direction.  Then you have confidence in the 

individuals providing the assessments. 

 

I also want to indicate . . . well I'll give you a chance to respond 

to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Again I think I understood the question 

correctly and I will try and respond in a way that brings our 

minds to the same point here.  In the process of selecting 

arbitration panels in labour disputes, and I have participated on 

some occasions in that situation, one is selecting from an 

infinite pool where people are identified by both sides that can 

become part of that panel and then an independent chairperson 

is agreed upon. 

 

The CAFF situation isn't exactly parallel because I believe the 

farmer had the choice of selecting the panel that dealt with their 

particular circumstances.  But they were selecting the panel 

from a pool of I believe 40 or 50 previously identified people.  

So the group was very large. 

 

When wanting to identify the nine best people to serve in this 

capacity on the Farm Tenure Arbitration Board, one needs to 

assume that they all have the qualities that would bring fairness 

and public accountability to the process.  But one also needs to 

assume that chances are most of them will be busy at a number 

of times when there are larger loads of clients who seek the 

advice of the Farm Tenure Arbitration Board. 

 

I appreciate the suggestion and I'll ask our officials to consider 

to what extent that can be part of the process.  But I'm 

suggesting that there may be circumstances under which it's 

impractical.  But we appreciate the suggestion in terms of 

making everybody feel good about the process. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Another point that has been made to me, Mr. 

Minister, that I think . . . Well I'll go back to this one and then 

we can finish it off.  My view of it would be this way.  We 

could probably have the lender establish who his representative 

was that was outside of the board that you're going to establish. 

 

We could have the farmer select the individual that would be 

outside of the board that he would like to have represented, and 

the board provide the third-party, common-interest individual 

who the two of them would select from.  And that would give 

you a broad dynamic.  That would give you the capacity of the 

individual who perhaps has been dealing with this farmer for 

the last 10 

years in negotiating through the lender the opportunity to 

present the case as he sees it on behalf of the farmer.  And then 

the lender who has had his own representation in the case could 

do exactly the same thing and then the common-interest person 

could then provide the balance.  And that person established by 

you.  I wouldn't see any problem. 

 

But I have a significant problem dealing with the balance that 

this sets up across the province.  If you have three men sit 

down in Carlyle, Saskatchewan and three men in St. Walburg, 

the circumstances are totally different and decisions will be 

made that are totally different.  But people have a tendency to 

blend the information until it becomes the same, and then 

you've got a serious problem in the whole function. 

 

And that, I think, would seriously enhance the opportunity to 

develop across-the-province kind of mediation.  The significant 

impact of the mediation services in the province of 

Saskatchewan under the direction of the heads of those . . . of 

the Farm Debt, Farm Land, and the Mediation Services has 

been the consistency of the individuals providing the 

judgements. 

 

And I have had significant exposure to the people that have 

provided it and have had the courts render their decisions on 

the basis of one or the other, and I have not had a great deal of 

complaining about the functions of those individuals.  And the 

reason is because there's consistency.  There isn't a diversity of 

responses.  And it's even more significant given the power that 

these individuals have.  And when you throw this all into the 

mix, consider that as an option to be dealt with in the future. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I appreciate the concern the member 

opposite brings to this issue.  I think it is genuinely reflecting 

the concern that all of us have that this process be as fair as 

possible. 

 

I believe some of the comments of the member from . . . that 

the member from Morse himself makes would suggest the 

correctness of the process that has been chosen and reflected to 

us by the committee on which both farmers and lenders sat, in 

that the consistency of consideration is important. 

 

The consistency of consideration is a practice in the models the 

member opposite has used as examples, with respect to 

Mediation Services.  We contract with reliable and trained 

people to carry those out and it is an excellent service. 

 

And with respect to the Farm Land Security Board, we use a 

consistent group of highly qualified people who can bring a 

degree of consistency to the consideration because they have a 

common experience with the hearings they have. 

 

So I think . . . I appreciate the import of the concerns of the 

member opposite and I hope that his expectations for this 

process will be met through this model which follows very 

much on the models the member has used in giving examples 

of what a good process looks like. 



3094 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I will just make this final point on it and 

then we'll go on to the next one.  And that is that if you have 

different decisions made and because it's binding on the court, 

the consistency has to be real.  It cannot be perceived to be 

real; it has to be real.  And there is significant pressure in 

people's minds that they don't mind being told what they have 

to do, but if they hear a year later or six months later that 

someone else got those kinds of circumstances exactly as 

theirs, the order was different, then there will be serious 

implications.  Then I don't know what will happen, because of 

the strength of the decisions that you're making in your Bill. 

 

I have one other thing that concerns me, and I've had it raised, 

and that is the judicial sale component.  I know you sent your 

legal counsel to visit with me and I made this observation, that 

the judicial sale component should have some impact because 

the court has already determined what was to happen.  And 

now this individual will have the land given back even though 

a third party purchased it.  The individual farmer will have the 

capacity to accept or reject that yet. 

 

And I think there are some . . . there comes a point in time 

when the determination has been made and a final 

determination has been made, and I would suggest that if the 

court has determined that that's what is going to be done, then I 

would say that the determination of the court should be final. 

 

It's been raised with me on a number of occasions with 

individuals who have purchased on the basis of a judicial sale.  

Now they're going to have to lease this land to an individual 

who they maybe purchased it from, or through, or whatever.  

And that causes a significant problem in my view because the 

court has determined that a sale should take place.  The court 

has held the sale, and it's been concluded.  And so at some 

point in time I think that there has to be a finalization of this, 

and I believe that on these cases that the court has determined 

that that's the final sale. 

 

And I'd like to have your explanation of this so that I can tell 

the people that that's what's going to happen. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the concern the member 

opposite has is a real one and was considered by the 

committee.  The first point is that this clause, this 

consideration, is not retroactive, so it will only apply to those 

judicial sales that take place from the day of proclamation of 

the Act. 

 

I understand that judicial sales represent a very small 

percentage of the group of dealings with land that is being lost 

-- possibly less than 10 per cent.  And of that 10 per cent, a 

majority of the purchases through judicial sale are again made 

by the original lender of the money for the land. 

 

It's necessary in the Act to protect against the possibility of the 

judicial sale being a mechanism which would skirt the purpose 

of the leaseback mechanism.  So it's put into there for that 

reason.  And prospective purchasers will be aware that that is 

part of the Act, and they will make their decision with respect 

to purchase at judicial sale knowing that is the fact in the Act. 

It was a matter of serious consideration by the board, but it was 

felt that if it was not dealt with in that fashion, then the 

potential for skirting the purposes of the legislation was there. 

 

And again I believe from our extensive ongoing discussions 

with all the parties to the original discussions that that's an 

acceptable solution for them. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd ask leave of 

the Assembly to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to 

introduce to you today, sir, and to the other members of the 

Assembly some guests in the west gallery.  I'm very pleased to 

have here today my parents, Don and Dorothy Swenson, and 

I'd ask them to stand; and their guests, from Pullman, 

Washington State, Jessie and Shirley Davis, who farm in the 

Pollus country of Washington.  And we're very glad to have 

them here visiting. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 57 (continued) 

 

Clause 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The concern I 

guess I have is that the future after the Bill was visible to the 

people sets a pattern for what will happen; but what caused the 

problem was, from the time that you announced the decision 

and what you were planning on doing to the time that the Bill 

actually came out, there were land transactions that took place.  

And on those . . . They should be treated a little differently 

because the circumstances involving those are a little different.  

And I'll give you the rationale for the observation made to me 

by the individual who contacted me. 

 

He said, I purchased the land from the lender.  The former 

owner is now going to have an opportunity to get a leaseback 

from the lender.  And then he will have to lease it from the new 

owner in the judicial sale.  And if I'm wrong on that, then you 

need to very clearly establish what the rules and the procedures 

of that very function are going to be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the expression 

of concern by the member opposite that the . . . We will have to 

make that clear to people, that land bought at a judicial sale 

will not have that right attached until after the proclamation of 

the Act.  So that anything that's happened up until that time, the 

purchaser will have the rights to that land unless there are some 

other legal proceeding that I don't know about at the moment.  

But we'll have to make that clear. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So that I understand this absolutely perfectly: 

the individual where there has been a judicial 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3095 

sale, up to this point or until the proclamation of this Bill, that 

individual will have that land clear? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I will just read from page 6 

of the Bill: 

 

 Subject to subsection (8), where the farm land of a mortgagor 

who is a farmer is sold by way of judicial sale after the 

coming into force of this section, a purchaser of the farm 

land, including the original lender, has the same rights and 

obligations pursuant to section 27.1 . . . as a lender who has 

obtained a final order of foreclosure. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- If I then assess it this way, as you've 

explained it now, and I go back to this individual from 

Mossbank who called me and I say to him he doesn't have to 

worry because his sale took place somewhere in spring, he 

doesn't have to worry about this, then I don't have a significant 

problem. 

 

However, if it's retroactive into that period of time where 

you've got a no-man's land, there is significant problems in 

relation to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

opposite can assure the farmer who called him that that's true, 

that if his purchase under judicial sale was made before the 

proclamation of the Act, then there is no responsibility with 

respect to the leaseback. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Can I get an explanation of how the CAFF 

works in dealing with the single units?  Can you make 

application for -- and the point I want to get it to is -- can you 

make application for the two sections or the 36,000 

assessment?  Can you make application and have more land 

that is in question?  Can you have more land in the transfer of 

the lease and only the component of the two sections or the 

36,000 having a part of this program as a subsidy, if you will, 

to the program? 

 

Can you define it that where the two sections fits in or the 

36,000 fits in to a guy that has four sections in this case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the program is designed in 

such a way that the maximum that can be owned or leased 

under the program is double the 1,280, that there is a limit at 

2,560 acres or $72,000 assessment to what can be otherwise 

owned or leased under the program total, with the limit that can 

be leased under the program at 1,280 and 36,000 assessment.  

But that if the farmer leases land additionally to that, that that 

doesn't become an issue with respect to this program.  So other 

arrangements are free to occur. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So if the person goes over 1,280 acres and 

then he's got 1,000 acres above that, that doesn't apply to the 

discussion on the process for lease, or that doesn't apply to 

and/or the subsidy given to the individual?  That's what I 

wanted to know. 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I'm not sure if there's another concern 

that's not being quite stated arising out of the member 

opposite's question, Mr. Chairman. 

With respect to any concern that may be in the member's 

question, with respect to a farmer dumping land to the financial 

institution, the regulations will prevent that kind of action 

because people who fit into the exemptions will be disqualified 

from their leases.  So if that's an issue here, there should be no 

concern about that. 

 

But at the other end, at the end of the farmer's eligibility for the 

program, it is . . . as the member opposite suggests, the limit for 

the farmer's participation in the program and compensation is 

1,280 acres or $36,000 assessment.  The farmer could own an 

additional 1,280 acres and $36,000 assessment to total 2,580 

and 72,000.  That would be the maximum owned and leased 

under the program land that the farmer could have.  And any 

other arrangements that the farmer participates in are of no 

interest to the program. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I'm not sure I understand that yet.  The 

total cap, as I gather now, is 72 . . . Let's just forget about the 

sections and deal with the assessment.  So if you've got a 

36,000 assessment, you can access the program.  If you have 

72,000 assessment or over, you can go up to the 36 and that's it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, that I believe would be the 

interpretation.  If you owned exactly $72,000 in assessment and 

lost one quarter, you would be eligible to lease it back.  If you 

owned whatever -- 72,000 plus the value of that quarter and 

lost the quarter, you would not . . . it moves up to that cap. But 

within it, the eligibility is limited, first, by the total amount 

that's going to be in the program; and secondly, by the total 

land owned and participating in the program. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So that a person going in there with three 

sections of land under the assessment would have that cap at 

72,000 and it wouldn't be at the 36.  Okay.  Now I understand 

that.  Then the cap has significant ceiling over and above what 

he would qualify. 

 

Now I guess what I assumed -- it was in the explanation that I 

read there -- I assumed that if you had two people on a farm 

and they had a combination of 72,000, that was the maximum 

they could go. 

 

Let's use a hypothetical case like the Matador Co-op Farm for 

an example where that assessment would be far in excess of the 

72,000 but there is significant more individuals involved.  I'm 

not suggesting that they're in financial difficulty at all.  I'm just 

using that as an example. How would that translate itself into 

working this program through? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, while the regulations have 

not dealt with the issue you raise, it is in the Act.  And it is the 

intent of the . . . will be the intent of the regulations to treat 

families as family units and their limits would be multiples of 

the family units participating. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I know there are 

people in the gallery that have some interest in FCC (Farm 

Credit Corporation) and would be interested in knowing how 

this legislation is going to fit with the operation of the Farm 

Credit Corporation in the province of Saskatchewan. 



3096 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

And maybe you could elaborate on some of the . . . perhaps the 

negotiations that have gone on.  Because evidently FCC will 

operate under one set of principles, as I understand it, and this 

legislation will force the credit unions and other financial 

institutions to operate under something differently. 

 

How's that going to fit and what implications would that have 

for the average farmer that might have FCC property credit, 

farm credit loans, and then in some cases they might have a 

credit union loan and some cases ACS (Agricultural Credit 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) and some cases a bank? 

 

But specifically, how's FCC going to operate, and to the best of 

your knowledge, how will it fit with what you're doing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I had attempted to address that question 

earlier and I will address it again and then maybe if I miss a 

point the member can ask for clarification. 

 

The Act as it's written applies to the Farm Credit Corporation 

and therefore clients of the Farm Credit Corporation are 

entitled to the same benefits as clients acting with any other 

lender in the province. 

 

With respect to their commitment to participate, there have 

been two discussions.  I have met with Jim Hewitt, the 

president of the Farm Credit Corporation.  In that conversation, 

when we were introducing the Bill I believe, or it was around 

that time, he said that Farm Credit Corporation would follow 

the program. 

 

It was several days later that the minister in charge made 

comments suggesting there may be a challenge.  It's my hope 

that that would be an unnecessary act because this Act 

contemplates not very much different action from the Farm 

Credit Corporation than they are presently engaged in. 

 

Farm Credit Corporation now frequently engages in leases of 

six years and longer.  Farm Credit Corporation has said 

publicly and to us privately that they provide leases to about 80 

per cent or 82 per cent of those who forfeit their land to them. 

 

So the action described and the rights described under this Bill 

for farmers would not require significantly different action 

from the Farm Credit Corporation than they presently engage 

in.  Often it would simply add for the farmers the right to 

access the Farm Tenure Arbitration Board if they happen to be 

one of the 18 per cent who have not received the right of 

leaseback from the Farm Credit Corporation. 

 

So while there hasn't been a final statement by the federal 

government in any written form, I think the six-year leaseback 

feature probably has its roots in the fact that Farm Credit 

Corporation already often does it, because they participated 

fully in the discussion with the other lenders and with the 

farmers and the other officials that were at the table in bringing 

forward the Farm Debt Advisory Committee report. 

And so I think it would seem to us to be reasonable that they 

would want to follow this practice which doesn't ask much 

more of them. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- If a Farm Credit client farmer had, say, five 

sections of land and he was going to turn that back, under the 

provisions of this legislation, say, two sections would be leased 

automatically because of this Bill, would Farm Credit be 

obliged to do the same with the other three?  Or what 

implication does it have in that situation? 

 

And secondly, could you table any understanding -- any legal 

understanding or table anything that would set out how Farm 

Credit and the province is going to deal with this in a parallel 

sense or side by side so that farmers have some understanding, 

other than Hansard here, how it's going to work.  Is there 

anything that you could table here that you have negotiated 

with FCC? 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the Leader of the 

Opposition for that question. 

 

This procedure applies to the Farm Credit Corporation as it 

applies to all other lenders with respect to the first question the 

member opposite asked.  That is to say that the CAFFs would 

apply as it would to the Royal Bank or the credit union; that 

Farm Credit, in the interests of their client, may wish to offer 

leases beyond the requirements of the program but the 

requirements with respect to the CAFFs would apply to them 

as well as to everyone else. 

 

With respect to the application of the law, farm foreclosure 

legislation applies to Farm Credit Corporation just like other 

lenders.  They were bound by the 1988 Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act and they are bound by these provisions as well. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I'm not sure that you answered the first part of 

the question.  Could you take that five sections of land turned 

back by FCC, and two automatically apply -- assuming that 

they're under the $36,000 assessment or two sections -- what 

happens to the other three?  Can they sell it?  Can they lease it 

to somebody else?  Do they have to do the same thing as . . . 

What do they do with the other three? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  I hope I can clarify 

the question and the answer. 

 

The process applies equally to all lenders.  If five sections are 

turned back to any lender, and two sections are eligible under 

the leaseback because their assessment will exceed $36,000, 

the lender would be required to lease the two sections.  And 

they could take any other action with respect to the other three 

sections that they wish, recognizing that the farmer would 

have, if the land were put up for sale, the right of first refusal 

for purchase. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think you've got an 

administrative difficulty there.  I mean we can think of lots of 

situations where it's going to be extremely complicated.  And 

I'm going to let my colleague pick up on that. 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3097 

But while I'm on my feet in this sense, I had a meeting with the 

board of directors of the Estevan Credit Union.  They weren't 

happy with this Bill, as you probably know.  And they said 

they had talked to you or your officials, and they quite frankly 

didn't know that they could convince you not to do this.  But 

they were worried.  And they were worried because they didn't 

think that they could afford it.  And they were worried about 

what the board of directors would do in terms of future loans 

into agriculture, given the fact that there was this new 

obligation on local co-ops. 

 

Now I know that you must be convinced in your own mind that 

credit unions can handle this and manage it.  But briefly what 

do you tell the credit unions, or could you tell the Estevan 

Credit Union and its members and its membership, that would 

give them the comfort that this Bill is not going to be onerous 

such . . . if it's an onerous Bill, that it will force them not to do 

the things that they traditionally do.  It's going to be costly, and 

it could have an impact on how they view credit into the 

agricultural community. 

 

So credit unions obviously have not got the national capacity 

that a bank does -- some of the chartered banks.  They are 

locally driven, locally financed, local people's money.  And so 

there's very little cross-subsidization, if you will.  Or the deep 

pocket isn't there; it's not as deep. 

 

I would like to know what you say to them that gives them the 

comfort that they're going to endorse this or they're going to 

feel that this is a good idea.  Because from what I've heard and 

from meeting with the board they were, as you probably know, 

were not impressed; they didn't like it.  So you must . . . is there 

something . . . What do you say to them that gives them that 

comfort? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I hope I can enunciate the 

five or six points fairly quickly, and the member opposite can 

then maybe address the individual ones for further clarification.  

I want to say that we have been in extensive discussions with 

credit unions wherever we've had the chance, and officials have 

addressed them frequently.  And there are a number of points 

that we bring forward.  One is that this is a balanced program 

that has advantages for credit unions and for other financial 

institutions. 

 

First of all there is no obligation under this program to deal 

with new debt, so that there is hopefully a comfort with the 

financial institutions that what we're dealing with here is 

creating security of tenure for people encumbered by debt that 

has accumulated till now, believing that there is an excessive 

debt for a number of people in the system. 

 

With respect to the willingness of credit unions to offer credit, 

it would seem to me that if there is no impact of this program 

on future lending, and recognizing that this program came 

about because of the joint recommendations of financial 

institutions sitting with farmers, that they clearly will have no 

fear that government is perpetrating something on them. 

 

They have participated in the design of this and it would 

be my intent, if there would be contemplated further change 

with respect to debt, that we would yet again use this very 

broad process which has proved so successful and for which I 

give a great deal of credit to the credit unions and the banks 

and ACS and FCC, along with the farmers who sat at the table, 

and the officials.  That in fact this has been a jointly designed 

program, so it's not something that came out of the blue. 

 

The impact of the program, because farmers will have the 

opportunity to remain on their land, ought to stabilize land 

values since land will not be entering the market where it may 

otherwise have been entering the market.  And so that land 

values should be stabilized as a result of this program. 

 

The provision provides a small protection in one area where 

farmers cannot declare a home quarter after a mortgage is on it, 

and that wasn't clear previously in law, so that there isn't the 

opportunity to protect against the creditor land by creating a 

home quarter where there is a debt. 

 

The provision, especially for credit unions, also provides that 

farmers can waive their rights to exemptions for specific 

properties, which means that farmers can use that provision to 

access credit, but it also opens the door for credit unions to 

offer credit in an area that previously was restricted to other 

financial institutions. 

 

Additional benefits arise because it is presumed that because of 

the voluntary mediation, that financial institutions will 

experience for a shorter period of time the difficulty associated 

with getting no compensation for the land they hold. 

 

There have been a number of examples where financial 

institutions have simply not received payment because the 

farmer's not been able to make provision to make payment on 

their land for extended periods of time, and there has been no 

easy way out of it if they've entered that process that's here and 

it's extended sometimes two, three, four years.  And during that 

time the financial institutions in fact hold that land rent free, in 

a sense, because they're waiting to make settlements. 

 

It's believed that on average this program will reduce that 

period when financial institutions are in that position and the 

farmers are experiencing stress.  So it's in everybody's interest 

to shorten it by, on average, a half a year. 

 

It's also true of this program that presently, sometimes lenders 

provide leases beyond two years in making a debt settlement 

with farmers.  And under this program they would be 

compensated for any period above the two years for which they 

offer the lease, which is also a net benefit to the financial 

institutions. 

 

So there are a number of positives here, and we believe that the 

total impact of this Bill will be to stabilize land values and to 

actually make a safer environment for the credit union system.  

It's clearly in all of our interests to maintain the strength of this 

system which is central to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Can I assume then that the credit unions 



3098 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

will endorse and are endorsing this Bill?  And as I asked with 

FCC, if you've got anything that you could table on FCC, and 

I'm not sure that you did say . . . Would you table anything 

from the credit unions that do endorse this.  Or can you table 

anything from the Farm Credit that do endorse it. 

 

And I understand that the Bill has a sunset clause that it ends in 

1996 or '97.  Is there anything to prevent you from amending 

the Bill between now and then to pick up additional years so 

that in fact 1993 and '4 and '5 you could kind of collect, and 

you could in the hopper and say, well we'll include those as 

well?  I don't think there would be.  So that in theory you could 

keep bringing this up.  While it is sunsetted in '97 you could 

bring on new debt with an amendment, which is always 

possible -- not only amendment, you could have new Bills or 

whatever.  So is that a possibility? 

 

And number two, could you table any correspondence from 

either the credit unions or FCC that would indicate how they 

plan to co-operate and whether in fact they do endorse what 

you've just said in your five points? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Just on the . . . Mr. Chairman, with respect 

to the question the member opposite asked with respect to 

amending the Bill.  This Bill has come forward as a result of a 

most co-operative process that has grown out of a recognition 

that there is a farm debt crisis in Saskatchewan now with a 

particular history to it, and that farmers need stability and it's in 

everyone's interest to provide that stability for farmers.  That's 

the origin of this Bill. 

 

I should say that the representative of the Canadian Bankers' 

Association, the representative of the Credit Union Central, the 

representatives of a number of other organizations, signed off 

on this Bill.  I want also to say that the Farm Credit 

representatives participated fully until the tabling of the report.  

I want to say that they did not sign the report, but it was 

technically at that point on the question of federal legislation 

that said they couldn't offer land for more than five years, 

which is a technicality which they have overcome repeatedly 

by simply making an order in council, I believe.  So it was on a 

technical point that the Farm Credit representatives did not sign 

on to the original report, but they made a very positive 

contribution to the discussions. 

 

(1545) 

 

The discussions continued to be positive with officials.  And I 

think when the Bill is passed we can come to a quick 

resolution, because I believe that the federal government is as 

interested as the people in the province of giving farmers the 

right of access to their land when they have lost it through 

circumstances which have befallen them which they could 

hardly control themselves. 

 

With respect to any documentation, we have no documentation, 

no signed commitment from Farm Credit Corporation that they 

will co-operate.  But it's certainly our belief from my 

conversation with their president that it would be their intent to 

do so, and certainly it would be my expectation that the 

farmers' interests are also the 

interests of the federal government. 

 

With respect to credit unions and the other financial 

institutions, we have engaged in ongoing discussions with them 

since the tabling of the report.  They have, as you would expect 

and by the questions you ask, obviously have their own set of 

particular concerns relative to the implementation of a report 

that they all joined in in presenting.  And they have engaged in 

diligent work with our officials to clarify and to modify the 

document to be one which is mutually agreeable. 

 

And there are a couple of fine points which are still under 

discussion, but I believe I can say that both the Credit Union 

Central, the credit unions they represent, and all the members 

of the Canadian Bankers' Association that are here in 

Saskatchewan, have put a very great deal, a very positive effort 

into this exercise and I want to commend them, along with the 

farm organizations who have helped fine tune the legislation 

which is implementing the report which was originally brought 

forward.  Without all of that commitment from both the farm 

organizations and the financial institutions, this Bill would not 

have been possible to be brought forward in such a 

co-operative atmosphere. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, in a 

response to the Leader of the Opposition on a scenario where 

Farm Credit owned five sections, his interpretation of the Act 

was a 36,000 assessment cap or two.  I need some clarification 

here.  Because in the earlier answer to the member from Morse 

you said that there was the 72,000 assessment cap that applied.  

So what you're saying is then, if the individual has five 

sections, it's the 72,000 assessment that's the line, or is it the 

36,000?  Which is it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it depends on whether the 

farmer is losing all five sections or not.  If the farmer . . . if 

there were five sections and each section had an assessment of 

$18,000, then the . . . just waiting for the member to finish 

reading there to try and clarify it.  If the farmer had five 

sections and each section had an assessment of $18,000, and if 

two sections were lost to the Farm Credit Corporation, the 

farmer would be eligible to lease one under the program 

because he would be limited, or she would be limited by the 

total limit of $72,000 assessment. 

 

If the farmer lost all five sections to the Farm Credit 

Corporation, the farmer would be eligible for leaseback for two 

of those sections because only $36,000 of assessment or two 

sections is eligible for the program.  And the other three 

sections could be dealt with between them as they would 

choose.  The Farm Credit Corporation could lease it 

independently of the program.  They could put it up for sale 

and the farmer could have the right of first refusal. 

 

But there are two limits.  The first is that no one can have more 

than 1,280 acres or $36,000 assessment under the program.  

The other limit is that the farmer cannot own or have under 

their program a total amount of land whose greater than 2,560 

or a total assessment of 72,000. 

 

The Chair: -- Before the member for Thunder Creek gets 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3099 

back on, some of the questions that are being posed are 

extremely complex and there are officials in the back who I 

think need to hear what the questions are.  It becomes difficult 

for them to do that if members persist in carrying on 

conversations in the vicinity of those officials.  If they want to 

carry on their conversations, I ask them to take their 

conversations somewhere else in the Chamber or outside the 

Chamber. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well I find this 

confusing, Mr. Minister, because you're saying that FCC has a 

mortgage with an individual of five sections of land.  The 

individual runs into trouble with that mortgage.  He then, as I 

understand sections of the Bill, decides to turn back say half 

the farm -- okay? -- to FCC under a leaseback.  He then gets to 

pick and choose which quarters out of that two and a half 

sections that he's turning back that he wishes to have in the 

program. 

 

He gets all this done and he is locked into this leasing 

arrangement on two and a half sections, but he still has to deal 

with his normal mortgage with FCC on the other two and a half 

sections.  I'm correct so far?  Okay.  But he can't get the full 

two and a half in so he's going to have two sections under this 

Bill and he'll probably have a half section outside, is that the 

way I understand it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, he would only in this case 

have one section under the . . . protected with the right of lease 

because his total owned and leased could not exceed four 

sections or 72,000 assessment.  So there's a cap that you bump 

into in terms of total owned and leased at four sections and 

72,000 assessment. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay.  So he will pick one section out of the 

two and a half that he has turned back to Farm Credit.  So Farm 

Credit and this individual are still going to have to have an 

arrangement, obviously, for this turn-back, or else he's going to 

have to quitclaim it and go through the federal debt review 

board, whatever solution he can come to. 

 

I find, Mr. Minister -- and this can apply to any other lending 

institution also -- that when you start picking and choosing 

quarters out of say, two and a half sections, and say you've got 

a creek running through the place or you've got a highway 

that's cut across one quarter or you've got something going on 

that will make that particular piece of land either difficult to 

farm or have less value . . . Or I can think of all sorts of 

situations where somebody has a caveat -- a railway company, 

whatever -- across a particular piece, that you wouldn't want it. 

 

Therefore I would think you are going to create a bit of an 

administrative nightmare here down the road, and you will find 

that you will have disjointed pieces of land.  Because if there's 

a creek running through it or something, naturally I'm going to 

get rid of the stuff that the creek's got all chopped up and give 

that back to FCC or to the credit union, and I'll keep the four 

quarters out of there that are nice and flat and well drained, and 

these other guys can worry about those sort of administrative 

nightmares.  Or if the highway's cutting through the middle of 

it or . . . 

 

You and I both have farmed.  We know all of the various 

situations out there when you start chopping up land.  And I'm 

not sure that allowing people to cherry-pick their way through 

this thing is going to be appropriate, and still maintain the 

confidence of the people that you say you have confidence in to 

work with you.  Because they'll be left with odd bits to try and 

come up with something. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I think it is because this 

process has been so broadly consultative, both in its inception 

and in bringing the law and the regulations together, that that 

issue as well has been dealt with under section 27.31(1)(b) 

where it says: 

 

 a lender may apply to the board for a determination of 

whether, or in what form, a lease should be granted to a 

farmer where the farmer intends to lease part but not all of 

the farm land offered for lease and the selection of farm land 

by the farmer: 

 

  (i) creates a problem of access; or 

 

  (ii) unreasonably diminishes the value of any of the farm 

land that was offered for lease. 

 

So that issue has been dealt with.  And as I had said earlier, if 

there are issues that . . . I appreciate the member raising these, 

because if there are issues that come to mind that may not have 

been dealt with by the lenders and the officials dealing with 

this, I appreciate concern being raised because there still are a 

few points of concern that are being addressed between us and 

the lending institutions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I appreciate, Mr. Minister, and I did read that 

point in there where "unreasonably diminishes the value."  At 

no point in here do I determine what type of process is in place 

to determine what is reasonable and what is unreasonable. 

 

If you want to go out here on the Regina plain and take a 

four-section parcel of some of this stuff that has about one inch 

of drop in a half mile, and you take the four quarters in the 

middle of say four sections, I don't think it'll unreasonably 

diminish the value because there's nobody living out there 

anyway.  It's all like that.  And yet you would have difficulty, 

in my view, of maybe accessing that situation.  And I guarantee 

you won't diminish the value of the land, but you might make 

problems. 

 

And I don't know who's going to sort this out according to what 

you have here because you don't have anything in writing from 

Farm Credit or the Credit Union Central that tells me that they 

have agreed to some type of arbitration process or that they 

have agreed to a process where this isn't going to happen.  And 

one only has to drive across this province to know that those 

situations occur in each and every township in this province, 

much less you know, the odd time.  And I'd like you to tell me 

what your process is so that this thing is reasonably dealt with. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the question the member 

opposite reiterates is important and I think again re-emphasizes 

the need for the people who will be on the Farm Tenure 

Arbitration Board to be wise and judicious.  It will be they who 

. . . As the member opposite raises the 



3100 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

concern, and feels that there is a certain kind of choice here 

which would be fair and other kinds of choices which would 

not be, I think we need to expect that those people appointed to 

the Farm Tenure Arbitration Board would have that same sense 

of fairness and would alter the land selection in a case where it 

was clearly disadvantageous to the land that's not selected, as 

described in the Act.  And we would expect the Farm Tenure 

Arbitration Board to make sure that there is fairness in that 

regard. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I need to ask a question about the component 

of the lease package.  As I understand it, if I have Farm Credit 

lease for two years and this program comes in, I have an 

additional four years that I can have under this program.  Is that 

correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes.  The term for which a farmer has the 

right to lease the land is six years.  If they had two already, 

they would be able to access the additional four years.  If they 

had three already, they would still be able to access the 

additional four years.  The limit, the total limit of lease period 

is I believe, eight years under the Act.  And beyond that then 

the four-year period for which the government provides 

compensation is reduced.  So if there had been previously five 

years, the new period would be three; at limit, a total eight. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay.  That explains that. 

 

Can you tell me the relationship of the mediation . . . because 

it's in the Bill here along with all of these explanations that 

we've got.  Can you tell me how the mediation board will 

function in relation to the Farm Tenure Arbitration Board and 

when access will be exclusive to one or to the other, or if that is 

in fact going to happen? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the roots through which the 

debt is resolved are somewhat complex.  One of the 

recommendations that the Farm Debt Advisory Committee 

made was that there be a bringing together of the federal 

process and the provincial process.  That has not yet happened 

but hopefully once the legislation is placed we can begin those 

discussions.  I've had them with Mr. McKnight several months 

ago.  And in principle he was favourable to that although his 

contention was that however the federal process be adjusted to 

fit our needs, it needed to have some standard features that 

were common across Canada.  So we'll see where those 

discussions take us. 

 

The formal mediation process, as the member opposite knows, 

takes the farmer through -- after foreclosure notice -- through 

mediation and the Farm Land Security Board, and if no other 

measure is then . . . if the concerns are not then resolved, then 

there is foreclosure.  Then under this program farmers would 

be offered a lease.  And if the farmer was not pleased with the 

conditions of that lease, then they would have access to the 

Farm Tenure Arbitration Board. 

 

But any other combination of circumstances are also possible.  

Because the farmer could anywhere at this time 

voluntarily access mediation.  So mediation becomes more 

accessible than it was in the previous process where one first 

had to be served foreclosure notice before it could be accessed.  

So it's accessible at any time.  But the formal processes flow 

about the way they did with the exception that now when the 

leases are offered, there is access to the Farm Tenure 

Arbitration Board. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On page 21 of your explanation notes at the 

bottom: this provision will exclude purchase money, 

mortgages, and construction mortgages from the current 

homestead waiver process.  Then you go to the next section 

there too.  It talks about that the determination of whether 

mortgage land is a homestead occurs on the date the mortgage 

is issued. 

 

Are those . . . section 44 and . . . 44, 12.3, and 16 and 17 -- Are 

those to register the process so that individuals cannot signify 

later on which they thought was their home quarters so that 

they have a problem later on?  And can you give me an 

explanation of the exclusion of the purchase money mortgages 

that this deals with.  And then I have a question about hog 

barns in relation to the other part. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, both points, I think the 

member is understanding approximately correctly in each case. 

 

With respect to the declaration of a homestead after the fact, it 

is simply to recognize that I as a farmer cannot use a quarter for 

security, let's say, to access $20,000 credit, and then turn 

around once its mortgaged and declare it my home quarter and 

then have that quarter protected under the homestead protection 

Act, so that I in fact remove from the financial institution their 

right to collect money that they had secured in that land.  That's 

that provision, to clarify that. 

 

With respect to the purchase money mortgages and 

construction mortgages -- it has been a matter of automatic 

process that in a homestead where a farmer wanted to borrow 

money against their home quarter for the purpose of building 

their home or whatever, that an exemption will be given.  And 

this simply makes it automatic in law that that occurs. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Now I want to . . . maybe it's hypothetical, but 

I know it can occur.  Individuals will have a quarter section or 

80 acres that has a dairy farm on it, and that dairy farm could 

be worth a significant amount of money, and there are people 

who have significant investments.  You have hog farms that 

can be on a 40-acre patch, that have significant investment.  

Now let's say these go into . . . and that's the only collateral 

there is.  Is there some protection in here? 

 

Show me how that process would work if that creditor was 

going to foreclose on that, and let's just ignore whether it's the 

homestead.  The house is some place else, and he lives in town 

-- for practical purposes.  But just tell me what will happen to 

that 40 acres.  Does the assessment apply, or how will that 

figure into this?  We could have hog barns; we could have feed 

lots; we could have dairy farms, as I suggested. 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3101 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the officials that have the 

greatest knowledge about assessment have briefly stepped out 

for some discussions with other agencies with respect to 

matters concerned here. 

 

The property would be eligible for lease.  But the questions of 

the assessment as you ask, I'm not sure that they have been 

technically yet described with respect to how the values on the 

improvements on those properties would influence limits. 

 

And if the officials return before we complete this Bill, we'll 

clarify that with you.  If not, we'll clarify it at a later time, 

because it's an important point. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What I'm interested in is how that transferred.  

I know and understand how it will do with farm land.  But how 

does it respond to the things that you have money purchase 

arrangements with on that small acreage and how that will 

relate.  It might be significantly different if there's 10 sections 

of land in this four-family unit and they have a feedlot on there, 

than it would be for a 40-acre piece of ground with a feedlot on 

it.  And I'd like to know how you have that put together. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I would ask the member 

opposite for a few moments for the officials to check the 

application of that with some assessment officials.  And 

meantime maybe we can continue with some other questions. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I have, on page 23 of your explanation notes, 

the explanation says this amendment creates a priority security 

position for the new input production security interest for 

farmers and livestock producers.  Now can you give me an 

explanation of what that means.  If we're moving ahead of 

somebody else, at a time when dates usually are the way that 

security agreements are being dealt with, I want to know what 

it's implying here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I think I will be eligible to 

be the dean of law by the time this process is over.  There is 

another Bill coming up, The Personal Property Security Act, 

which deals specifically with this question.  But the Law 

Reform Commission made the recommendation that input 

security interests be strengthened.  Input security interests are 

those things which . . . those expenses that you have in growing 

a crop, those expenses you have in raising livestock. 

 

Previously only cropping expenses were able to be secured 

with input security interest, and they had no status relative to 

other securities.  And the security was very complicated and 

difficult to obtain. 

 

I'll just give the member a minute to . . . The input security was 

very restrictive and technically difficult to obtain.  The time 

period now which is applicable is broader, the rules by which 

it's accessible are easier, and it is also applicable to livestock.  

And it has been raised to the similar status of purchase money 

security interests which are those interests you would have in 

purchasing a tractor, for example. 

So that the status of the input security interest is raised in the 

general realm of securities from an undefined position to a 

position equal with the PMSI (purchase money security 

interest). 

 

Mr. Martens: -- This, Mr. Chairman, is the reason why the 

credit unions haven't got a problem any longer with some of the 

other things that you're bringing in.  That was the simple 

answer.  I understand it because they did have a problem in 

using other collateral that has already been paid off and they 

couldn't use that as collateral.  Okay. 

 

We have significant problems in how you're going to handle 

the board.  And I guess, from our perspective in dealing with 

the functions of the board, as I see it -- and I don't want to 

imply anything negative here at all -- but I would have a great 

deal of confidence in the three men you have sitting with you 

today to run that board.  But I wouldn't have the same degree of 

confidence in some of the other individuals that you 

mentioned.  Because these people have provided through their 

experience in dealing, not only with law but with agriculture . . 

. they have been dealing with the kinds of things that we are 

currently involved in, because they've had experience in it. 

 

And I want to point that out because what I see happening and 

what we've seen happening is that we have had a significant 

amount of political involvement in the decision-making process 

on boards and commissions.  And I want to put that as frankly 

as I can without causing any irritation.  But we have a concern 

about that, and we don't want to have this going down the road 

and exclusion from the court on a decision made on a political 

basis by individuals who shouldn't be in the process of doing it. 

 

And that's the reason why we have significant concern about 

how these things will work.  And I guess what we need is 

absolute assurance that we're going to do this, just as the 

justices are appointed on the basis of some recommendations 

from the bar and other agencies.  I think that we need to have 

some response from you that will provide us with a little bit of 

confidence in this direction.  And I want you to tell us what 

you're anticipating doing. 

 

And that's why I raised some of the individuals who have had a 

degree of experience in dealing with this.  And that's why I 

raised it from the point of view of having people who have 

been in a legal sense helping farmers and also credit unions and 

banks and Farm Credit Corporation -- I'm not quite as worried 

about the banks and the Farm Credit.  But I think there is 

significant advantage to have the credit unions have confidence 

in individuals that they provide to that arbitration function and 

the people in legal firms. 

 

And I have a great deal of difficulty in having one single unit 

out of Regina dealing with all of the things that happen 

throughout the province.  Because the impact is different in 

North Battleford and Carlyle, and I explained that.  I really 

think that you need to be fairly functionally focused in dealing 

with how you're going to expedite this board. 



3102 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, I want to assure the member opposite 

that his concern is also ours, and that of all of those whom 

we've consulted.  And I make the commitment that we will do 

everything in our power to make this a high-quality and 

impartial body that has the absolute respect of all those dealing 

with it, both lenders and farmers. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I just have a couple of questions, Mr. 

Chairman.  I want to go back to the example . . . the member 

from Morse was talking about a feedlot or a value added 

situation that has occurred in a farming operation.  Obviously it 

has a different lending criteria. 

 

I'm sure that Jim Hewitt in his discussions with you on this 

particular item mentioned that FCC are coming forward with a 

legislative package to the federal parliament to allow them to 

do more value added, more diversification-orientated things; 

rather than trying to get bigger farm units, that they concentrate 

on the customers that they have and try and enhance their 

lending criteria in that way. 

 

I didn't find your explanation of how assessment and how this 

Bill is going to affect those situations to be one that would give 

me a lot of comfort with FCC going forward to the federal 

parliament with what may be a fairly large lending package to 

Saskatchewan farmers.  And if this thing is going to get in the 

way of them coming forward with a package that enhances us 

because you don't recognize certain criteria, I'm going to be 

slightly disappointed.  And I'd like your comment on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, one of our officials has 

stepped out just to get some clarification in terms of the 

application of the assessment provisions so that I can answer 

that question in a way that helps us both.  If we can . . . if there 

are any other items for clarification while we're waiting for 

that, I'd appreciate dealing with them. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I want to also go on the question that the 

member from Morse has just asked pertaining to boards.  Now 

I understand your sincerity, but I have heard other of your 

colleagues in here with the same amount of sincerity and upon 

checking . . . and I can list you five, if you want, of boards with 

some prominence in this province that have been struck.  And 

when one checks down the road, we find them heavily 

populated by donors to your political party. 

 

And in the case of this one that simply will blow this thing out 

of the water.  We're dealing with people here that are on the 

edge of the precipice, and I don't know how we're going to do it 

without getting into a big partisan fight here.  But there have 

been enough attempts, and I think you've got some people 

around you that have been through the process with 

organizations that are above reproach in your Farm Land 

Security Board and some areas around it.  You've basically 

been able to, I think, to have a non-partisan view on the world 

through two administrations now and doing it quite well. 

 

I think it would behove you, Mr. Minister, to bring back the . . . 

the Assembly will probably not be in session, but somehow 

bring back to . . . Maybe this is the ideal opportunity to strike 

the Standing Committee in 

Agriculture of this House even for two days, to bring back and 

say, this is my plan for the board structure.  And the standing 

committee of the legislature which can encompass all parties 

can say, yes this looks like a good plan, or we want to talk 

about it, or maybe we should have a sit-down with all the farm 

groups or something like that so that everybody knows that 

when we're assigning . . . an example I used of an individual 

turning back half his farm, and he's picking a section out of that 

two and a half that that committee in dealing with that section 

of land is going to be above any criticism based on politics or 

favouritism anywhere in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Now you might have some biases toward one lending 

institution or another; that's going to happen.  And you might 

have a bias, well you shouldn't have took the quarter down by 

the creek; you should have took the quarter over here.  But 

you'll get that in any instance.  And I'm saying, minister, you 

have an opportunity here.  I can't think of a better tool than the 

standing committee of this House, which hasn't sat formally 

since the '20s, to put your plan of action in place here.  And 

you're going to be above criticism, I think, if you do that. 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I thank the member opposite for his 

sincere concern and advice in that regard, and we will take it all 

into consideration as we proceed. 

 

As I said earlier we have -- so there's no misunderstanding -- I 

listed 11 organizations whom we had asked for nominations, a 

very broad range of lenders and farm organizations who we 

asked for names in order to get a list of nominees.  And in that 

list are a number of nominees who are common to a number of 

organizations, and we will do everything in our power to make 

this the kind of body the member opposite wishes it to be and 

all of us wish it to be. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, we have an amendment to 

clause 8, section 27.2(1) and I have handed it over to the 

minister and his legal counsel.  We want to move that at the 

appropriate time.  And when we get to it, I would ask the 

indulgence of the chairman if we do ours first and then have 

the minister's amendment go second. Then that I think would 

expedite the process here a little bit.  But we will be moving 

that amendment on clause 8 on section 27.2. 

 

One other point I'd like to make to the minister is if in the 

discussion, whoever is investigating this small-holding 

intensive livestock operation question, we'd sure like to have it 

as soon as you get it and you can interrupt the proceedings to 

provide that to us then. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the patience of 

the member with respect to that explanation.  We've sent for 

the officials.  If we cannot provide the information now, we 

certainly will provide it afterwards at the earliest time, and in 

an ongoing way work with you to make sure that these 

provisions do address the concerns that you have as others 

have. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3103 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I ask for a moment of 

consideration so I may answer the question that was previously 

asked before I proceed with the voting on this.  Otherwise it's 

going to hang over anyway.  So I'll just deal with my official 

briefly and then try to make that explanation before I move my 

House amendment on 7. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I will make this as clear as possible and 

encourage us to have a further discussion when this session is 

over. 

 

The caps will be determined only on the assessed value of the 

land.  So in that sense the value of the other properties won't 

apply.  There are assessed values of improvements.  It's 

expected that in negotiations between the lender and the 

farmer, an agreement will normally be reached in those 

circumstances because they will be special circumstances and 

they won't be the usual third crop share or specific dollar rent 

for a quarter of land. 

 

And it's expected that because in assets, depreciation is known, 

that if there were . . . First of all, it would not be often that a 

lease would be given in a larger context, but there could be 

circumstances where that happens, where it's on other land 

that's under the program.  But because the depreciation rate on 

assets is . . . on improvements is generally known and 

predictable, that the lease rate would reflect that rate of 

depreciation.  And so it would not likely have an impact on the 

compensation payable to the lender because the lease would be 

the real value that would be drawn by those assets when you 

know their value and the rate of depreciation.  So it's likely to 

have a minimal impact relative to this program. 

 

It sometimes will be a factor because those assets will sit on 

land that's eligible under the program, and if there's not an 

agreement reached between the farmer and the lender, then the 

Farm Tenure Arbitration Board will have to deal with it.  And 

in dealing with it, it will have to judge whether there is the 

fairness of the lease rate and whether there's compensation 

payable.  But those would be unusual circumstances. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I will just make this observation and then we 

can go on.  The place where you're going to have difficulty is 

in ACS, because ACS is a lender to those improvement kinds 

of situations.  And so you're going to have to have a very 

significant, even arm's-length process in dealing with this 

function, because it's going to be significant. 

 

And I know that there's some very large dairy producers that 

have serious financial difficulties and their holdings are being 

held by ACS.  And that's going to make a significant impact. 

 

So having said that, we can go on with the amendments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you very much to the members 

opposite for that. 

 

I'd like to move an amendment under section 7 of the 

printed Bill: 

 

 Strike out subsection 7(1) of the printed Bill and substitute 

the following: 

 

  "7(1)  Subsection 27(1) is amended by adding ', but 

subject to subsection 27.2(22)' after 'other Act'". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 

 

Mr. Martens: -- There's one suggestion I want to make on 

clause 8 dealing with the first part where it says: 

 

 'board' means the Farm Tenure Arbitration Board established 

pursuant to section 27.11; 

 

My colleague here from Thunder Creek suggested that this 

board, the process of the board, be dealt with through the 

Agriculture Committee of the legislature.  And I want to just 

add one other dimension to it, and that there is significant 

impact in all of our rural communities on how this impacts on 

financial institutions as well, and credit unions are concerned 

that . . . have been expressed to us over and over again. 

 

And our suggestion in that case would be that the regulations 

could be presented to that committee to be discussed and 

evaluated.  I would say it from this perspective, for the very 

reason about how we discussed the very impact of 

improvements on property and all of that, to have an 

involvement from our side of the House would be greatly 

appreciated on that. 

 

And having said that, I will move on to the amendment in 

clause 8: 

 

 (a) By deleting subsections 27.2(1) and (2) as being enacted 

therein and substituting the following therefor: 

 

  "27.2(1) Where, after the coming into force of this section, 

a mortgagor transfers his or her farm land by 

voluntary transfer, quit claim or otherwise to a 

lender, or a lender obtains a final order of 

foreclosure or cancellation of agreement for sale 

against farm land, the lender shall, within the time 

specified in subsection (6): 

 

   (a) if the mortgagor is a farmer, first offer that farmer 

that farm land for lease, subject to the farmer's 

financial viability to sustain an independently 

assessed fair market value lease rate, by service of a 

notice in writing of the terms and conditions set 

forth in the form of lease provided with the notice; 

or 

 

   (b) serve the mortgagor and the board with a notice in 

the prescribed form that he or she will not be offered 

that farm land 



3104 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

for lease because the mortgagor is not a farmer within 

the meaning of clause 27.1(b) or does not meet the 

qualifications set out in clauses 27 . . . 

 

I won't read the rest because I've given it to the minister to 

read.  However what I will say is this, that when all of this 

whole process is said and done and we have an evaluation, and 

these leaseholders have held the lease for a maximum of six 

years, what do we do then?  What's the function going to . . . 

function of this Bill and the process going to do then? 

 

(1645) 

 

And that's why we added in a method that you can transfer or 

provide an opportunity for an individual to purchase the land 

after this six-year lease package is dealt with.  And that's why 

we put this in here, so we can extend it beyond just the lease 

package that you've got here and also offer an opportunity for 

these people to have a chance to purchase this land. 

 

I know that the implication will be that they have the right of 

first refusal already anyway, but I think it's necessary to put it 

into here so that people understand that there's going to be a 

process or a flow of the process from the decision to quitclaim, 

or whatever it is that transfers the assets back to the lender, and 

then from the lender back to the farmer again.  And I think we 

want to have the least amount of influence negatively or 

jeopardizing the effect and the impact that it would have on the 

farmer as we possibly can.  And that's why we are introducing 

this amendment at this time in this place. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I too want to 

speak in favour of the amendment.  I think it's absolutely 

imperative here that if we're depending upon the goodwill -- 

and I think the minister is to a great extent from what he's told 

me today -- of various types of lending institutions, both public 

and private, for the continuation of this Bill, that if there is a 

point in here that is clearly defined where they are going to 

have a responsibility in the case of public institutions to do 

everything they can to have ownership re-established, or in the 

case of a private institution, that there is going to be some 

ability to realize on their security that they will feel far more 

comfortable than having something that could stretch on into 

infinity. 

 

And I think public goodwill in this sense will be furthered by 

allowing this particular amendment to be in place because it 

does define to everyone involved in the program that there is an 

end and that everyone hopes the end result is that the farmer, if 

he so wishes, once more moves back into an ownership 

position.  And I don't think anyone in this province would 

disagree with that particular item. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I can't accept the 

amendment but I want to explain why.  There is actually some 

legitimacy to an element of it that needs further discussion with 

organizations and lenders.  It is the issue the members opposite 

raise with respect to the period following the lease. 

I've discussed with officials of the farmers' union and others 

I've questioned today as well . . . but with respect to the general 

application of the amendment as brought forward here, and by 

the way, that we have a year or two in which to make that 

clarification before it will be a matter where it will be applied.  

So I would invite participation from you in raising that issue 

later. 

 

But with respect to the amendment as presented here, the 

option to purchase, which according to this amendment would 

apply throughout the period that the farmer was leasing the 

land, was one of the elements of balance brought within the 

committee report.  It was an issue considered by the committee, 

and it was one of those trade-offs that was done internally 

within the committee before the report came forward.  And so 

the option to purchase, as generally applicable, is one that was 

not recommended by the committee when it came forward. 

 

The other issue that's contained within the amendment that's 

here is the question subject to the farmer's financial viability.  It 

was also felt that a viability test was one which would be . . . 

that would put farmers at risk in the process, and it was 

therefore rejected by the committee in terms of a test. 

 

But with respect to the issue of the disposition of the land 

within the two-year period, while the farmer does continue to 

have the right of first refusal, there is some clarification 

required for that period of time . . . And appreciate the spirit of 

those comments on this amendment. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- My question to the minister then is: what did 

you trade off for that option?  What was the value, or can you 

tell us what you traded off for the purchase option? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- My understanding from the committee 

process -- and these officials were there -- my understanding 

from the whole process, that in the package of proposing the 

six-year lease and to get agreement from everyone around the 

table, that the option to purchase was a piece that was not 

agreed to.  That there was a balance in the understanding of the 

six-year lease package that the option to purchase within that 

period of time when the leasing was going on, that would not 

preclude the lender and the farmer from agreeing to a purchase 

agreement.  But the option to purchase was not recommended 

by them because that was what brought them . . . it was all of 

those considerations that brought them to a consensus when 

they brought the report forward. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

The Chair: -- I believe the minister has another amendment 

and I believe both sides have a copy of the amendment.  Can 

we take the amendment as being circulated, and ask the 

minister just simply that he moves the amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, I'm sorry you won't let me read this 

wonderful piece of literature.  But if that's the deal, then I 

simply move it as printed and as shared. 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3105 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 9 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Bill No. 54 -- An Act to amend The Farm Financial 

Stability Act (No. 2) 

 

The Chair: -- If the minister could introduce any additional 

officials with him who were not here previously. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there are two additional 

officials here:  Kathy Hillman-Weir, on the desk next to my 

deputy minister, from the Department of Justice; and behind 

the deputy minister is Ross Johnson from Department of 

Agriculture and Food. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, we would 

like to talk about the two of them together if we could, and then 

we'll run them through afterwards since we've got them 

discussed. 

 

In the process of doing this and moving it from a department in 

the government to Ag Credit Corporation, there is, I guess one 

could say, a significant amount of problems being created in 

how the implementation process works because of there being 

two separate entities prior to the coming into force of these 

Bills. 

 

And so a decision to amalgamate the two is not necessarily 

wrong from our perspective.  However the outcome is that 

individuals who are caught in having to have their guarantees 

through the CAFF program are now in a position where some 

of those very people who were their collectors for another loan 

. . . and they become the administrators of the CAFF program 

or the CAFF clients. 

 

So what we have heard and seen through the past few months 

is that as individuals go through the process to have their 

extension on their CAFF loans and the guarantees extended, we 

have a significant impact on those individuals when they come 

to ACS where the location of the mortgages that started the 

whole process on the downhill slide. 

 

And so we have more questions on function and how this 

works than on the fact that it happened. 

 

And so when you come back after supper, we'd sure like to 

have some views from you as to where you see this going and 

how you see this happening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I don't know, Mr. Chairman, whether the 

member opposite wanted me to introduce the Bills briefly.  I 

think he actually did a good job.  The first Bill that we're 

dealing with does essentially deal with the termination of the 

counselling and assistance for farmers program as of April 1, 

1992, a decision made this spring and a decision consistent 

with the Farm Debt Advisory Committee report. 

And the second Bill that he wants to deal with in a package is 

the continuance of the residual of the program clients . . . 

program features under the Ag Credit Corporation.  And it is 

with respect to that function that the member opposite wishes 

to discuss further after supper.  And I appreciate that 

indication, and we'll proceed with that discussion after the 

break. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 

 


