




















































Hansard: July 07, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1305 

 July 7, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly to 

introduce guests please. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

like to introduce through you, Mr. Speaker, and to the rest of 

the Assembly, some friends of mine in your gallery.  All the 

way down from Onion Lake, some eight hours or nine hours 

driving from Regina, is friends of mine, Arnold and Emily 

Whitstone, and I'd like to ask everybody to join with me in 

welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as I began 

prior to the supper break to speak in this Assembly this 

afternoon regarding the motion that is before this Assembly, 

the motion that is going to draw an end to, or put a limitation 

on the bell-ringing in this Assembly, I indicated that as the 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for the Moosomin 

constituency, as an MLA in this legislature and in this 

province, I find this rules and the change to the rules at this 

time very unbecoming in light of the number of the . . . the 

process that has taken place over the last few days and certainly 

the normal process that has followed in this House over the 

number of years that this legislature has evolved and worked in 

Saskatchewan, and certainly, legislative assemblies across 

Canada and in the democratic world. 

 

I would have to say that many people are stunned and today I 

am stunned by the apparent arrogance that has been shown by 

the members opposite.  In fact, the member from Regina . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I would remind the member for 

Regina Churchill Downs he has already spoken in this debate. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I just want to bring the point, Mr. Speaker, that 

many people across this province feel that the mandate that was 

given to the government of the day back in October was not a 

mandate to allow a government to show arrogance and disdain 

for the democratic process, but a mandate that gave members 

of the NDP (New Democratic Party) Party the opportunity to 

show that they could work within the process, the guidelines of 

this Assembly, within the rules of the Assembly, and indeed, 

working together in co-operation with the opposition as parties 

have through the years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That people back in October 1991 believed that . . . in some 

cases many people believed, especially the die-hard New 

Democrats certainly, a new day had dawned on this province.  

Apparently today, Mr. Speaker, yes we do have a new day  

_- a new day of government showing its disdain for the 

workings of this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government appears to be willing to change 

and twist whatever facts they deem necessary in order to 

introduce retroactive legislation in this Assembly.  The Rules 

Committee talked in great detail about the bell-ringing process.  

And certainly bell-ringing has been a debate that has come and 

gone over the years. 

 

It has been a debate that has taken place in rules committees, 

and I have only been in this Assembly since 1986 but I am 

certain that the debate on the rules and debate on the bells has 

come up continually.  It has been an ongoing discussion.  And 

certainly a number of members this afternoon brought out the 

fact of the bell-ringing procedures as they have taken place 

over the past number of years. 

 

The debate today is whether this government should be allowed 

to go on and change legislation retroactively.  And the debate 

on the motion before us is whether this . . . whether it should be 

allowed . . . the debate on bell-ringing should be allowed to go 

on for days or hours or even the debate this evening should be 

unlimited. 

 

But what the public knows and what the opposition knows is 

that bell-ringing has very little to do with this decision.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, and members on this side of the House and many 

members in this House have spoken of the fact that the public 

in general are fed up with bell-ringing.  They're fed up with the 

stalling tactics of bell-ringing.  They do not like that ability of 

an opposition, if you will, to stall the workings of government. 

 

And back in '89 we heard that.  Certainly it is something we 

have heard the last few days.  I have run into it as well, but I 

can also assure you, Mr. Speaker, that the public have more 

disdain for a government that would bring in legislation that 

would retroactively change a contract.  And that's, Mr. Speaker, 

that is where the public draw the line.  They disagree with 

bell-ringing but if that's what it takes to let a government know 

that people have a concern and people are against a 

government using its strong-arm tactics, and, Mr. Speaker, I 

have had many people . . . In fact people walk across the street 

to compliment and to ask me . . . in fact, Mr. Speaker, just the 

other day asked if the bells were still ringing.  Many people are 

concerned that we might allow the bell-ringing to stop, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I was able to assure the individuals that had come 

across my path that indeed to a degree the bell-ringing has 

ceased, that the Speaker of this Assembly had called the House 

back into order, that the Speaker had suspended the vote and 

asked the House to proceed and the vote on the contentious 

legislation was put on the shelf.  I think, Mr. Speaker, if that 

vote would have or could have been put on indefinitely or for a 

long period of time, this House would certainly be willing and 

able to operate without any hindrances.  And I believe the 



1306 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

members of the opposition and the members in this House over 

the last few days have indicated their willingness to work and 

to co-operate and to get on with the normal procedures that 

would take place in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen a number of Bills through second 

readings and into committee, and we have been through a few 

minor portfolios in Estimates.  Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt 

that there is a lot of work that remains to be done in this 

Legislative Assembly.  And certainly it would be inappropriate 

for the government to ram through its legislation when there is 

so much other work that needs to be taken care of, so much 

other business that affects people right across the broad 

spectrum in this province. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, the public knows very well -- and I believe 

the media are well aware of it -- that the only reason for the 

motion that we have in this Assembly today is the fact that a 

government got caught with its pants down and that farm 

families have become very disappointed in this government 

and they have taken the government to court. 

 

And the members opposite know full well that the only reason 

that it suddenly became an emergency to limit the ringing of 

the bells was because every indication they have and we have 

and the public in general have is that the judge would rule 

against them in court and would rule in favour of the farm 

families.  Because any judge looking at the case presented to 

him or her realized that in fairness the proceedings that were 

taking place, the reason for the court case, the lack of evidence 

by the government, indicated that the farm families that had 

taken the government to court were right on, were well within 

their rights, and to be fair, they indeed had the information 

necessary to confront the government.  And therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, we have the Crop Insurance Corporation going to the 

court and suggesting that they would have the legislation 

needed, legislation which has precipitated bell-ringing in this 

Assembly. 

 

What is really amazing, Mr. Speaker, is that a government can 

use a majority to tamper with the justice system, a majority to 

force judges to rule in favour of an NDP government.  I believe 

it is very appalling, and I believe every member opposite 

should be ashamed that they would allow the front benches to 

dictate how this House is going to operate. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I find it very hard to believe that many 

members on the opposite side of the House and back-benchers 

on the government side of the House would find it easy to go 

into their constituencies, especially in rural Saskatchewan, and 

tell people that it's okay for a government to retroactively 

change a contract; and if indeed they are challenged in court 

and they don't have the wherewithal or the defence needed, 

then to turn around and bring in legislation that would change 

the rules and leave individuals out in the cold. 

 

I believe many members . . . If from what I'm hearing from my 

constituency and from many people that I have run across in 

the last month or so since the bells first started to ring, many of 

the NDP members would be ashamed and 

would feel . . . would be hanging their heads as they met their 

constituents and let them know.  And their constituents would 

be condemning them for betraying them and betraying the trust 

they put in them when they voted for them last October. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have here today in this motion is the 

government, the NDP government showing the people of 

Saskatchewan just how important the rights of people are.  And 

it would appear to me and I believe to many members and 

many people across this province that the rights of individuals 

are not important at all.  In fact, it wasn't that long ago that one 

of the MLAs of this Assembly suggested that the process was 

more important than the rights of an individual.  And it would 

appear that again this government is showing that same 

disdain. 

 

I believe if the rural members in this Assembly, and rural NDP 

members really believed in the rights of individuals -- the 

rights that I believe that the member from Regina Churchill 

Downs talked about when he talked about Mr. Douglas and the 

rights that Mr. Douglas stood for when he decided to get 

involved in politics, maybe even Mr. Blakeney -- they would 

stand up in this Assembly today . . . And we have heard on 

numerous occasions this afternoon from a number of members 

who have indicated that they are prepared to stand, and 

certainly they will have the opportunity to stand, stand in this 

Assembly and let their constituents know why they support 

such a Draconian motion brought to this Assembly. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, these NDP members would be standing 

up for what is right.  In fact maybe they need to speak out 

against the move by a very few . . . a small group of people on 

the front benches to let them know, listen we . . . yes we 

decided to run as NDP candidates but we didn't run on this 

platform.  We ran on the idea of helping people and working 

together with people, not using an iron hand or an iron . . . 

closed fist to rule.  They would take the time to speak in this 

Assembly to at least let their constituents know that they have 

been hearing what their constituents are saying. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, if they have any moral integrity 

at all, they must stand in this Assembly to defend the rights of 

individuals, speak out against this motion that's been presented 

to the House, stand up and speak on behalf of their 

constituents.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, I believe that is the only 

way they will show their constituents that they are actually 

doing their jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion that has been presented to the 

Assembly today and brought forward to this Assembly, I 

believe was brought forward under, if you could use the term, 

at a period or a time of duress and distress.  I don't believe, Mr. 

Speaker, now was the time, in light of the decision, in light of 

the ruling that the Speaker of this Assembly brought down a 

few days ago asking the members, the Government House 

Leader and the Opposition House Leader and the two party 

leaders, to sit down and follow the normal procedures in this 

Assembly.  I don't believe that this motion is appropriate at this 

time, and it is unfortunate that we are indeed debating such a 

motion. 

 

(1915) 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1307 

Let us take a quick look as to why the motion is before us.  I 

look at the Leader-Post, June 13, 1992.  This was just shortly 

after the legislation bringing in the farm security Act that 

would have brought in the retroactive legislation working 

against the farm families of this province was introduced and 

the bells began to ring.  The Speaker of this . . . 

 

The Speaker: --  Order.  I would remind the member from 

Pelly and the member from Kindersley that it's their duty to 

allow the member from Moosomin to have his turn at speaking.  

If they wish to have something to discuss, please go behind the 

bar.  All right? 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Government House 

Leader indicated that the government had no choice but to 

unilaterally attempt to rewrite history with its changes to the 

gross revenue insurance plan.  Mr. Speaker, we all know the 

debate that has taken place regarding the GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) question.  And the House Leader went on 

to say . . . and the article goes to say: the stand-off goes back to 

the spring when the government changed GRIP but missed the 

May 15 deadline. 

 

And then it also brings out the fact that farmers decided to 

speak out.  They took the time to come to this legislature and 

speak out.  They spoke out in rallies across this province. 

 

And yet the Government House Leader, in co-operation with 

his front bench members, decided that it was still more 

appropriate to follow the urging of their Crown corporation, 

their Crop Insurance Corporation, rather than listen and stand 

up for the basic rights of individuals.  The article goes on to say 

Lingenfelter wouldn't tell anyone Thursday what was in the 

Bill, but he admitted Friday it's intended to retroactively clear 

up . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I must remind the member 

again that the motion before the Assembly is that the second 

report of the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures be 

now concurred in.  There is no mention at all in that report on 

GRIP.  I have allowed members to make a connection between 

this and GRIP but not then to go into a detailed discussion on 

GRIP as to the advantages, disadvantages of GRIP . . . have 

nothing to do with this motion.  That we can discuss at another 

time.  It has nothing to do with this motion and I ask the 

member to please stay within the motion that is before us. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, and I thank you for your ruling and I 

certainly am aware of the ruling that was made earlier today.  

And I must also indicate to the people of Saskatchewan that the 

bell-ringing question and the motion before this Assembly ties 

directly to the retroactive legislation, and that is the case 

scenario that . . . And I don't intend to get into the details of 

GRIP, Mr. Speaker, and I appreciate that, but I certainly must 

take the time to tie the reasoning for the motion, and I 

appreciate your ruling. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the time when the bells began to ring in this 

Assembly, and we're all aware of the 1989 commotion that 

arose in this Assembly when the 

government of the day brought forward a piece of legislation or 

introduced a piece of legislation that would have allowed for 

the splitting off of SaskEnergy from SaskPower and would 

have allowed people of Saskatchewan the opportunity to take 

an equity position in their SaskEnergy corporation and the 

members of the opposition . . . or then opposition, now 

government, at that time indicated that it was fundamentally 

wrong for the government to make those kind of decisions and 

walked out and rang the bells. 

 

In the June 15, '92 edition of the Star-Phoenix a headline reads: 

 

 Bell-ringing comes back to haunt NDP. 

 

 Devine pledged he would move to limit the length of time an 

opposition could ring the bells.  But he couldn't get the 

required agreement from the NDP who hated the thought of 

losing such an effective weapon. 

 

That is back in 1989. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farmers right across this province believe in 

keeping your word.  And their form of contract in most cases is 

on a handshake and your word better be good.  Your word 

better be your bond.  However we find that this piece of . . . or 

this motion will allow this legislature to give the government 

the opportunity to not only break its word but to break what I 

would consider a legal and binding contract. 

 

Another article talking about the bell-ringing: bell-ringing halt 

legislature.  There are two issues at stake in this current 

impasse at the legislature. One is the opposition's use of the 

division bells as a tool to block introduction of legislation.  The 

other is the Bill itself which we're told will retroactively change 

a contract.  It is an identical tactic to the one used by the New 

Democrats when they were in opposition to block introduction 

of a Bill to privatize SaskEnergy.  The NDP let the bells ring 

for 17 days and didn't return until the then Devine government 

agreed not to proceed with its SaskEnergy Bill.  And the writer 

of the article goes on to say: but now it's apparent the New 

Democrats have totally botched the entire GRIP issue.  They 

came to power promising to improve the insurance plan to 

farmers and have instead turned it into a holy mess.  Basically 

the government has turned this into a public policy nightmare 

and deserves the grief it's getting. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, as I have talked to people and laid out 

the facts before them regarding bell-ringing, and indicated that 

I myself am not a person in favour of bell-ringing and feel that 

we should have a more appropriate form of speaking out and at 

least informing people of legislation that we feel would be very 

harmful to the rights of individuals across this province, that 

people have supported me on that.  But people have been very 

strong in speaking out and voicing their opinions when they 

feel a government is working and ramrodding changes against 

them. 

 

Another article, another commentator says, indicates: no quick 

solution to the GRIP debate.  And he's talking about the debate 

that was taking place regarding the question of 



1308 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

the Bill and the bell-ringing itself.  And in this article it says: 

nor do the PCs (Progressive Conservative) have to give in 

quickly.  At least not with the court case giving them 

justification for not allowing the legislation to be introduced.  

There was little pressure, little pressuring the PCs to end their 

walk out.  Moral hazards and adverse crop selection are the 

polite terms they use to describe the '91 GRIP shortcomings. 

 

What the writer was suggesting in this article is that people 

across the province, at the time when the bells first began to 

ring, were saying, listen, the argument that moral hazard is the 

reasons for changes to a farm program are not good enough. 

 

And I think if you take a very close look, Mr. Speaker, you 

would find there are very few people that really would be 

termed or considered as having . . . using, abusing the farm 

programs.  I don't know of anyone, any program that 

government brings in that will not find one person or other 

abusing it.  But the percentages are very, very low.  This 

motion, Mr. Speaker, is going to take away people's rights to 

express their views. 

 

But what about the leader, the Premier of the province?  What 

has the Premier of the province indicated regarding the motion 

before this Assembly and regarding the ringing of the bells and 

regarding the Bill that precipitated the ringing of the bells?  In 

the Star-Phoenix of June 23, '92: 

 

 While he said he can see the Tories' point, the premier said 

the government won't withdraw its legislation. 

 

 "The substance of what we did is right.  And if it's the 

substance which is at issue in terms of our fiscal picture and 

the like, process becomes a little less important." 

 

I find that appalling.  I find that very distasteful.  I find that any 

Premier who would indicate that the process and the reasoning 

for an opposition standing up for what it believed in, standing 

up for the rights of individuals is right, and yet to turn around 

and say that they will not change their minds on that piece of 

legislation, appalling. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

 "I worry about contracts and all of that.  I mean, one has 

certain rights." 

 

We in Canada, we in the province of Saskatchewan, have 

certain rights.  We have the right to speak our mind.  We have 

the right to make a business decision.  We have the right to go 

where we please in this country.  In fact the Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms, which the Premier of the province was involved 

in back in the late '70s, early '80s, has expanded that right and 

in some cases, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, much to the 

chagrin of our country.  But I believe yes we do have rights but 

we also have responsibilities.  As elected members of this 

Assembly we have a right to stand here and speak out with one 

voice and represent our constituents, but we have a 

responsibility to represent them truthfully and honestly and to 

respect their rights. 

And so he says: 

 

 "I worry about contracts and all of that.  I mean one has 

certain rights.  That's where the merit of the PC walkout is." 

 

And then he goes on to say: 

 

 "But we've got the point, and the public has that point, and 

they can use that (point) . . ." 

 

However he still says we will not . . . we have no intention of 

pulling the Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's where the walk-out and that's where the 

bell-ringing differs from 1989.  The Premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan recognizes the rights of individuals, recognizes 

the rights of the opposition to stand up for those rights, 

recognizes the fact that many people have spoken out against 

the legislation as it has been presented, and said he's listening.  

And we have heard him time and time again talk about the 

consultative process, talk about the consultative process, talk 

about listening.  And yet, Mr. Speaker, as the House Leader 

indicated, as soon as the bells were ringing and as soon as he 

felt that the process was wrong, we still will not remove our 

legislation.  We will not change the legislation; the same with 

the Premier.  So I ask you: is he really listening? 

 

That's where this process differs from the bell-ringing of 1989.  

Because the premier of the day was listening.  The premier of 

the day and the government of the day pulled the legislation 

and put it on the back shelf in this government, and the House 

came in and operated, although as members indicated at that 

time they said they would make the province ungovernable.  

And certainly it was very difficult forming and running good 

government for the last two years of the former term. 

 

The article also says: 

 

 Romanow said he didn't like leading his own party out of the 

legislature in 1989 when he fought a then-PC government 

bill.  He said he worried he might have to return before 

gaining any concessions. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that is an interesting comment.  That 

is very interesting because the NDP of the day, the then 

opposition, believed they had a very legitimate reason to walk 

out of the Assembly.  And they believed that the only way they 

could come in was with a concession from the government.  

And before the bell-ringing ceased, yes, the government leader 

and the opposition House leader and the two leaders got 

together and there was a concession made, and the House came 

back. 

 

But what have we received today?  What have we seen today?  

Have we seen any indication by the government that they are 

going to give a concession?  That they will indeed allow the 

people of Saskatchewan to have their rights?  That they will 

indeed speak out and listen to the people of Saskatchewan?  No 

they haven't. 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1309 

I would suggest it is obvious that the government still haven't 

got the point.  I would have to wonder if even the Liberal 

leader has the point.  In a comment in the June 17 issue of the 

Leader-Post, the Leader of the Liberal Party said, ". . . the 

Tories have proved their point and should return to the 

legislature." 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rules of the Assembly . . . by returning to the 

legislature this opposition would have then shown to the people 

of Saskatchewan that they didn't have the ability to stand up to 

a government and let them know that what they were doing 

was wrong.  Because the moment we would have returned to 

this Legislative Assembly, the Bill would had received first 

reading.  It would have been on the floor of the House.  And 

indeed, Mr. Speaker, the process would have been in motion 

and the court could have proceeded, and for all intents and 

purposes, the case against the government would have been 

very sound.  The farmers would have lost their day in court. 

 

I find it interesting that at one moment the Leader of the 

Liberal Party would find it reprehensible that the House would 

bring in such a motion and at the same time turn around and 

support the government in their efforts, such as she did 

yesterday when she voted for the government against rural 

Saskatchewan on the rural development Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are all elected to bring the views of our 

constituents into this legislature and base our decisions on the 

views of our constituents and of people.  Not only are the 

members opposite ignoring the wishes of people, they are 

doing so while claiming to be fair by claiming to have 

democratic rights and freedoms in mind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have never heard such outrageous justifications 

and I beg to wonder if indeed the NDP members really believe 

it themselves.  If the question were posed to people -- do you 

think there should be a limit to bell-ringing? -- people would 

say, well of course, yes.  Most people would say we should 

limit bell-ringing. 

 

As I have indicated earlier, members on this side of the House 

have also agreed.  But as I've also indicated, Mr. Speaker, this 

is not the real issue before us this evening. 

 

Ask the public whether they think a government should be 

allowed to break contracts with over 50,000 farmers and see 

what kind of response you get.  I'm sure many people who were 

involved in Saskatchewan Pension Plan think the same thing. 

 

I know what kind of response you will get because, Mr. 

Speaker, I have had many phone calls and as I've also 

indicated, I have had people actually cross the street to talk to 

me because they wanted to ask me about what was happening.  

Very concerned and, Mr. Speaker, it wasn't just farmers or farm 

families, it's business people, wage earners in my communities 

who have come, who have talked to me, talked to me at 

functions like the centennial celebrations in Whitewood this 

past weekend, talked to me at parades in my constituency, 

talked to me at a camp that I was attending. 

People from right across this province, pastors have talked to 

me and asked me about the process, and as I have explained the 

process, Mr. Speaker, I find people are more than supportive 

and they're not supportive simply because it's a Conservative 

opposition that has raised the question.  They are supportive 

because they fundamentally believe in the rights and freedoms 

of individuals and they fundamentally believe that any 

government, regardless of how large, should not unilaterally 

use its mandate to change contracts. 

 

And I would almost think, Mr. Speaker, members opposite if 

they were honest with this Assembly would also indicate that 

they have had many calls -- many calls indicating that the 

Tories are on the right track, many calls that would agree with 

this article, Leader-Post, June 13: 

 

 Good for the Tories. 

 

 Their decision to ring the division bells to stop the retroactive 

GRIP legislation from being introduced at least until 

Monday's court case is likely the smartest move they have 

made . . . 

 

 The facts be known, the Tories are right on.  The NDP 

government is dead wrong. 

 

 Moral righteousness . . . (that's what this question is all 

about). 

 

 And right now, the . . . reasons for blocking the government's 

legislative agenda and effectively holding the province 

hostage is far more justifiable than the reasons for the NDP's 

1989 walkout ever hoped of being. 

 

 When the NDP walked out of the assembly April 22, 1989 it 

was strictly over philosophical difference of opinion.  No 

matter how rancorous the SaskEnergy debate became, history 

can record it as nothing more than a difference of political 

opinions. 

 

 However the Tories have now walked out of the assembly 

over a matter of law -- one the NDP is now attempting to 

rewrite so as to appear . . . they have done nothing wrong . . . 

 

 This is why the PC's bell-ringing is completely justifiable . . . 

 

 . . . it is the Tories who are clearly on the (right) side . . . 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we've seen a few polls taken lately, we've 

seen the media have gone and talked to individuals.  One news 

broadcast I happened to watch, one of the media had gone out 

to the Farm Progress Show when it was progressing in this 

province and in Regina, and talked to a number of people that 

were involved in the show -- visitors, people who had displays 

-- and it was interesting, Mr. Speaker, to note that there wasn't 

one person that believed the government was doing the right 

thing, and that believed the opposition had done the wrong 

thing in leaving the Legislative Assembly. 



1310 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

And of everyone of the suggestions put forward, most people 

suggested that bell-ringing in itself was wrong, but in view of 

the legislation brought before this Assembly by this 

government, the bell-ringing at this time was the appropriate 

thing to do, and the opposition had done the right thing. 

 

Also in the Leader-Post about that same time, a survey of 

farmers at the Farm Progress Show suggest the Tories are on 

solid ground with most of those interviewed by the Leader-

Post. 

 

A gentleman from Saskatoon said I don't think the government 

should be able to easily change something they set up like that.  

I don't really support them walking out.  And I think they 

should stay there to do the business of the province.  But I don't 

support a government that makes wholesale changes to 

programs people have to put their life into. 

 

A gentleman from Redvers said, yes, I do believe.  I don't like 

the idea of it being retroactive, the Bill they're introducing.  I'm 

not saying the old system was the best, and I'm not saying the 

new system is any better, but I support the Conservatives. 

 

A gentleman from Canora: yes, I do support the bell-ringing.  

The main reason is I believe last year when they initiated the 

program, they guaranteed us they would not change the 

program unless they gave us due time.  In my opinion, the time 

period was too short.  In all honesty, I believe the old program 

would have benefitted me more than the new one. 

 

A gentleman from Palmer, he said, yes, I certainly do as well.  I 

think they have a pretty good deal going, and then Romanow 

turns around and tries to wreck it. 

 

A gentleman from Moose Jaw: yes, I agree with them.  

Somebody's got to stop the government.  Otherwise they'd pass 

laws and do whatever they want to do. 

 

Another gentleman from Moose Jaw also suggested he 

believed in the changes . . . in the bell-ringing because he didn't 

believe in the retroactive changes. 

 

And yes, there are a couple gentlemen who didn't believe 

totally in the bell-ringing but they certainly believed in the 

process and felt there should be another method of addressing 

the problems that are generated by governments, regardless of 

what political stripe they are, of being able to retroactively 

change legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this debate that has taken place over the last 

three weeks or so, Mr. Speaker, is on a lot of people's minds 

and a lot of people are concerned. 

 

I believe right now that people are not on the side of the 

government, and they're not on the side of the government 

because they see this government as forcing the rule change in 

order to tamper with the judicial system. 

 

And maybe some members may not appreciate that and may 

not like that comment.  They will try to say that the opposition 

is blowing things out of proportion.  But I 

believe many members know well that the opposition is 

speaking a lot of truth in this Assembly this afternoon and this 

evening. 

 

The NDP know that the deputy minister of Agriculture told the 

court that the government's defence in case . . . the case against 

farmers was a retroactive change to its Bill.  That is their only 

defence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is that the reason we're . . . is that the real reason we're 

addressing the motion before us this afternoon?  I believe it is.  

I believe that the real reason we are addressing this motion this 

afternoon is because the government has found itself in a 

corner.  And rather than admitting they made a mistake and 

rather than, as we have suggested over the past number of 

weeks, maybe opening up the doors for alternatives, rather than 

sitting down with the opposition and heeding the advice 

presented to this House by the Speaker of this Assembly, the 

government has decided to move retroactively. 

 

And if they couldn't retroactively change legislation, they 

would then move to change the rules unilaterally, without the 

consent of members on this side of the House. 

 

If justice were allowed to be served without the NDP 

tampering with the courts, the government would be forced to 

comply with the ruling, which they have been advised will not 

be in favour of them. 

 

I'm not surprised by the fact that the NDP want to cover their 

excuse for an Agriculture minister.  I'm not surprised that the 

only way they can accomplish this goal is to tamper with the 

judicial system.  And I'm not surprised, Mr. Speaker, that this 

motion and the timing of this fundamental rule change 

apparently has the support of rural NDP members. 

 

I would have thought they would have had more backbone than 

that; that they would have at least taken the time to stand in this 

Assembly to speak out on the fundamental principles of 

democracy and freedom and the rights of individuals, and the 

fact that no government, regardless of political persuasion, 

should be allowed to use its mandate and its large majority to 

change the rules and force members who have no control and 

no opportunity at all to really speak out, other than through the 

opposition members in this Assembly, force people across this 

province just to accept the government's changes at will. 

 

And I believe their constituents did too as well, Mr. Speaker.  

And I'm sorry to say that the people are disappointed, once 

again, by members on the government side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the opposition walked out of this legislature 

over the sneaky introduction of a Bill that would bring the 

agriculture industry to its knees in this province, it was the 

right thing to do, and I've already indicated it.  And the people 

supported it.  I don't believe the people would support this 

motion in light of the government breaking contracts, in light 

of the government pushing undemocratic and immoral 

legislation.  If this government was more interested in 

protecting the rights of people rather than covering the 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1311 

hide of their sorry Agriculture minister, we wouldn't be 

debating this motion in this legislature today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion is not a concurrence of the meetings 

of the Rules Committee, and each member in this Assembly 

knows it.  Each member of the media knows it.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, the public knows it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look back to 1989, and we're talking 

about the bell-ringing, I first of all go to an article, June 19, 

1992, and it refers back to the debate which took place in 1989.  

And it says: 

 

 Former justice minister Bob Andrew and then Opposition 

leader Roy Romanow eloquently debated the merits of 

bell-ringing during an exchange in the Saskatchewan 

legislature in the spring of 1989. 

 

 Andrew told the legislature that "this tactic, left unchecked 

and left unchanged, violates the fundamental principle of . . . 

our democratic parliamentary system, and that being the 

principle of majority rule -- the right of the people to be 

governed by the party of their choice". 

 

 Equally convincing, Romanow called the NDP's use of the 

tactic to prevent the privatization of SaskEnergy "the best act 

of participatory democracy that I've seen in Saskatchewan 

since medicare, and it worked". 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, in 1989 there was bell-ringing.  In 1989 we 

had an ongoing debate regarding rule changes.  And in 1989 

we also found, Mr. Speaker, that a compromise was reached.  

A compromise that wasn't favourable to the government of the 

day, but a compromise that allowed this Assembly to proceed 

with the ordinary process of government. 

 

(1945) 

 

However, at that time, because of lack of consensus, it didn't 

address the real concern of bell-ringing, and the ability of the 

opposition, regardless of who they are, to speak out and 

represent its constituents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1992, we have a government of some 55 

members.  In 1989 we had a government of, I believe, 34 

elected representatives and 28 opposition members -- a 

substantial difference in numbers and a majority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government of the day did have the majority.  

If they had desired to work and rule against the proper process 

they could have forced through changes to bell-ringing.  But 

the government of the day chose to work through the process, 

work with the members of this Assembly, work with the 

opposition.  And certainly it has taken, and I suggest it would 

take, some time yet to arrive at a proper consensus to address 

this position on bell-ringing. 

 

When we looked back to the 1989 debate many members of the 

NDP Party at that time, members in the opposition, raised a 

number of concerns regarding the proposed changes to the 

rules.  The member from Regina Rosemont 

suggested what this government wants to do is ram through its 

own political agenda so that it can carry on its maniacal course. 

 

And everybody on this side of the legislature, now everybody 

in Saskatchewan, is saying shame.  Shame to that government 

that is more interested in its own narrow, partisan political 

purposes than it is in the real problems facing people in 

Saskatchewan.  And that was in 1989.  And I don't think times 

have changed, Mr. Speaker, other than the fact that the 

members that were making these comments are now members 

on the government side of the House. 

 

This is what the member goes on to say: does this motion 

enhance and strengthen the democratic operations of this 

institution or does it weaken it?  And, Mr. Speaker, I think the 

only conclusion that has been drawn to that is in fact it has 

been weakened.  Well if it was weakened at that time, Mr. 

Speaker, what is it today? 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that this motion is undemocratic that 

we are debating.  This rule change, which is, as you pointed out 

so quite correctly, Mr. Speaker, is an aspect of an attitude of 

authoritarianism well known to the people of this province and 

reflected by the commentators, political analysts and 

editorialists across this province that they can damn well do 

what they please, and I quote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Rosemont also went on 

to say what kind of people, what kind of people I ask you 

would initiate this rule change?  What kind of narrow-minded 

people?  What kind of world view do these people hold that 

they think this little rule change will muzzle this opposition or 

muzzle the opposition of the people of Saskatchewan.  If that 

was appropriate in 1989 I believe it is more than appropriate 

today. 

 

And as well, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Rosemont 

also went on to say:  this government, because of its twisted 

priorities and its perverse and authoritarian streak, and well 

known by . . . a character trait that is embodied in certain 

members of the opposition, well known to us on this side of the 

House, they want a recorded division that is on the recording of 

votes to say, as it says here, the bells to call in the members 

shall be sounded for not more than one hour. 

 

At that time we were suggesting an hour.  This motion suggests 

30 minutes. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, those are just a few of the comments made 

by the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

But let's look at some other members of this Assembly.  What 

about the member from Saskatoon Broadway -- Hansard, May 

29, 1989: 

 

  . . . the government's decision to bring forward this motion to 

limit the opposition's ability to ring the bells, if they so 

choose on controversial issues, is really a change in 

procedure and rules without the agreement of the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Broadway suggested 

that to have unilaterally changed the rules in 



1312 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

1989 would have gone against the procedures and rules of this 

Assembly where parties would agree. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Broadway 

continued: 

 

 This government, in my view, Mr. Speaker, will set a 

dangerous precedent if it uses its majority to force through 

the new rule changes.  Never before have the rules changed 

without all-party consent.  (And I repeat that, without 

all-party consent.)  A departure now . . . And I want to 

remind the members opposite that a departure now will 

permit, will permit future governments to change the rules at 

will. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if it was disrespectful to force changes in 

1989 when the government of the day only had a majority of 

some six to eight members, what is it today when the 

government sits here with some 45 or 44 members more than 

the total opposition combined? 

 

The member also goes on to say: 

 

 There are times, however, I'd like to remind the government, 

when issues are so important, so extremely important, that it 

requires that the opposition's objections be put forward in an 

exceptionally forceful way. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is what my colleagues and I have been 

attempting to do this afternoon and this evening.  We want the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan to know that we will 

stand up and speak out for them.  We will stand up and speak 

on their behalf.  We may only be 10 members but we're willing 

to speak for people right across this province whether they are 

urban or rural or in the two major cities in this province.  We 

will speak as forcefully as we know how. 

 

And I continue to quote: 

 

 Sometimes obstruction, Mr. Speaker, exerts pressure on 

governments to reconsider their position.  Sometimes 

obstruction does that, and it encourages the majority 

government to move slowly and cautiously. 

 

 Bell-ringing, Mr. Speaker, can also be used to gain 

legitimacy because of what it accomplishes.  It can be 

successful in forcing a compromise and it can turn divisive 

legislation into legislation of consensus. 

 

And what have we seen today?  What have we seen over the 

last few days in this Assembly, in this province?  What has this 

motion brought before this House done for us?  Was this 

motion brought through consensus?  Is this motion now going 

to limit the opposition's ability to let people know about 

changes in legislation that we feel would affect their individual 

rights and freedoms?  Is it going to allow the members of the 

opposition to effectively put out notices so people across this 

province can speak out before a government brings forward the 

Bill and allows it, or forces its passage through this Assembly?  

I say not. 

What is three days?  Three days isn't a very significant amount 

of time -- 72 hours.  Not a very large amount of time in which 

the opposition can rally people across this province in light of 

the fact that many people in this province really do not have the 

access to televised viewing of this Assembly so they can follow 

the proceedings.  And many people across this province, even 

if they do have television available, especially at this time of 

the year, find it more appropriate and a lot easier . . . and 

certainly I think we've all indicated it would be a lot nicer at 

times to be able to leave this House and call it a working day at 

5 o'clock and maybe spend on hour or two on the golf course.  

And I know many members across this House would certainly 

agree with me.  And there are some pretty good golfers in this 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, quoting again from the member from Saskatoon 

Broadway.  What I'm trying to say here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

is that there are occasions in our history in this country when 

oppositions need the right to ring bells.  And the member 

suggested that: 

 

 Oppositions don't take that right lightly, or they shouldn't, 

because they do so at their own peril (Mr. Speaker). 

 

 Now any opposition, any opposition in this province would 

not be doing its job if it failed to use all of the tactics and 

strategies available to it in preventing this government from 

going against its word. 

 

And certainly I believe as I stand in this Assembly and as my 

colleagues stand in this Assembly, want the people of 

Saskatchewan to know that we need to speak out, and I would 

encourage members on the government side to stand up and 

speak out in favour of their constituents as well, as their 

member from Saskatoon Broadway suggested. 

 

 It should be a tactic that opposition parties can use in the 

future, but this government wants to put it to us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we agreed that bell-ringing . . . there should be 

limitations on bell-ringing, but we do not agree that a 

government should be able to limit the opposition into a time 

period that doesn't give it the opportunity to effectively present 

its case to the public. 

 

And as my colleagues have suggested in the Rules Committee, 

Mr. Speaker . . . and the member from Shaunavon must be 

agreeing with me that he doesn't believe we should be 

interfering, or that his colleagues shouldn't be interfering with 

the rights of individuals.  But in the Rules Committee in the 

debate that had taken place over the past number of days, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, my colleagues had offered a number of 

suggestions to this Assembly, had suggested to the government 

members on the committee that the business of this House 

could proceed and that we should allow the process of the 

Rules Committee to continue to meet to hammer out an 

agreement that would limit the bell-ringing but would not 

restrict the ability of an opposition to withhold . . . or uphold 

legislation that they feel is very regressive. 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1313 

What this motion does.  Yes it restricts the bell-ringing, which 

in principle we have no problem with that part of it, but it also 

restricts the opposition's ability to hold legislation which -- and 

in this case, Mr. Speaker -- legislation which would take the 

feet right out from under a number of farm families in this 

province who have taken the government to court.  And I don't 

believe that is appropriate. 

 

And I'm sure that government members would also argue that 

in the future they would like to have the same opportunity.  

They would like to have the ability to put on the shelf a Bill 

that they feel any . . . The government of the day is bringing in 

a Bill that is very negative and very unresponsive and not 

responsible.  They would like to be able to lift that Bill and put 

it on the shelf for a while, continue with the process of the 

House, and be able to talk to their constituents and talk to the 

people of the province so that they indeed would be able to 

make them fully aware of the limitations that any Bill would 

bring to people's rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what this Bill does indeed goes totally against 

what the member from Saskatoon Broadway said as well.  And 

I quote: 

 

 This government doesn't want the opposition to be able to 

protect the public from unwarranted attacks by the members 

opposite.  That's what this government doesn't want.  They 

don't want an effective opposition. 

 

That's what the member of Saskatoon Broadway said regarding 

the government in 1989.  The member from Saskatoon 

Broadway also indicated: 

 

 You want to limit our ability to represent the citizens of 

Saskatchewan, and I'll tell you this: you may get away with 

it, but you will pay dearly, members of the government, you 

will pay dearly in the next election. 

 

Possibly in October of 1991, yes we did pay dearly.  And 

maybe the member was right.  But I would suggest today that if 

the people effectively knew or actually knew what the real 

intent and purposes of the NDP government was prior to the 

October 22, 1991 election, the results would be substantially 

different in this Assembly today. 

 

The Conservatives may or may not have formed government, 

but certainly the numbers on the government side of the House 

and the numbers on the opposition side of the House would be 

considerably different.  And I believe, Mr. Speaker, if an 

election were called today that the people of this province 

would indicate their preference for a much stronger opposition 

if not a total change in government.  And I find that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, being very unprecedented that a government 

could fall from grace so quickly. 

 

And then the member from Saskatoon Broadway also 

suggested: 

 

 And then we're on to rule changes without the consent of the 

opposition.  And never in the history 

of our province have rules changed without all-party 

agreement.  But you people are going to sock it to the 

opposition, and you're going to sock it to the people in the 

process. 

 

(2000) 

 

The member from Saskatoon Broadway believed that you 

needed all-party consent, you needed the parties to work 

together. 

 

The Speaker of this Assembly in his recent ruling indicated that 

the parties should get together and iron out their differences.  

The Speaker of this Assembly asked the Government House 

Leader and the Opposition House Leader to sit down and find a 

compromise and come out with a ruling that would allow the 

House to proceed, that would meet the needs of all parties 

involved. 

 

And what have we found?  When in opposition the NDP 

believed in the process of consent and consultation.  In fact, 

they talked about it very dramatically in their throne speech, 

and yet since that throne speech, since the election day, what 

have we found?  Have we found a government that's been 

willing to consult?  Have we found a government that is willing 

to sit down and negotiate? 

 

I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, no we haven't, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would seem to 

me that there is no intent on the side of the government to 

negotiate.  For even after the Speaker's ruling, the Opposition 

House Leader, the deputy leader, the opposition leader have 

been in consultation with the leader of this province, with the 

House Leader of this province, have written letters and have 

basically heard nothing until yesterday when the Opposition 

leader finally had a chance to sit down with the Premier of this 

province.  And they both arrived at the consensus that the 

Government Whip and the Opposition Whip should sit down 

and work out the process of rule changes.  And yet what do we 

find today, less than 24 hours later, a motion in this Assembly 

to stymie the ability of the opposition to withhold . . . or to hold 

the government to task. 

 

Back in 1989 the member from Saskatoon Broadway said: 

 

 They're concerned about bell-ringing.  Well what about the 

people of Saskatchewan, and what about their hopes and 

dreams and future?  It's time you people started paying 

attention to the real needs of Saskatchewan people. 

 

 . . . and I just want to remind them again that their decision to 

come forward with this motion without the consensus of the 

members opposite, the members of the opposition, will set, 

and does set, a dangerous precedent in our province.  It sets a 

dangerous precedent that the majority in this province, the 

members of this government, will force its will through the 

new rule change. 

 

 I just want to remind the member opposite that this departure 

from history and procedure, where we've had all-party 

consensus in terms of rules 



1314 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

changes, will permit future governments -- and I just want to 

remind them of this -- it will permit future government to 

change the rules at will.  And I want to remind the members 

opposite that some day you will be the official opposition, 

some day soon. 

 

And it's very interesting to note that this member would talk 

about the fact that to change the rules at that time would give 

the government, a future government, the ability to change its 

rules at will.  And today we're debating the very same motion 

which at that time didn't pass because there wasn't a consensus 

and today the government is indeed doing what they said.  The 

NDP party is indeed doing what they said they wouldn't do 

while in opposition.  I find that very hypocritical.  I find that 

very hypocritical, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are other comments made by the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale.  We can get into many 

other comments.  What about the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland-University:  I would say this about this particular 

motion on bell-ringing.  Would that both the government and 

the opposition would sit down together and co-operate with one 

another to effect some sort of, if not reconciliation, at least 

some sort of communication on this issue, so that we can get 

beyond it to deal with the public's business. 

 

Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I fear today that even the 

ability of this opposition to stand in this Assembly today and to 

speak out on the motion, to speak out against the forces that the 

government are putting in this House, to speak out against their 

ability to ram this motion through, I will be stymied in the 

future days.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, that even though we would 

speak out forcefully and lay out the reasons for our opposition 

to this motion, even though we would suggest the fact that over 

the years and time and time again, whether it be at the level of 

the federal government, whether it be at the level of provincial 

governments across this province, whether it be in the United 

Kingdom, never before has a government unilaterally changed 

the rules without coming to consensus. 

 

And I don't believe the member from Saskatoon Broadway or 

the member from Saskatoon Sutherland-University have all of 

a sudden changed their principles or changed their belief that 

consensus is important, that is as important for governments 

and opposition to work together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by speaking out on this motion, we as an 

opposition realize that we will have a limited time, that it will 

be impossible and wouldn't be right for us to speak on this 

motion for time and eternity. But I'm afraid once this motion is 

passed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and if the government or whoever 

would force a vote on this motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

the people of Saskatchewan are the individuals who are hurt, 

who are robbed of the very democratic principles that this 

legislature stands for. 

 

And as soon as this motion is put through you can believe me . 

. . and I'm sure that the Government House Leader is already 

just sitting on the edge of his desk waiting for the 

moment to stand up and reintroduce the farm Bill, the farm 

legislation that would retroactively change a contract.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, if the government of the day can change a 

contract for agriculture, the government of the day can also 

take the time to change contracts that would affect people right 

across this province. 

 

And we've already seen that in the fact that they attempted to 

change the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  Yes they've watered it 

down but people did speak out.  And maybe they listened, 

maybe they just listened, but I'm not quite sure. But certainly 

regarding this legislation, as I spoke earlier, the signs are there 

that they are not willing to listen.  And that's why I find it very 

offensive that the government would move unilaterally to bring 

forward a motion that would give it the ability to stymie the 

opposition. 

 

I find it very disturbing that the chairman of the committee 

would allow a motion to come forward that didn't have consent 

of the committee.  I find it very disturbing that members on the 

committee would be so hidebound by the doctrine brought 

forward by the Government House Leader that they wouldn't 

be able to sit in committee and reason effectively and 

appropriately and would allow such a Draconian motion to be 

brought forward to this Assembly. 

 

I find it appalling, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I have to stand in 

this Assembly today to lay out the reasoning behind the 

bell-ringing, the reason behind the motion that we are 

addressing in this Assembly, when there are so many other 

urgent pieces of business that this House should be addressing. 

 

There are so many urgent concerns across -- not only in the 

province of Saskatchewan, not only . . . and, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we are well aware of them.  They have been in the 

media the last few days.  In some cases there is drought in parts 

of the province, in other cases there is destructive storms, cases 

where people are hungry and line-ups at the food banks have 

increased.  The number of people on welfare have increased. 

 

The constitutional debate that is taking place.  And this 

Assembly is addressing a motion that would give the 

government the ability to do as it pleases.  And I find that 

offensive and I believe that the people of Saskatchewan are 

finding that offensive as well. 

 

I believe that the people of Saskatchewan certainly believe that 

when they elected me to speak on their behalf, they believed I 

would take my place and speak out and represent them to the 

best of my ability.  They not only believe that from me, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but they believe that every person elected in 

this Assembly -- members on this side of the House and the 

opposition, members on the government side of the House, 

back-benchers -- also believed.  At least I think they did.  I 

think they believed they were rightfully coming to this House 

to represent their constituents but where are they today?  

Where are they when they should be speaking up? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there's no doubt in my mind that members 

on the government side of the House and back-benchers would 

find it very offensive and would 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1315 

speak out against any government that would just take away 

the democratic rights and privileges that they take so much for 

granted. 

 

We found it very easy to speak out against Eastern bloc 

nations.  And people in the Eastern bloc countries are fighting 

today for the very freedoms that we enjoy.  Because they 

indeed do not want governments again to come and rule their 

lives without giving them the opportunity to speak. 

 

And what this motion does, Mr. Speaker, is takes away many 

rights, many freedoms of individuals to speak out.  And it takes 

away my ability as an opposition MLA to stand up and 

represent my constituents.  Mr. Speaker, I find therefore, it 

very difficult, and I will not be supporting this motion to 

unilaterally change the bell-ringing in the Legislative Assembly 

of Saskatchewan at this time.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  The 

NDP have introduced this motion to win a court case against 

Saskatchewan farmers.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know the 

circumstances of the court case.  The government broke the 

contract and now they are trying to put in the fix and get out of 

their blunder. 

 

Breaking contracts is not only a concern of farmers, but it's a 

concern of everyone in this province.  A contract should be a 

sacred document and only changed by the terms within the 

contract as outlined or by agreement of both parties.  I 

discussed the issue of contracts and the breaking of contracts 

with a representative of the Teachers' Federation. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm having difficulty 

hearing the member, but the little that I do hear suggests to me 

that the member is off the mark.  The question before the 

Assembly has to do with a report from the Rules Committee 

with respect to bell-ringing.  The member's remarks have dwelt 

on nothing but the matter of contracts and it has nothing to do 

with the motion that's before us.  I would encourage the 

member, as the Speaker has encouraged other members, to 

stick to the motion that's before us. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I will 

try to keep my remarks germane to the topic of ringing the 

bells.  And ringing of the bells, Mr. Speaker, is the reason what 

we're here discussing and the reason why the GRIP Bill has 

become so important.  This Bill that's being presented, this 

motion that's being presented to the House, is simply a tool 

being used to get the GRIP legislation into this House.  It's 

needed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the government to win their 

court case. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I attended the court in Yorkton where the 

GRIP legislation was being discussed, where the lawyers for 

the government were part of the circumstances that were taking 

place.  The lawyer for the government said that it wasn't 

necessary for the GRIP Bill to pass in the legislature . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I'd like order from the 

government benches.  And again I would remind the member 

that the issue that's before us is the report of the 

Rules Committee.  The member may wish to make connection 

between that report and other matters but the member should 

not dwell at length on those other matters. 

 

The member should deal with the issue that is before us and 

that is the report of the Rules Committee and a motion to 

concur in that report.  I encourage the member to regard the 

words to the Chair and to speak to the motion. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We feel that 

it's necessary, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to have the privilege and 

the power to ring the bells on legislation that we find repugnant 

and distasteful in this House.  This tool is used by the 

opposition to stop the dictatorial processes used by the 

opposition . . . by the government, excuse me. 

 

(2015) 

 

The opposition, in 1989, used this tool to hold up government 

legislation.  In 1992 the opposition, with the roles reversed to 

1989, used the same tools to hold up government legislation. 

 

One of the items involved in the process in 1992, in holding up 

this legislation, was the terms of the GRIP Bill, and we felt that 

it was necessary as opposition . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  The Chair will 

determine when a member's remarks are in order and needs no 

help from the government benches.  I ask the government 

benches to observe decorum and enable the member to speak 

and to give him the courtesy of doing so. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We 

felt that the use of the bell-ringing tool was very pertinent in 

the case of the GRIP legislation as we felt that the court case 

needed that legislation to proceed.  By ringing the bells in that 

particular case, the government could not present that 

legislation as part of their defence in the court case.  We rang 

the bells, Mr. Speaker, to prevent that from happening. 

 

The lawyers in the case said it wasn't necessary to have the 

legislation, and yet the Government House Leader said that it 

was.  We chose in this particular case to believe the 

Government House Leader, that he needed that legislation.  By 

ringing the bells, we prevented that legislation from 

proceeding.  This prevented the government from using that 

legislation in the court case to say that there had indeed been a 

letter sent out to farmers when there was not in fact a letter.  

We felt that the bell-ringing was necessary at that time to 

prevent the government from presenting in their GRIP 

legislation a clause which would retroactively determine the 

court case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if bell-ringing is limited to no more than three 

days, then the opposition's hands will be tied.  The GRIP 

legislation, as had been presented by the Government House 

Leader, would have passed and farmers would have suffered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need the tool of bell-ringing just in the case of 

the farmers down at Glasnevin who recently suffered a severe 

hail loss.  Because we were able to ring 



1316 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

the bells, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we were able to prevent the 

government's GRIP legislation from proceeding.  This gives 

those farmers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, more protection than what 

they would have received otherwise. 

 

I'm not sure how the members opposite can explain to those 

farmers why it was wrong for us to use bell-ringing as a tool to 

prevent that legislation from passing when those farmers know 

in their own hearts that it was better for them that that 

legislation did not proceed. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP want the people of 

Saskatchewan to believe that bell-ringing and GRIP '92 are 

separate issues.  That's not true, Mr. Speaker.  The member 

from Regina Churchill Downs, who today seems to prefer to 

call himself the toy minister, spoke of bell-ringing in 1989 and 

using that time while the bells were ringing to gain public 

support.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1989 the NDP needed the 17 

days to get the public interested in the issue of SaskEnergy.  In 

1992 when we rang the bells over the '92 GRIP changes we 

already had the support of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even the people of urban Saskatchewan 

understood bell-ringing on that particular issue.  They did not 

understand the issues of GRIP but they understood the issues of 

breaking contracts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition -- today it's us, tomorrow it could 

be some other party -- needs the power that this rule allows 

them to stop governments from illegally breaking contracts or 

any other type of rule that we normally live under.  They need 

the power to stop a government from trying to break those 

contracts and using this House to make it legal. 

 

The member from Regina Churchill Downs talks about going 

out and meeting people, about the issues of GRIP, while the 

bells were ringing.  Mr. Speaker, SARM held their regional 

meetings while the bells rang and we took the opportunity to go 

out and discuss the issues of why the bells were ringing at 

those meetings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was the perfect opportunity for the government 

to take that opportunity also to explain their GRIP legislation.  

There was an opportunity for the government to show 

Saskatchewan what was in that Bill and how it would benefit 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we rang the bells in June for the 18 days, 

we took the opportunities to attend the SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) and a number of other 

meetings around the areas.  But the NDP MLAs did not attend. 

 

At the meeting in Kipling, the deputy minister was the only 

government representative there.  The minister for Rural 

Development, the member from Canora, did not show up at 

that meeting or any other. 

 

No one at those meetings, Mr. Deputy Speaker, suggested to 

us, to me or to my colleagues who were in attendance, that we 

should stop ringing the bells.  Their suggestions were that we 

continue to ring the bells. 

 

At the Farm Progress Show, which took place at the same 

time as the bell-ringing, there was no one suggesting to me that 

I should return to the House and allow that Bill to proceed.  

The more people I talked to at the Farm Progress Show, the 

more I knew we were on the right track.  Some of those people 

were from my constituencies and some of those people were 

from the constituencies of the members across the floor.  Not 

one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not one person wanted us to end the 

bell-ringing and allow that to proceed. 

 

At this time, I would like to quote from the member from 

Riversdale on some comments he made on bell-ringing in 

1989, and this quote is from Hansard of May 11: 

 

 That's the context in which this motion is to be done, and let's 

not fool ourselves as to what's happening here.  This 

government, if it was really genuinely committed to 

democracy, would have, as much as it hurt the Minister of 

Justice, as much as he opposed what he did, they would have 

done it in the traditional and normal democratic way.  Let's 

not be fooled about what's being planned here. 

 

This motion gives the NDP the opportunity to ram through any 

legislation they desire, any legislation that suits their agenda. 

 

As a new member, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm still learning the 

rules and procedures which govern this House.  But it seems to 

me that the rules and procedures should be fair and equitable.  

The government should be able to present their agenda and the 

opposition should be allowed to express their views and the 

views of the public on the issues which arise.  All of the rules 

eventually allow the government to have their way, to have 

their agenda met. 

 

However, the opposition has one rule -- the bell-ringing -- by 

which it can force the government to seriously reconsider the 

legislation that they are presenting.  This is an ultimate weapon 

for the opposition.  Because it is the ultimate, last-resort action, 

it is rarely used.  It has been used twice for an extended period 

in this House. 

 

I am sure that when in opposition the NDP felt strongly about 

an issue but only once did they ring the bells for an extended 

period of time.  Mr. Speaker, only once in nine years of the 

Conservative Party being in opposition, that being from 1975 

to 1982 and again since last October 21 until now, have the 

Conservatives caused the bells to ring for any extended period 

of time.  I'm sure that, Mr. Speaker, the Conservatives have felt 

strongly opposed to some of the legislation that has come 

forward in that time period. 

 

Since I have been in this House there has been other legislation 

which we opposed, which I opposed.  We did not ring the bells 

for any length of time on any of that legislation.  Even on Bill 

18 last fall, Mr. Speaker, we did not hold up the House.  While 

the current rules allow the practice of bell-ringing, that power 

is rarely, rarely ever used. 

 

We might equate the power of bell-ringing to a strike.  As 

opposition we could be considered labour; the government 

could be considered management.  This 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1317 

gives us the opportunity to withhold our services from the 

legislature.  Management cannot proceed, as long as we have 

the bell-ringing power, with their agenda. 

 

What this Bill does basically, Mr. Speaker, is allows the 

government, to use a union term, to bring in scab labour and 

allow the proceedings of the House to proceed regardless of 

what the opposition feels about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote from Hansard of June 9, 

1989 from the member for Saskatoon Sutherland-University: 

 

 And the question might well be asked then, of people across 

the province, what does this particular motion by the hon. 

member for Kindersley, the Minister of Justice, what does 

this particular motion, this proposal to change the rules, do to 

democracy?  What does it do for the people of the province? 

 

 Does it do a service or does it do a disservice to the people of 

the province?  Is it a genuine service to practical democracy 

and to facilitate democratic interaction in the province 

outside of this Assembly?  And I think that's one of the 

hallmarks of scrutiny that this legislation has to bear.  It isn't 

a question of whether it serves simply the process here in the 

Assembly, but we have to ask ourselves, does it do genuine 

service to the practice of democracy outside of this 

Assembly. 

 

 And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say in terms as forceful as I can 

that the present rule that we have in this Assembly guarantees 

-- guarantees the democratic process outside of this 

Assembly.  And that's why we on this side of the House, as 

New Democrats, are so insistent that this rule change be 

opposed. 

 

That was a quote from the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, 

June 9, 1989.  Mr. Speaker, we are just as outraged as 

Conservatives as the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland-University was or as he claimed to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, bell-ringing was to be discussed in a co-operative 

manner during the Rules and Procedures Committee meetings.  

I attended the meeting of the Rules and Procedures Committee 

which the chairman called for the evening of July 2, 1992.  The 

meeting was called at the earliest possible time after Mr. 

Speaker made his ruling to suspend the GRIP legislation.  That 

ruling was a good and proper decision.  Mr. Speaker's rationale 

at the time was to give the parties time to discuss and 

co-operate to find a solution on the GRIP impasse.  It was 

indeed a good and wise decision. 

 

This decision, however, was undermined when the chairman of 

the Rules and Procedures Committee called a meeting to 

discuss bell ringing as soon as possible after the decision had 

been made.  Mr. Speaker made the decision to suspend the vote 

in the House on Monday, June 29.  The House sat on Tuesday, 

June 30, a private members' day.  On Wednesday it was July 1, 

Canada Day, a statutory holiday and therefore, Mr. Speaker, 

the House did not sit.  Thursday, July 2, was the first practical 

time 

that the committee could meet and it did so at 7 p.m. that 

evening. 

 

I took the opportunity as an MLA to sit in on that special 

committee which was called to deal specifically and only with 

the issue of bell-ringing.  While I had the opportunity to sit in 

there, Mr. Speaker, because I was not a member of the 

committee, I could not participate in any votes.  The first and 

only item discussed at that meeting was a motion by the 

member for Prince Albert Carlton to limit bell-ringing, to limit 

bell-ringing to 30 minutes and a new rule, No. 55, to allow the 

opposition to suspend a Bill for three days. 

 

(2030) 

 

There was discussion around the table that evening.  There 

were even some practical suggestions made, yet they were 

ignored and disregarded.  Midway through the meeting, Mr. 

Speaker, one member said to me that at this meeting there 

seemed to be something going on here that we were not a part 

of, we being the members of the opposition.  And that member 

was right, Mr. Speaker; there was a secret agenda.  The secret 

agenda at that meeting was to change the rules to eliminate 

bell-ringing to allow the GRIP legislation to be forced through. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was very evident when I suggested that any 

rule changes should be dealt with as the rule changes 

previously agreed to in this House were being dealt with.  

Those changes and the manner in which they were being dealt 

with was to have a fixed period of time in this House in which 

those rule changes would be observed and then those rule 

changes could be reviewed and then renewed if the members of 

the House agreed, and if they agreed with all parties.  In fact 

the rule changes were made in a manner of consensus within 

that Rules and Procedures Committee before they were brought 

to the House. 

 

However at the meeting on July 2, the government members 

seemed willing to use a rule change which might only be in 

place for a short period of time to force through or to ram 

through their GRIP legislation.  They seemed to be prepared at 

that time to allow a rule change on the bell-ringing to be in 

place for only a short period of time and then they would be 

again reviewed.  But in that short period of time, in the case 

that we're discussing right now, would have amounted to 15 

days because that is when our 50-day rule change review will 

take place. 

 

This rule change would have allowed GRIP to have proceeded.  

After GRIP was in place it would not have been important to 

have the rule changes in place; it would not have been as 

important to have such a Draconian limit on bell-ringing.  As 

long as GRIP passed that was the important issue, Mr. Speaker, 

not the bell-ringing.  The government members seemed to be 

bound and determined to push through a vote on the motion by 

the member from Prince Albert Carlton -- the motion to limit 

the bell-ringing to 30 minutes and to allow a three-day 

suspension of any Bill. 

 

They totally disregarded any comments by the members of the 

opposition.  They were unwilling even to allow time for the 

House leaders to discuss the issue.  They were unwilling to 

allow any ideas or suggestions to be taken 



1318 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

back to their respective caucuses to be discussed. 

 

It was only after the member from Morse suggested that the 

opposition would take as critical a look at this motion as was 

taken at the GRIP legislation when it was introduced -- as you 

are aware, Mr. Speaker, the opposition rang the bells for 18 

days on that legislation, and it was only after that statement and 

a statement by the chairman of the Rules Committee, and I 

quote: "I made it very clear I'll be very, very reluctant to 

intervene" -- only then did the government members discuss 

the situation amongst themselves, and then decide to allow the 

issue to be taken to their respective caucuses, and to allow the 

House leaders an opportunity to discuss the situation.  The 

committee then decided to defer the motion to a meeting this 

morning, July 7, 1992. 

 

It was only at that point that the government members were 

willing to be co-operative.  I got a feeling from the manner in 

which the meeting of July 2 proceeded, that the government 

members came to that meeting with their minds made up, and 

closed to any ideas or suggestions.  The government members 

were bound and determined to kill bell-ringing at any cost. 

 

I would like to again quote from the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland-University: 

 

 . . . the government has an agenda to ignore the legislative 

process . . . and to, as a consequence, put forth a motion to 

muzzle the opposition, to muzzle the people of this province, 

and to change the rules for bell-ringing. 

 

June 9, 1989, the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland-University. 

 

Bell-ringing, Mr. Speaker, was to be discussed in a 

co-operative manner during the Rules and Procedures 

Committee meeting.  Instead today, the chairman came to the 

meeting with a prepared report, a report prepared before the 

vote was even taken.  The opposition was totally ignored.  The 

opposition, today, did not have the opportunity to put forward 

any suggestions for consideration.  The chairman knew what 

the results of the meeting were to be before the meeting took 

place.  The NDP Party was guaranteed a victory. 

 

Today we're supposed to be in private members' day.  In fact, 

the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow had a motion on the 

order paper dealing with parliamentary democracy.  What a 

sham.  The members opposite should be embarrassed.  This 

motion today will effectively stifle the opposition's ability to 

act on the people's behalf. 

 

I would like to quote from the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton, from the Rules and Procedures Committee meeting of 

July 2.  The member said:  "Because the item has not been 

brought to the House."  And in that sentence he is talking about 

the previous GRIP legislation. 

 

 . . . suspension should only take place after first reading or 

after . . . (inaudible) . . . In my mind it's fundamental.  An 

exclusion from debate in this legislature, before the 

legislature, is perhaps the worst abuse of all of any rule in our 

democratic 

process.  And that is why we feel this is urgent. 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker, he feels that it is urgent that this motion 

come to the floor of the legislature to be debated and passed so 

that bell-ringing as a tool for opposition will be eliminated.  At 

that meeting, Mr. Speaker, I asked the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton: 

 

 . . . did you feel the same way in 1989 when the bells rang on 

first reading? 

 

The reply from the member from Prince Albert Carlton: 

 

 Did I feel as strongly about it as I did now?  At that time I 

never thought . . . I felt very much like Harold does.  I felt 

very strongly about the issue. 

 

And I would like to quote the Harold mentioned here, that is 

the member from Morse: 

 

 However there comes a point in time when you have to say in 

the public interest that you draw a line in the sand and that's 

as far as you can go with it.  And in other jurisdictions they 

do have some of those, and I outlined some of them -- in the 

House of Lords in England, in the Senate.  And that's why I 

agree with the Senate.  It's a place for some public reflection, 

and they have done some reasonable work in some areas and 

I kind of buy that. 

 

So again I asked the member from Prince Albert Carlton: 

 

 But did you feel at the time that ringing it before the Bill 

came to the floor of the House, that it was a major abuse of 

the system? 

 

This was in reference to the ringing of the bells in 1989.  The 

response from the member of Prince Albert Carlton was: 

 

 We knew what the purpose of the Bill was.  It was there, it 

was spelled out, it was spelled out by those around.  There 

was no assumptions as to what the purpose of the Bill was . . 

. Well it's another issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, maybe knowledge of what is in the Bills is 

another issue to bell-ringing, but it's -- in this particular case 

with the GRIP legislation -- the lack of knowledge of what was 

in that Bill that was part of the cause for the bell-ringing.  And 

perhaps that's another one of the rules that we should look at at 

some point in time, is that Bills to be presented to the House, 

that the opposition members be given access to them before the 

Bill comes to the floor. 

 

I'd like to quote again from the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland-University.  No I'm sorry, from the member from 

Riversdale: 

 

 . . . for the first time in the record of the province of 

Saskatchewan, although the olive . . . they (did) come 

forward to change the rules of this House in the name of 

democracy, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  What kind of a double 

standard is this? 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we are indeed seeing is a double 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1319 

standard.  Indeed from across the floor we see a fake concern 

for democracy.  And I would like to quote again from the 

member from Riversdale, today the Premier of Saskatchewan, 

who on March 11, 1989, during the debate on the motion to 

limit bell-ringing said, and I quote: 

 

 What new-found democrats are these, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  

What new-found democracy is this?  What kind of charade is 

this?  What kind of an unprecedented action is it for these 

people to bring forward a motion for rules change without 

consultation . . . without any consultation from us; out of 

pique, out of pique. 

 

 They know that the people of Saskatchewan oppose what 

they have done and oppose it vigorously, and they wanted the 

opposition to do what was being done, and they've gotten 

beaten up.  I don't mean beaten up politically; I don't care 

about the politics.  They got beaten up on this fundamental 

policy of theirs, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  They got beaten up 

and now they're coming in and they're going to show us who 

the bosses are.  Again, what kind of democrats are these? 

 

A quote from the member for Riversdale, the Premier of 

Saskatchewan today. 

 

Well I have an answer for him, Mr. Speaker.  What kind of 

democrats are these?  These are new democrats, the members 

of the New Democratic Party. 

 

The only tools left to the opposition if this bell-ringing Bill 

passes will be to filibuster, will be to talk for hour on end.  And 

some of our members have the ability to talk for hours on end 

but others do not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's difficult to attract public attention of the men 

and women of Saskatchewan when the members of this House 

are speaking for hour on end.  This motion takes away the 

opposition's rights to put forward the concerns of their 

constituents and the constituents of the rest of the province. 

 

When we walked out and rang the bells, Mr. Speaker, it went 

far beyond our own constituencies.  We were acting on behalf 

of all of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The members opposite seem to have a very short memory 

when it comes to bell-ringing.  They should think back to the 

comments that they were making in 1989 when a similar 

motion to the one at hand was being discussed.  And this 

evening we have brought up some of their quotes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a massive outcry from the NDP that 

their democratic rights were being trampled upon.  Again, I 

would like to quote from the member for Riversdale: 

 

 These are the people who say they're the defenders (and this 

was talking about the previous government).  If they're the 

defenders, why didn't they approach us in this kind of fashion 

-- traditionally -- of trying to define the rules in a 

 way that we could all accept and agree, these 

self-proclaimed, new-found democrats. 

 

The motions in the rules and procedures committees prior to 

this motion being presented to the House have been done 

through consensus, through unanimity.  It was agreed that the 

motion would be handled by an all-party committee, that all 

members of the House today know that agreement was not 

reached.  The government of the day did not strong arm the 

decision to force through the motion to cease bell-ringing.  

That would have been an undemocratic action. 

 

But what is this government today doing?  This morning, July 

7, 1992, they forced this motion in committee and they will 

now attempt to force this vote to pass in this House.  What 

we're seeing today, Mr. Speaker, is the socialist attitude for 

democracy, the attitude that what's yours is mine and what's 

mine is mine. Or to put it another way, that anything that 

furthers the socialist agenda is sacred and any method used to 

thwart the socialist goals is a sacrilege, a sacrilege even if it is 

the same method that was sacred in the hands of socialists in 

achieving their ends. 

 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Speaker, this reminds me of the action taken in the 

legislatures of Russia during the years of Stalin and in the 

legislatures of Germany prior to World War II.  The 

legislatures there were dominated by Adolf Hitler and the 

Nazis.  In both of those institutions the affairs of governments 

were performed legally, legally in the content of the law as it 

was written in those lands.  Those dictators used the 

legislatures to carry out their dirty work.  They stifled the 

opposition. In fact the members of both those houses were to 

respond as Pavlov's dogs responded to the whim and signal of 

their master. 

 

The masters of this House, the Premier, expects that his 

back-benchers and even the opposition members to respond to 

his beck and call without even a whimper.  If the Premier 

expects this opposition to roll over and play dead, he is very 

wrong.  If he is so inclined, he is simply being arrogant and 

pompous.  And I am not the only one who believes, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Premier is being arrogant and pompous in 

trying to stop the legislation . . . the legislature from having the 

power to ring bells. 

 

If the opposition in some of those legislatures had had the 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to ring bells and stop the government 

maybe the Second World War would not have been necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote to you from a letter I 

received.  This concerns the attitude that this government 

brings to this legislature.  And it's a quote from a group of 

ladies who meet on Thursdays for tea and who watch the 

proceedings of this legislature.  And I'll quote: 

 

 I am a retired housekeeper from the Plains Hospital.  Every 

Thursday a group of ladies and I get together for tea, and 

when it's on, (we) watch the Legislative Assembly on the 

television.  We have a lot of fun especially during the 

questions part. 



1320 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

 When you said the Premier was pompous, we all started to 

laugh.  You see we have always thought Mr. Romanow is 

pompous, and have said it many times in fun among 

ourselves.  So when you said it too it was funny, and it made 

us feel important too. 

 

 Keep up the good work young man.  There are some old 

ladies out here who enjoy some good debate. 

 

And there is five names on here. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Signed: mom. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- My mother would write a lot longer 

letter than this, Mr. Speaker, if she took the time to write. 

 

Mr. Speaker we're not prepared to surrender to such arrogance 

and undemocratic measures.  The government has a fight on its 

hands because we will not sit still for this.  The farmers of this 

province who will be directly affected if this motion is allowed 

to proceed will also not sit still on this.  Mr. Speaker, I will be 

voting against the motion. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well it's again one of those days where one 

would have to say that it's distinctly not a pleasure to have to 

speak in this Assembly.  Even though we fought hard in an 

election to win a seat here we never expected that the rights of 

individuals would be challenged by the government in such a 

manner, at least not so quickly into their mandate. 

 

But then I suppose, Mr. Speaker, if you think about it for a 

while, when better to change the rules than early in your 

mandate, because if you do that and get all of the rotten things 

done quickly, you have the right to ram through anything you 

want for the next three years and you have very little 

opposition left.  You destroy your opposition immediately at 

the outset, and in three years you hope that nobody has a long 

enough memory and you try to create some other subterfuge 

with the new issue and tried to get re-elected.  Obviously I 

guess then when you think about it, we should have been 

expecting this from this type of a government. 

 

I was appreciative, Mr. Speaker, when you earlier made your 

comment that you had allowed us to tie this piece of work to 

the GRIP issue.  It is important that people do know that it is 

tied together.  And your acknowledgement of our right to do 

that certainly reinforces the fact that the two go hand in glove. 

 

The second report of a Special Committee on Rules and 

Procedures -- it's a shame that we don't have the first report, but 

I'm going to just talk to you a minute about the word-by-word 

way that this report and rules is written.  I believe it's important 

for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to know and 

understand exactly what is in this second report. 

 

Quite frankly, when it was read earlier today I expect that most 

folks really sort of thought it was one of those orders of 

business that naturally happen sometimes just before question 

period that really don't take a whole lot of effect on folks lives.  

I think probably most folks thought well, 

here's an order of business, some housekeeping that is going to 

be tidied up by the Clerk, and likely didn't really pay that much 

attention to it.  So what they probably missed was the reality of 

the dramatic effect that this report is going to have, not only on 

those of us who are in opposition but on their lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the report goes like this in the first paragraph: 

 

 Your committee recommends the following amendments to 

the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly.  The 

first recommendation is for the rule change to establish a time 

limit on the length that the division bells may ring during a 

recorded division.  This change in the rules brings 

Saskatchewan into step with other Canadian legislatures. 

 

Now let's just stop right there, Mr. Speaker, and see if it really 

does bring us into step with other Canadian legislatures.  This 

is a misnomer because quite frankly other legislatures, while 

they don't allow bell-ringing, have made other provisions in 

order for oppositions to have tools to work with that allow the 

opposition to preserve the basic fundamentals of democracy . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Name them. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I will later.  I will name them.  The member 

has asked me to name them, and I will name the tools that they 

have after a while, but it's early in the evening and we've got a 

long time.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, for the member opposite's 

benefit, I want to say that we as an opposition are here for a 

long time, not for a good time. 

 

It is the responsibility of an opposition, any opposition in a 

democratic government, to make a government take time -- 

that's our job.  We didn't choose to be elected into opposition, 

but fate has done that and it has put a responsibility on to us.  

The voters have decided that we should be in opposition, and 

we will play that role and we will play it well.  And our role is 

to stall the government long enough for people in a democracy 

to be able to absorb what is happening to them. 

 

You have to take things easy in a democracy because otherwise 

you have a revolution rather than an evolution.  And the people 

of Saskatchewan are not prepared to allow a revolution in their 

province.  They want to go back to evolutionary changes that 

they can learn gradually to live and to absorb.  This 

government has been intent upon creating a revolution through 

its legislative power. 

 

And in other jurisdictions -- I want to go back to discussing the 

actual report, because that in fact is what we're here for -- the 

reality is that in other jurisdictions, as I was pointing out before 

I was so rudely interrupted, in other jurisdictions the folks have 

decided that ringing of bells is truly, not over a 17- or 18-day 

period of time, totally productive.  Assemblies should in fact 

attempt to do some work. 

 

But what they have decided is that there are other tools that can 

be effective, and so before they took out the bell-ringing, they 

put those tools into place and they 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1321 

allow the oppositions the right to use those tools to bring about 

the kind of democracy and the needs of democracy that I 

explained to you a minute ago, basically providing the time for 

the people in the community to absorb what is happening to 

their lives as a result of legislative moves. 

 

It goes on to say ". . . all of which have restrictions on the 

length that the bells may ring during a recorded vote."  Now of 

course those restrictions vary quite a lot throughout the 

Commonwealth and throughout our country and I think, in all 

fairness, it should have pointed out what those restrictions and 

lengths are.  And I guess we'll have to ask our researchers to go 

into that a little more in depth so that we can understand it 

fully. 

 

One of the things that is used, Mr. Speaker, as a tool for 

oppositions . . . and I guess the people of Saskatchewan should 

note here, Mr. Speaker, that people in the government side 

seem to find this rather hilarious.  They sit and laugh jovially as 

they attempt to cover up their embarrassment at attempting to 

destroy the democratic process by giggling and cackling like a 

flock of drunken geese who have been feeding on some corn 

mash. 

 

You will note, Mr. Speaker, that there are tools that other 

jurisdictions have that we don't have. In some jurisdictions a 

unanimous vote is required in order to pass certain pieces of 

legislation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That I can, for 

example, Elijah Harper held up the entire Meech Lake process 

and held up the entire country of Canada by using his one vote 

in Manitoba.  Now, my friend, is that the kind of example you 

wanted? 

 

Now if you want to talk about taking away rules in the middle 

of a ball game, let's talk about putting some other rules back 

into place that make the ball game fair.  All right let's talk 

about putting back the things that should be there and let's talk 

about putting the rules into place at a time when they should be 

put into place and that's before the game is played.  You don't 

change the rules in the middle of the ball game or you're not 

going to have very much fun playing with the opposition. 

 

Now Mr. Harper, Mr. Harper may have done more than he has 

ever realized in pointing out to people in this country, the need 

for oppositions to be able to hold up governments and to be 

able to bring about a time of cooling off in society.  That's, Mr. 

Speaker, what bell-ringing has become all about in 

Saskatchewan.  I didn't make the rules.  I learned to live by 

them and if you want to change them, that's fine.  We'll work at 

that in the time when it should be done. 

 

We came to this Assembly elected as an opposition with 

certain rules that we were told we could use.  The fact that 

bell-ringing is not used any place else was not ever a 

consideration.  It is one of our rules in our Assembly and we as 

an opposition took those rules and applied them as best we 

could to do the job that we are elected to do, and our job is 

important.  As your job was important when you government 

members were also in opposition. 
 

It is absolutely essential for oppositions to have powers and it 

is also essential that governments have opposition, so much 

essential in fact that in those jurisdictions where there has been 

a total vote in favour of one party and there 

are no members left in other parties to sustain a reasonable 

opposition, the governments in our country actually appoint 

members from their own side to go and sit in the opposition 

side of the House in their legislatures to think up things that 

could be wrong or should be considered.  They form their own 

opposition to themselves because that's how important it is.  

They know and they understand that you cannot have a 

democracy without good opposition. 

 

Now let's go on, Mr. Speaker, to the second paragraph of this 

second report.  The second recommendation is for a new 

procedure to provide a period of three sitting days during 

which consideration of a government public Bill might be 

postponed.  Now that, if the rules were all encompassing and 

changed in the proper time frame, might be an acceptable 

exchange to the present situation.  But that can only work if 

you replace what you're removing with something else that 

oppositions can use to effectively perform their duties. 

 

(2100) 

 

It goes on say, Mr. Speaker, that: 

 

 The purpose of suspending a Bill would be to allow members 

an opportunity to further study the Bill . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Good idea. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- And it certainly is important.  The 

government member voices his opinion that that is a good idea 

and I'm glad that he agrees. 

 

Sometimes Bills do need to be studied.  And perhaps when my 

colleague from Souris-Cannington mentioned a few minutes 

ago that Bills should be presented to the opposition a little 

ahead, maybe that wasn't such a bad idea, even though they 

seemed rather amused by the whole idea. 

 

It seems to me that if you want to have good government and 

you want to have good Bills that help people, you must also be 

willing to suffer the scrutinies of examination.  If you are intent 

as a government to ram legislation through without people 

having an opportunity to examine and study it, it must tell you 

one thing and that is that the government fears what will be 

said about what it is trying to do. 

 

If you are so afraid, so afraid as a government to let the people 

know what you're going to do, then it cannot be in the best 

interests of the people to have that kind of legislation or that 

kind of government. 

 

You have a powerful majority: 56 to 10; anything you want as 

a government you will eventually have.  But you must, in order 

to provide good government, do it in the framework of the 

rules that allow an opposition and the people an opportunity to 

absorb the changes that you are making in society. 

 

If you don't do that, I am going to lecture you just a little.  You 

will lose the next election.  And I think that is clearly obvious 

at this point.  People will not tolerate the 



1322 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

approach that you people take to government.  You are not 

operating as a democratic structure.  You've got four years to 

put your legislation into place.  You don't have to ram it down 

people's throat tomorrow morning. 

 

If bell-ringing can assist you to become a good government, 

then you should be quite happy to have it.  And if you are 

intent on changing the rules, then you should be willing, in 

order to get re-elected next time, to allow new structures for the 

opposition so that they in fact can do their job effectively 

enough so that you can get re-elected. 

 

The second report goes on to say: 

 

 The purpose of suspending a Bill would be to allow members 

an opportunity to further study the Bill, consider comments 

made in debate, and to review public reaction. 

 

And that is necessary. 

 

But in all fairness, Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure that in 

Saskatchewan that we have the ability to communicate well 

enough and fast enough for people to be able to absorb in three 

days what might totally and completely change their lives.  I 

know that we live in the modern age of television and radio, 

but the reality is that a lot of folks go on holidays for a week.  

The reality is that over in our area a lot of people may be away 

from home for three days just going across to Medicine Hat to 

do some shopping. 

 

And if you're going to be fair about this idea of exchanging the 

extended bell-ringing to three days and justifying that because 

we need the time to let the folks know, then surely you must 

consider whether or not that is the right amount of time.  That 

in itself could be a topic of some considerable debate.  That's 

why it's so important that you folks should have considered 

bringing this Assembly together last January.  It's why it was so 

important that you should have sat down and negotiated 

through this very committee a lot more depth and a lot more 

length into the areas of the changes that you were thinking you 

were going to have to have. 

 

But of course you didn't know at that time that you were going 

to need these changes.  In fact it was the furthest thing from 

your mind.  You didn't know that your Minister of Agriculture 

was going to put you into a corner that you couldn't get out.  

You didn't know that your Minister of Agriculture was going to 

throw away 200 millions of dollars of federal money that could 

have come into this province.  You didn't know that you were 

going to be so cornered that you would have to change the 

rules in order to save your government; the millions of dollars 

that you threw away because of bad decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is quite evident that the decision to change the 

rules in the middle of the game came only as a result of the 

total realization by this administration that they were going to 

lose a battle in the courts and they had to tamper with the 

evidence in order to win.  And they cannot win until they force 

a piece of legislation through this Assembly, a piece of 

legislation that cannot be forced through if the rules are applied 

equally for this opposition 

as they were for the past opposition. 

 

It was mentioned earlier by one of my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, 

that last year this very Assembly was held up for 17 days in a 

debate on an energy Bill, 1989, a couple of years back.  One of 

my colleagues has assisted me with the date of April 21. 

 

And this piece of legislation that they oppose, was it so 

important at that time, Mr. Speaker, to spend 17 days to make 

their point?  Who am I to judge that?  Obviously the people 

that did that action thought they were doing what they thought 

was right and they were using the rules that had been supplied 

to them as available for them to use.  They thought they were 

doing the right thing for the province and they thought that they 

were doing the right thing philosophically for their party.  

Because as you will recall, Mr. Speaker, they rang the bells as a 

tool to point out to the province the differences between 

privately owned companies and publicly owned corporations. 

 

The NDP, by their philosophy, believe that publicly owned 

corporations run by the government work best for the interests 

of the people.  And they were prepared to stake their political 

careers, their political ammunition and use every rule available 

to them to prove their point that in fact SaskEnergy should stay 

as a Crown corporation and not be sold to the people of 

Saskatchewan through a share offering. 

 

It will always be I suppose a contentious issue of debate, Mr. 

Speaker, whether those two philosophies . . . one is right and 

the other is wrong.  All we can do is allow time to judge that 

and to allow people the opportunity to see how things work 

out. 

 

Saskoil, you will recall, Mr. Speaker, runs quite efficiently as a 

privately owned company with the government only owning a 

small number of shares.  Before it was . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I don't have the information.  One of the 

members wants to know how many shares.  But I am quite sure 

that your Minister of Energy and Mines could look that up for 

you. I am very sure he could.  In fact, I will ask him when the 

appropriate time comes if he will supply that in Estimates for 

you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to get back to the subject of the bell-ringing and 

away from the comments made by the member opposite, we 

have to note that this tool was used by the government when 

they were in opposition.  They used that tool to attempt to 

convince the people of Saskatchewan that they were enough 

right to be elected as a government.  They used that tool to 

bring public attention to their philosophy and to their direction, 

and to their ability to work as an effective opposition.  Thus 

they hoped, I'm quite sure, to prove to the people of 

Saskatchewan that they would be a good government.  

Unfortunately, the two do not happen to go together today. 

 

Now I want to go on and deal with this exact second report 

because I think it's important, Mr. Speaker, that the folks in the 

province have an opportunity to absorb this sentence by 

sentence, and to consider the ramifications that are involved.  

Earlier today it was suggested that we had not reviewed enough 

or sufficiently, that we perhaps 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1323 

hadn't gotten enough public reaction.  The reality, sir, is that we 

did considerable discussion with people.  We did a 

considerable amount of travelling, and the reality is rather 

strange. 

 

When we were campaigning last fall and we discussed 

bell-ringing at some length . . . because of course the Assembly 

in this province had been rather laid to shambles last year and 

the year before because of the use of rules, and so the 

bell-ringing issue was an issue in the campaign as I went 

around my constituency.  In all honesty, Mr. Speaker, a lot of 

folks did express that they felt that bell-ringing was being used 

excessively, and that people weren't working hard enough at 

the actual working of the Assembly.  And they made no bones 

about letting me know their feelings at that time. 

 

It is ironic though, that I go back to those very same people 

after we get into the discussion on the GRIP Bill, and we ring 

the bells for some time, and went to the country to discuss it 

with the folks, and the very same folks that had told me during 

last fall's election that they thought bell-ringing was being used 

excessively, told me that we should now use this tool to slow 

the government down.  They favoured ringing the bells. 

 

I had such extremes as this, believe it or not, such extremes as 

this.  Some of those folks said ring the bells till Christmas.  

One individual actually said ring the bells for three and a half 

years, and then they can't wreck the rest of the province before 

the next election.  I guess they've determined when the next 

election's going to be. 

 

Now we haven't said, Mr. Speaker, that we are totally opposed 

to the consideration of changes of rules.  At least, I personally 

will say that for myself.  I don't want to speak for all of my 

colleagues out of turn.  They can speak for themselves as we 

go.  I haven't ever thought that bell-ringing in itself was a tool 

that was absolute.  Nothing is in our world.  But you have to 

exchange it for something else.  If you want to preserve the 

democracy that we live in, in the way that we understand it and 

the way that people enjoy having it, then you will have to 

exchange us some other rules to work with.  And this is not the 

time, Mr. Speaker, to be negotiating those kinds of changes. 

 

And while this debate will be productive in establishing the 

thoughts of the people opposite versus our own, and while I'm 

sure that some of the folks might say the heckling that's going 

on at the moment is out of character, unnecessary, disruptive, 

and unproductive, it in fact, Mr. Speaker, probably has some 

benefit because we can find out what their true feelings are. 

 

After all, sometimes people say and express themselves 

through their actions exactly what they are feeling and 

thinking.  And it's interesting to watch how heckling can sort of 

clue you in on what's going on in the minds of the folks 

opposite.  And I'm sure the people of Saskatchewan will pick 

that up and in the long run it will all come together to better 

assist us to having a better democracy and a better control of a 

government that has gone drunk with power. 

 

Absolute power corrupts absolutely.  One of my daughters 

mentioned that and it just struck my mind, isn't 

this ever an ironic situation that a week, not more than a week 

ago, I was presented with that very statement by one of my 

daughters.  And here we have today, less than a week later, a 

government that is attempting to seize absolute power, but not 

with fear of becoming absolutely corrupt because it's too late 

for that.  This government is absolutely corrupt already.  They 

are absolutely corrupt and drunk with power. 

 

(2115) 

 

They believe that they will simply take away all of the rules 

that apply to giving the opposition the tools to work with in this 

Assembly, and then they will have their private little 

dictatorship which will afford them some rather unique kinds 

of graces.  They will come in here, Mr. Speaker, on January 15 

after they've had a nice, long Christmas holiday and they will 

sit for a week, pass all of the 64-or-some-odd Bills if they 

happen to want as many as we've already got on the order 

paper here in this Assembly through this sitting. 

 

They will pass them all in a week's time.  They will pass their 

budget in three days or six days, whatever the limits are.  And I 

should imagine within two weeks they'll be all done and they 

can have a 10-month paid holiday on the backs of the taxpayers 

and nobody'll have to do any work at all to earn their wages as 

a member of this Assembly or as an MLA.  I guess that's what 

absolute power could do for you, and I suppose if I was in 

government I might think, in my mind, that this would be a 

pretty nice kind of show to have.  We could all go out for a 

10-month holiday, take it easy, come back, sit for two weeks, 

ram everything through, then take off and have another holiday 

on the taxpayers. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't think that's quite right.  I don't think 

it's quite fair.  In fact, I think if this Assembly is forced to give 

up the rules that allow the opposition to work, then those 

members opposite should all take 10 months of their pay and 

donate it to a charity because they're not going to be earning it 

sitting out in the country fishing.  I expect some of them don't 

fish, Mr. Speaker.  I hear a few folks complaining.  Well 

whatever you do for fun is fine with me, but don't take it out of 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and out of their backs if you're 

just going to be bumming around taking it easy. 

 

Now it goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, that: 

 

 Your Committee recommends the following amendments to 

the Rules and Procedures and further recommends that the 

said Rules take effect on the date this report is concurred in 

by the Assembly: 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, is there any doubt that this Assembly would 

vote this in, with a majority of 56 to 10?  Hardly.  But I 

suppose it had to be in there to make it legal.  In the past 

though, Mr. Speaker, in all fairness, I believe, and I guess 

maybe I could be wrong here so I'll be corrected if I turn out to 

be wrong, but my impression is that in the past, when 

committees sat to make rule changes to the Assembly's rules, it 

was only done through a gentlemen's agreement, through a 

gentlemen's agreement with unanimous consent.  But of course 

when I mentioned that 



1324 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

earlier today to someone, they said these people are no 

gentlemen, why would they follow any kind of gentlemen's 

agreements? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, our system cannot work, as it has in the 

past, if we don't honour time-tested traditions.  If we don't 

honour contracts our society will fall apart.  You know I didn't 

make those words up myself.  I paraphrased the fellow that 

these gentlemen like to dig up every so often to make their 

point.  Those words, in essence, were said by Tommy Douglas 

in this very same Assembly many, many years ago.  He stood 

here and told people that contracts are absolutely essential for 

society and if you don't live by contracts, society will fall apart, 

is what the man was saying.  You have to have rules that you 

abide by. 

 

If bell-ringing as a rule is going to be taken away in the middle 

of this Assembly's sitting, you are breaking a fundamental 

contract with the people of this province and with this 

opposition.  Those rules are written as a contract.  And 

breaking these rules in the middle of our session is the breaking 

of a contract.  No different than the breaking of the contract 

with the farmers when they say that they're going to 

retroactively declare that letters were sent out on March 15 

when in fact everyone in the province knows that no such thing 

ever happened.  It is as much a broken contract on that front as 

it is on this front and they all become one, and you cannot have 

a democratic society where people do not honour contracts. 

 

I challenge you people to look up your own favourite person's 

comments, one Tommy Douglas, who believed in contracts. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say in this second report, that 

the rules and procedures of the Legislative Assembly be 

amended by adding the following after rule 36(1) length of 

division bells; 36.2(1): 

 

 When the Speaker has put the question on a motion and a 

recorded division is requested under rule 36, the bells to call 

in the members shall be sounded for not more than 30 

minutes. 

 

If, Mr. Speaker, this rule change were being put into a package 

of rule changes in January, before the Assembly sat, that might 

be enough time.  I'm sure there will be some folks that would 

say, no that's not really quite good enough, we probably should 

have an hour, because maybe somebody gets caught with his 

suit jacket out at the cleaners and can't come into this very 

Assembly until he can take one off of one of the pages or 

somebody else. 

 

I just have to point out to you, Mr. Speaker, that we do have 

rules.  Small, little rules like wearing a jacket to this Assembly.  

And we adhere to that rule, don't we?  It's an unwritten 

contract.  I expect it's written in the rules as an official written 

contract.  But here is what we do -- we put on a jacket because 

we believe in the time tested traditions of this very Assembly, a 

tradition that no member as an MLA will hold his seat unless 

he is respectably attired.  That is a rule that we all comply with 

quite cheerfully.  We wear a tie, we wear a jacket.  I would just 

as soon have not worn this jacket tonight, but the 

reality is that it is a rule, it's a contract, just the same as 

bell-ringing is a rule in an unwritten contract that we use as an 

opposition as a tool.  And you are taking away the rules in the 

middle of an Assembly sitting and that's not right. 

 

We have a committee, Mr. Speaker, that is going to send a 

second report to this Assembly and when I read it, it sounds so 

very official, especially when you say that the committee has 

sat, considered this, written it up and presented it to this 

Assembly.  That sends a subliminal message to folks that it 

must have been agreed to. 

 

Well for the public out there who don't know how committees 

work, let me point out for them that there are seven people on 

that committee who belong to the government side, there are 

two members in that committee who come from the opposition 

side.  The vice-chairman of that committee is one of the 

opposition members and he absolutely assures me, Mr. 

Speaker, that he voted against this measure.  There's one other 

member and that is the member of the Liberal Party, the 

independent member.  So you have three potential votes 

against the government seven.  Is there any possibility that 

anything they wanted to ram down your throat would come to 

this Assembly?  Absolutely no question whatsoever. 

 

The reality, Mr. Speaker, is that they can force a change on 

anyone and could have done this for time immemorial since 

1922 or any time in-between, because the same gentlemen's 

agreements were the only thing that held this Assembly 

together.  And that gentlemen's agreement today is broken for 

the very first time in the history of this province, the 

gentlemen's agreement that has held committees together in 

rule changes is being broken and challenged.  We are setting a 

dangerous, dangerous precedent for democracy here. 

 

The thing goes on to say: 

 

 (2) Notwithstanding sub-rule (1), where a recorded division 

is requested in the following cases, the division bells shall 

sound for not more than ten minutes: 

 

Where a recorded division is requested -- now suppose 

somebody happens to be in the bathroom.  I guess somebody's 

going to argue that for a while too, that maybe it could take 20 

minutes. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in all fairness, if this rule change were 

brought in to us in January or February when this Assembly 

was not sitting and we were to be allowed to consider it along 

with a package, we might not totally agree, but at least we 

would give it consideration as part of a package.  We have not 

been accused of being unreasonable opposition members in this 

committee before.  I have heard no one in this Assembly ever 

accuse our representatives on this committee of being unfair, of 

being obstructionist, of being unwilling to negotiate.  I have 

never heard anyone from either side of this House accuse the 

members of opposition of doing any of those things in 

committee. 

 

And yet this committee has worked for many, many years 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1325 

on a gentlemen's agreement. That gentlemen's agreement, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, being quite simply that people would 

unanimously agree before rule changes in the Assembly were 

made.  It's not a Bill to tax somebody 10 per cent more on their 

income tax that we're talking about here. 

 

We're talking about the rules of this Assembly and how it 

works.  It's totally different.  You have to use the time-tested 

tradition of gentlemen's agreement -- a contract between 

fellows and ladies who come together and decide what would 

be best in the interests of democracy to make the system work. 

 

We have had some rule changes.  All of you heard earlier 

today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about a few of them -- the 

members' statements, where fellows like myself who might not 

ordinarily have an opportunity to speak can stand up and talk 

about things like Hootinanny in the Hills out in Cypress Park.  

And that's important because a member's statement is the only 

way that some of these members, especially on the government 

side, it's the only rule that's been changed that allows them an 

opportunity to speak to the public of Saskatchewan.  In a 

House that has 56 people voting on one side and 10 on the 

other, it is by nature of this very Assembly that some of the 

back-benchers on the government side will have no opportunity 

to speak. 

 

And so that rule change was a good one.  We like it.  If it isn't 

abused we will continue to like it.  There's always that 

possibility that people may start to make a mockery of it, use it 

for partisan political reasons or something like that.  But as it 

has been working, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a good tool and a 

good rule change for people who ordinarily don't have a chance 

to address the public of Saskatchewan to view and express their 

views to the public of this province. 

 

And so that was a good rule change.  And our members 

supported putting that rule change in as a trial period.  And I 

applaud them for doing that.  It was a good move and it was 

done unanimously as all of the rule changes have always done 

before -- always been done that way before until this very day. 

 

A new course we set this province on. A new course that won't 

end the world but in small terms it is a disastrous course.  We 

aren't going to upset the apple cart with this change in terms of 

world war.  We aren't going to have a revolution likely, but 

changes like this in history, Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly have 

caused those things to happen. 

 

The members earlier heard my colleague refer to Joseph Stalin 

and they laughed and hee-hawed and belly-laughed about that.  

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Joseph Stalin started out as what was 

considered in my history book, if you will recall, a somewhat 

moderate individual. 

 

But absolute power corrupts absolutely.  And the man began to 

seize power step by step, little by little, until he destroyed his 

country to the point that 30 years after his death they take 

everything and tear it down that even resembles the man.  

Because they absolutely now believe 

that he was totally corrupt, and they believe that and they know 

it and they want to wash their hands of the whole thing. 

 

(2130) 

 

Earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we talked about changing the 

rules on the bell-ringing as being Draconian -- and maybe that's 

too harsh a word.  But in a small way in a small province in 

Saskatchewan in the middle of a country that's enjoyed 

democracy, even though as I said before we're not going to 

cause a world war by this, we are fundamentally changing 

something that in another example that my friend referred to, 

changed the history of the world.  These folks thought it was 

great hilarity to be compared with the things that Adolph Hitler 

did. 

 

Well let me point out to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that 

individual was a socialist in a socialist party before he seized 

absolute power and became absolutely corrupt.  And it was no 

laughing matter and this won't be any laughing matter to you 

folks when in three and a half years you find yourselves sitting 

over here with no tools and no rules as an opposition to work 

with. 

 

Because this can come back to haunt you.  Just as surely as it is 

bad for us, it will be bad for opposition people in this province 

in the future unless we put together a package where rule 

changes are made that provide the opposition with other tools 

to be used to cool down a government. 

 

People have been phoning me, begging me to ring the bells on 

many issues, but we haven't done that.  We haven't done that.  

We have used a responsible approach to using this tool. 

 

Now I want to just finish before I go into that aspect of it.  I 

guess I've got a long time to discuss this with you yet, so not 

being pressed for time and having nowhere better to go, I'll just 

finish off with my analysis of the second report before I go into 

how the opposition has been credible in its use of the rules and 

the tools available to it. 

 

It goes on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to say: 

 

 Notwithstanding sub-rule (1), where a recorded division is 

requested in the following cases, the division bells shall 

sound for not more than 10 minutes: 

 

And then it goes to: 

 

 (i) on a non-debatable motion; 

 

Well if a motion is non-debatable, and the folks are all here, I 

expect that's probably the way it will end up being, if it's done 

at the proper time and the proper place. 

 

 (ii) on a motion moved without notice; 

 

Now I wonder about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in all fairness.  

On a motion moved without notice.  Now if nobody knows 

about it, and a motion is moved, and you say you've all got to 

be back here in 10 minutes, is that really good democracy.  

Think about that.  You're going to put in some goofy notion, 

maybe, that somebody dreamt 



1326 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

up, somebody maybe has a hallucination and puts it on paper, 

moves without notice, moves a motion in this Assembly, and 

the bells can only ring for 10 minutes to call people in to vote 

that down. 

 

Well, my friend, I'm quite sure that if you're on the government 

side, and we're over here, and you're voting on something that 

you've introduced, that would go quite nicely.  But I have my 

suspicions that if it were our motion and you didn't like it, and 

if we happen to have a few by-elections, and our numbers 

happen to get a little closer to yours, and your sitting there with 

14 members and we have 15, then you won't like it so good if 

one of your guys can't get back here in time.  The shoe will be 

on your other foot then, my friend.  It also goes on then: 

 

 (iii) in Committee of the Whole or Committee of Finance; 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, wouldn't the Minister of Finance 

just love to be able to pop his budget measures through with a 

10-minute limit on bell 

_ringing.  We could double the income tax in one fell swoop.  

We might just decide to put the sales tax up to 12 per cent 

instead of 7 or 8.  We might just slap that right through.  And 

we won't even have a murmur because the news media won't 

have time to record it and we'll be charging the tax before 

anybody wakes up.  You see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why 

oppositions have to have tools.  Why we have to have rules like 

bell-ringing or something in exchange for that.  It's in order to 

let the people know what's going on in this Assembly before, in 

fact, it destroys their lives. 

 

And there's never been a government more capable of 

destroying more people in a shorter period of time than this 

one.  Never in the history of this province have we run such a 

high risk. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the report goes on, and it says: 

 

 and further: 

 

 That the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly be 

amended by adding the following after rule 55: 

 

And here, I guess, is rule 55.1(1): 

 

 Proceedings on a public Bill introduced by a minister shall, at 

the request of the official opposition, be suspended for a 

period of three sitting days following the first reading either 

before or during second reading debate or during committee 

stage.  Such request can be made only once during 

consideration of any Bill and shall be made orally by the 

member standing in his or her place. 

 

Now the problem there of course being that if you're going to 

really examine this and what it's going to do to opposition and 

to our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it says that you can only 

do this once. 

 

Supposing, for example, that a very controversial Bill comes in 

and on first reading the opposition says, we better pull this 

thing for three days to consider it.  And they 

do that; that'll be the rule.  And we all consider it.  We come 

back and the government decides to put in an amendment and 

the amendment makes it even worse than it was before.  What 

tool now is available to the opposition to make its point to the 

public?  Because we've already sat once with the bells ringing 

for three days to study it.  And they could ram anything they 

want through. 

 

So in effect what you do is you very coldly and callously 

calculate as a government how you can design a Bill that will 

irritate the opposition just enough to get them to walk out, and 

invoke this rule of three days, but not so bad as to get the whole 

general public upset too much.  Then in three days you're back.  

The media hasn't given you too much trouble with it because it 

doesn't look too bad.  But then you stick in your amendments 

that change the thing whatever way you want it, and the 

opposition's hands are tied and there is no vehicle left except to 

filibuster. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm not saying that this rule would 

be totally without merit, if we didn't take some time here 

maybe to re-examine it, if we didn't have in it that particular 

restriction, if we worked on it in committee. 

 

I believe that there's a lot of potential in this document.  But it's 

not perfect and it's not quite right.  And if you force it through 

as it is now, if you think the GRIP situation was a mess -- all 

summer long and all spring -- if you think that's a mess, think 

about what this is going to do as we try to work our way 

through it in committee to straighten out the mess that it's in, 

where people supposedly are supposed to have a gentleman's 

agreement to agree on things. 

 

Nobody will ever agree on anything, because you started out 

with a flawed document that nobody agreed to.  So how are 

you going to change it and have agreement?  How are you 

going to fix it later and make it workable?  How are you going 

to do that with unanimous consent if you start it out with 

people that don't consent?  It's absolutely impossible.  It will 

never happen.  The decorum of this Assembly is at stake and it 

will be destroyed by this kind of measure.  That's why 

precedents are dangerous. 

 

And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is why people in our court 

system use precedents so very cautiously to make sure that they 

don't upset the democracy that we live in and the public 

responsibility that we have. 

 

Just as judges have a responsibility, we as sitting MLAs have 

responsibilities.  We all have responsibilities to see to it that 

our democracy works; to see to it that we preserve the very 

fundamental things that our forefathers fought two world wars 

to preserve.  It is a fact that democracy was at stake.  And it 

must have been very important for people to go out and die for. 

 

I can't imagine any issue in this Assembly that we've talked 

about that I would be willing to walk over there and have 

somebody take a shot at me for.  Not one issue is that 

important.  And yet my forefathers and my relatives went 

across an ocean with a lot of discomfort to be shot to preserve 

something that we have the potential to destroy here.  They 

were willing to die to preserve democracy and those things that 

democracy can bring us.  The freedom of 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1327 

the individual to express his opinions -- that's what 

democracy's about, the right, the right to be treated fairly and 

equitably, the right to be able to work or not to work, to 

choose. 

 

Those things are important enough for people to have laid 

down their lives for and yet the government of this province 

would take away the very fundamental rules that allow an 

opposition to make sure that a government works in the 

democratic interests of society. 

 

It is interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that one of the members 

across the way has suggested that we should be working on the 

work of the Assembly.  Well, my friend, we didn't bring this 

document to this Assembly; you did.  This day could have been 

spent in private members' debate as it should have been. And in 

reality this night we could have been talking about some of 

your Bills, because I understand there were some negotiations 

before you decided to bring this mess in.  So there were some 

negotiations to work into some extended hours to get through 

some of the legislation, to do the debating that is necessary for 

that to happen.  Those negotiations were set and we had no 

objection to that, but no, here we are defending the democratic 

rights of our society instead of handling the business of this 

Assembly.  That's your choosing, not ours. 

 

You chose to bring this piece of legislation in this report into 

this Assembly and we have to defend it as an opposition.  You 

chose what we would work at today, and the people of 

Saskatchewan should know that this opposition was quite 

willing to follow the ordinary rules of the day. 

 

I believe I have a copy of the blues here. The folks out in the 

province may not all know what a copy of the blues is, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but it is a piece of paper that is printed on blue 

paper and the rules of what we're going to do for the day are 

printed in a suggested form of what we have to deal with.  We 

then get what is called the whites. The whites are a piece of 

paper that actually take from the blues those things that we are 

going to discuss for the day and the order. 

 

Then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have the gall to sit there and 

say that we are unwilling to work on their agenda.  Instead of 

following their own papers that they put out this very morning, 

at the last minute they bring this thing in and force us into 

nothing else but a defence of the democracy of our country, 

instead of doing the work that they say we are unwilling to do. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are willing to work.  If you want 

to call this charade off, we'll go right to question period right 

now, because I've got a lot of questions that I'd like to ask the 

Minister of Highways about which road he's going to tear up in 

this province.  I've been getting a lot of calls about that.  I'd like 

to have the right to get into question period and talk to you 

about that.  They want to know those answers. 

 

They don't want me wasting the province's time and the 

taxpayers' money defending the basic fundamentals of 

democracy.  They want me to be doing the work of this 

Assembly, but you people won't allow us to do that.  We 

can't ask you if you're going to tear up the highway out south of 

Val Marie or if that one can be saved. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we're going to allow the rules of 

bell-ringing to be taken away from us we're going to have to do 

it with an extreme struggle and we cannot succumb to the 

pressures of the government members opposite accusing us of 

wasting their time when in fact it was them that are wasting our 

time.  We didn't want to talk about the rule on bell-ringing.  We 

wanted to go to question period. 

 

And I wanted to talk about the member's statement. The 

Hootinanny in the Hills is coming up and let folks know that 

it's coming so they could all get ready and go out there.  But I 

didn't get a chance to do that today because there is no 

opportunity for a private members to get up and talk about the 

funnest thing that's ever happened out in the hills in 

Saskatchewan.  Second biggest country and western jamboree.  

One of the members doesn't know what's going on, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, so it's the second biggest country and western 

jamboree in Saskatchewan every year, and I wanted to tell the 

people about that this morning, right after dinner when we 

come to work.  But no, you have to bring in a second report 

here that changes the rules in the middle of the Assembly, the 

middle of this sitting. 

 

(2145) 

 

And we find ourselves having to defend the fundamental, 

democratic principles of this province instead of talking about 

who's tearing up the roads.  And where's the Minister of Rural 

Development on some of the issues that are going on in rural 

municipalities out in the country?  We can't talk to him about 

the letter he sent out today saying that we've got now a 24th of 

July deadline for signing-off of GRIP or signing-up.  Oh, 

another deadline that he extended today.  You didn't even know 

about that.  Well, for your information, the deadline's been 

extended again.  We wanted to ask him about that today.  We 

wanted to get into the business of the province and talk about 

it.  There's no use me asking now because he can't answer.  I'm 

the one on the floor and I stay here. 

 

He can get this Assembly back to work tomorrow by pulling 

this rag off the Table.  He can pull this rag off the Table 

tomorrow and go back to question period and an ordinary order 

of work in this Assembly, the way it should have been this 

morning right from the start when they started off with the 

blues suggesting that that's in fact what we were going to do. 

 

We were going to have an ordinary day's work to earn our pay 

as MLAs.  And instead of that, we stand here all day trying to 

convince the people that you are taking away the rules of this 

opposition, the tools that they work with in order to keep a 

government from becoming a dictatorship.  That was your 

choice, not ours.  You brought this in.  So don't tell me we're 

not working.  Don't tell me that we're not doing our part.  We're 

quite willing to go back to work.  Like I said, if you want to 

have question period we can start now.  I've got a ton of them. 

 

I wanted, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to talk about a lot of other 

things besides this Bill, and the member opposite 



1328 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

continues to want to discuss this, so I'll tell him what we 

wanted to work on if he's so curious.  I wanted to know 

whether or not the Minister of Rural Development was going to 

force municipalities to take back the highways that they take 

the hard surface off of and turn back to gravel.  That's what I 

wanted to know for the people of Saskatchewan because the 

municipalities are very concerned as to whether or not they will 

be saddled with that extra financial responsibility of taking care 

of all those extra roads.  They wanted to know out there 

whether they're going to have to accept, by force, all those 

extra roads into their municipal systems. 

 

It would have been important for us to get on with the business 

of the day rather than talking about removing the bell-ringing 

as a tool for the opposition.  You people have chose to take up 

part of the month of July destroying the fundamental, 

democratic rights of an opposition.  You people have decided 

to do that in the hope that most folks are off on vacation and 

won't notice what's going on.  But maybe we will just have to 

talk about it long enough so that they get time to get back. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, someone mentioned earlier today 

that a filibuster was available to the opposition, and it is.  In 

case there's anybody who isn't really watching too close, they 

may note that that's what we're doing.  We're using one of the 

other tools that we have available to us as an opposition -- it's 

called a filibuster.  Two years ago I knew what a filibuster was, 

but I never thought I'd ever be in one.  I never thought that I 

would have to use a tool of this magnitude in order to save the 

rule for the opposition of using a bell-ringing to bring a 

government to order. 

 

Now it's obvious I'm sure, even folks in television land can 

probably hear the kind of commotion that we've got going on 

here in the House tonight, and I think it should be obvious to 

those folks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if the heckling can carry 

on like this in the House when we are simply debating the 

preservation of the rule, how essential it must be for an 

opposition to have some way of controlling that type of unruly 

government.  If they can't even be controlled here in the 

Assembly, how can we control the legislation that they are 

proposing if we don't have some tools to work with? 

 

The bell-ringing has been a fundamental tool of this Assembly 

since as long back as I can remember.  I haven't studied the 

history of it exactly to find out if it started when this Assembly 

was set up in 1905, but I expect it probably was.  And if it was 

so good for us for so long, then why would it suddenly be so 

bad for us that we would have to force it through in the middle 

of a busy working day? 

 

I want to talk to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about a comment . . 

. (inaudible interjection) . . . No I haven't got to my speech yet.  

I want to talk a little bit about a comment here that was made 

earlier by the Speaker himself when he referred to the fact that 

he was going to allow us to tie the GRIP trial and the GRIP 

legislation to this move to remove bell-ringing.  Mr. Speaker 

was kind enough to point out to us that he was going to allow 

that and that recognition is appreciated by this opposition. 

 

And there should be no mistake, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the 

minds of the people of Saskatchewan that this is not a 

question just of taking away the opposition's ability to stop the 

government from becoming a dictatorship or stop the 

government from a revolution in the province.  This is directly 

an attempt to ram through one particular Bill, the GRIP Bill.  It 

is an attempt to change the history of our province, it is an 

attempt to break a contract, it is an attempt to tamper with 

evidence in a court trial that is before the courts, and it is tied 

directly to that one thing and that one thing only.  This 

Assembly will be used and abused as a result of this action in 

many different ways. 

 

I wanted to talk for a few minutes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about 

a comment one of the government members made about the 

fact that we were being irresponsible and that we might 

continue to be irresponsible in the use of the bell-ringing.  The 

first speaker for the government on this subject alluded to the 

fact that we might sit indefinitely with the bells ringing on 

other issues.  What he did there was directly imply that we as 

an opposition were not being fair to the people, that we weren't 

being fair to the system, that we were in fact being 

irresponsible. 

 

And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a comment that cannot be left 

unchallenged.  We have been very responsible.  I mentioned 

earlier that other people had called me and asked me to ring the 

bells on other issues, and that got a chorus of laughter from the 

opposite side that nearly drowned my voice from the 

microphone.  But the reality is that those people that believe 

that the payment of abortions and the lack of attention to the 

plebiscites that were voted on last fall were reason enough to 

ring the bells.  Folks that believe in that issue so very strongly 

that they were willing to stand on the Assembly grounds out 

here in protest against what was going on, those people thought 

that their issue was the issue that was important enough to ring 

the bells for more than 18 days, I can assure you. 

 

Now this opposition chose not to go that distance on that issue 

because we felt we had to show some responsibility on how we 

use the tools available to us.  You want to talk about people 

who want to ring the bells.  We have had a whole list of things 

that we could have rung the bells on.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, just 

to prove the point that we have been more than co-operative, 

I'll just go through some of these examples. 

 

Bill No. 20 for an example.  I just opened the book up.  Let's 

talk about it.  It just happens to be the one that I hit.  Here it is 

-- The Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act.  This 

opposition saw no reason not to allow that piece of legislation 

to pass through the normals channels of this governmental 

structure that we're in.  It is now in committee to be discussed.  

First and second readings are already passed. And you would 

say, well that's just housekeeping.  It doesn't matter.  But I had 

an individual tell me that this Bill is important enough to ring 

the bells on.  Believe it or not I just opened the book and that's 

the one. 

 

And the reason, I'll tell you the reason: because in this 

legislation there is a small piece in there that is very upsetting 

to that individual.  And in this legislation it says that the fees 

will be increased from $2 to $5 for each photocopy that anyone 

gets from the Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation 

Board. 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1329 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that individual stated to me that while 

most people will think going to $5 for a charge for a photocopy 

of transcripts of past hearings is not very important, it means a 

difference of between $500 to $2,000 . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- I've listened to the member with 

interest and his use of examples but I encourage him to think of 

them as examples and not to dwell on the details of his 

examples and in this particular case the details of Bills which 

members have had an opportunity to discuss before the House.  

So I encourage the member to stay on the motion that's before 

us. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I think I made my 

point, and I appreciate the fact that the point has been made 

that we could have, in fact, been unco-operative.  We could 

have taken the advice of that individual and rang the bells.  But 

we were responsible enough not to do that. 

 

We followed the order and procedures and the other tools 

available to us to point out the things that were wrong about 

this Bill and how it restricts farmers without very much money 

from being able to try their cases before a court of law in this 

province because it will financially be impossible in the future 

for them to do that. 

 

That issue was important enough, Mr. Speaker, it was 

important enough for that individual to ask me if we would 

consider ringing the bells.  He didn't say for 18 or 20 days.  But 

he thought maybe for a couple of days. 

 

Now you take away the right of the opposition to use this tool 

and you're taking away what a lot of people have been asking 

us to do.  But we have, contrary to the opinions of the first 

speaker of the government tonight, contrary to his opinions, we 

have used considerable restraint and considerable amount of 

good judgement, I believe, in not abusing the use of this tool of 

ringing the bells. 

 

There are, I think, 64 Bills in this book, Mr. Speaker, 66 

already it is.  Two of them have not been put in because they 

came through today.  Sixty-six Bills, Mr. Speaker.  Out of 

those 66, we've rang the bells on one.  And this government has 

the nerve to say that we are abusing a tool that oppositions 

have had in this province for as long back as anybody can 

remember. 

 

We used a tool that they themselves used in the past, and they 

say that we are irresponsible for using it once out of 66 times.  

That in my opinion is irresponsible, to make a statement like 

that.  Because it has not been an abuse by opposition. 

 

We have used an enormous amount of constraint, especially 

when you consider that there are people in our party who 

genuinely would like to have us take a course of revenge.  And 

we said no, we will not do that.  We won't use the tools of this 

Assembly for revenge on the NDP.  We will use the tool 

correctly at the proper time to save the democratic principles of 

our province and to save the people in rural Saskatchewan from 

legislation that could destroy their life . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I don't 

claim, as one member has chided into the conversation here, I 

don't claim to be trying to save the province by myself.  But I 

am getting paid a wage to do a job and I will do my part.  It 

may end up being a very small part.  It may be insignificant.  

And in fact, in the end, Mr. Speaker, it could end up that it's a 

total waste of my time.  But I'm being paid for it.  I'm being 

paid for it, rather handsomely, and I'm quite prepared to stand 

here to do the job. 

 

We could have, Mr. Speaker, moved to orders of the day today, 

but we find ourselves facing a government that would likely 

laugh in Tiananmen Square as the people there died to try to 

gain the same democracy that we have cherished in this 

province and in this country.  They probably would have had a 

great, amusing time watching those fellows fight for their 

democracy as they died in the streets. 

 

(2200) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we are duty-bound to see to it that if the 

rules are changed, that oppositions in this opposition period 

and in future oppositions will have tools left to work with. 

 

And there is another tool that you folks might consider.  And 

that is a free vote.  I haven't seen any free votes in this 

Assembly yet.  You could put that rule into effect and allow it 

to happen.  Some assemblies in fact do exactly that. 

 

The member from Regina Churchill Downs stated that there 

was irresponsibility because he though we might use this rule 

again.  Well, Mr. Speaker, somebody earlier today said that at 

some time in your life you have to draw a line in the sand.  I 

think we all know that that is a metaphorical term for saying 

that we have to stand on a position at some time and that we 

have to put our backs to the wall and fight with whatever we 

have for whatever it takes to defend some principle that we 

believe in. 

 

We also heard mention that the bells don't ring in Ottawa and 

somebody else stated that they have different rules for the 

opposition and they also have a senate to fall back on.  It's the 

only argument I've heard that makes me reconsider my 

thoughts about what should happen to senates.  They may have 

a purpose after all.  Although it's hard to see where they are 

most times. 

 

Earlier today it was alluded, Mr. Speaker, to the fact that 

somehow the weight of the scales of justice would have to be 

balanced with enough public opinion, suggested at least, that 

enough public opinion would have to be on this side in order 

for us to balance that scale so that we could go on with wanting 

to preserve the rights of the opposition in this bell-ringing 

debate and quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I think that the scales of 

justice are just about balanced in the centre on this issue right 

now. 

 

The folks in the country used to be against bell-ringing but 

gradually they're changing their minds, and while a large 

percentage could have been read a few months back as being 

opposed, if you were to take an honest look at a survey of the 

people now, it would be pretty well balanced. It won't be very 

long that the people of this province will realize what in fact is 

at stake in their 



1330 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

democracy if the opposition is no longer able to be effective.  

And that will balance the scales of justice to our side.  And of 

course it will go to the right side. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it's obvious to everyone in this province 

that if we had been closer to an election, this opposition would 

not have had to go to the extremes that it did in the bell-ringing 

over the issue that was at stake when we did that.  The reality is 

that we are a long ways from an election and this issue will 

perhaps not even be considered in the next election. 

 

But the reality is also this: that a government that does not have 

anything at stake is not willing to negotiate.  When you take 

away the need for them to negotiate a settlement they're bound 

not to want to negotiate.  They'll simply ride it out and hope for 

the best.  And that's what happened. 

 

That's why it took 18 days for this issue to be resolved; that if 

we had been within a year of the election, would likely have 

been resolved with negotiation within 3 or 4 days.  No question 

about it. 

 

But knowing that they were far away from an election and 

knowing that this elimination of this tool can give them the 

power to jam everything through for three and a half more 

years, they're willing to take whatever comes -- whatever 

comes to get it now for the benefits later. 

 

And the same thing holds through, Mr. Speaker, when reporters 

on the 6 o'clock news report that the Speaker is going to bail 

them out.  And that's unfortunate. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I'm sure that the member didn't mean 

what he said.  Because if he did, he is certainly 

unparliamentary and that the remarks he makes against the 

Chair are certainly not accepted in this legislature.  And I ask 

the member to withdraw those remarks that he made against 

the Chair. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I certainly withdraw the remark that you feel 

that I said.  I don't believe I said in my mind what you heard 

my words say.  So I withdraw that and we'll carry on with the 

debate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the reality is that this government is so far 

from an election that they really don't care what public opinion 

is; and it is my contention that public opinion -- and I was 

trying to make that point -- that public opinion has swayed 

from one extreme on one hand to the other side.  It has not 

come to an extreme on the other side, but it will gradually 

because there is a building of attitude in the province of 

Saskatchewan that opposition does have to have a tool to keep 

a very powerful government under control with. 

 

It is absolutely essential that an opposition, in order to do it's 

job to preserve the things in democracy that we value, it is 

absolutely essential that oppositions have tools to work with. 

 

And what I was suggesting is that public opinion is in fact 

swaying over to our side, and that if the argument is made by 

the government that we have to have public opinion on our side 

in order to achieve our goal of retaining tools 

to work with, then I'm saying that we have that.  I'm saying that 

we have done a survey; we've done a poll.  That poll was 

conclusively evidenced in our favour to carry on. 

 

It was surprising to me that when the poll was done that the 

folks in the city that did not support us in the election . . . as 

you're all aware basically most of the folks in the cities did not, 

the big cities did not support our party -- but the unbelievable 

part for me in that poll was that the people in the cities 

supported what we are doing.  They understand what's going on 

and I had underestimated them.  I apologize to the people of the 

cities for that because I truly did underestimate them. 

 

I didn't think they would understand what we were doing 

because we had tied it to a farm Bill.  And the reality is that 

those folks are watching.  They know what's going on and 

they're starting to see the need to support us in keeping this 

government under control.  And they're starting to say, out 

loud, that we have to keep the tools of opposition so that the 

opposition can work.  And as I've told you a minute back, we 

felt we had to at some time draw the line in the sand, and we 

had to do that today because you're taking away, in the middle 

of this session, the tools of opposition. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would have gone through every 

Bill in that book if it would have made a better point.  As I did 

pick one and made my point, I could have taken every Bill in 

that book and said that this opposition had not rang the bells on 

that Bill -- 66 of them.  Because the very Bill that we rang the 

bells on is not in that book. 

 

So we have 66 Bills that we have chosen to allow this 

government to work through this Assembly in a democratic 

fashion, without using the tool of bell-ringing.  We have been 

responsible.  That, sir, was the point I wanted to make.  We 

were being responsible when we took the approach that we 

took.  We could have rang the bells on several issues. 

 

There is no question, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP have 

introduced the motion to win a court case against farmers.  

Obviously they need to limit bell-ringing to win a case.  It's 

unfortunate though that it won't stop there, because once this 

tool is lost they will be able to use this same kind of measure 

on all kinds of things. 

 

Even though we are responsible and have not used the 

bell-ringing, the fact that we had it was a deterrent from the 

government doing ridiculous things.  And a deterrent is 

important in life.  Now if you don't think so, remember the last 

time you got a speeding ticket.  Next time you probably drove a 

little slower.  That's a deterrent. 

 

The fact that we could use the bell-ringing on those 66 Bills is 

a deterrent from the government becoming too dictatorial in 

their approach.  And so if they take the rule away to jam one 

piece of legislation through, then the potential for every piece 

of legislation in the future to be rammed through in the same 

fashion exists. 

 

And that's too high a price to pay for the people of 

Saskatchewan for one Bill.  We have decided that we're not 

going to let the GRIP legislation be voted on unless the 

retroactive clause was removed.  If the bell-ringing 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1331 

limiting the bells can be introduced in three days time, then, 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition's hands are tied.  The GRIP 

legislation will pass and farmers will suffer.  That is a given.  If 

the bell-ringing issue is lost by this opposition without 

replacing other tools to work with, then the farmers will lose 

their case.  It is a fact that reports on the judge's statement say 

exactly that. 

 

Now the NDP want the people of Saskatchewan to believe 

bell-ringing and GRIP '92 are separate issues.  They are not.  

This is not true.  This motion will give the NDP the opportunity 

to ram through any legislation they desire -- any legislation that 

suits their vindictive needs.  Bell-ringing was to be discussed in 

a co-operative manner during the Rules and Procedures 

Committee meeting.  Instead I'm told that the chairman came to 

the meeting with prepared reports.  I wasn't there, but that's the 

report I got. 

 

The opposition, I'm told, was ignored.  The opposition never 

had the opportunity to put forward any suggestions for 

consideration.  That's the kind of gentlemen's agreement that 

doesn't exist any more.  We believe that the chairman of that 

committee knew what would happen.  We believe . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I would just like to ask 

members that . . . It's very difficult for the Speaker to rule on 

this particular situation, because the Speaker automatically, as 

Speaker, is chairman of that committee.  And there's no 

opportunity for the Speaker to defend himself in this 

legislature.  And accusations that are made against the 

chairman, which in this particular case happens to be the 

Speaker, is really unfair and should be out of order.  It's very 

difficult for the Speaker to rule on that.  But I would ask the 

members to please take that into consideration when you're 

making accusation against the chairman of that committee 

when that chairman happens to be the Speaker at the same 

time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The members 

opposite, I believe, should be ashamed for putting the chairman 

of that committee into such an embarrassing position -- 

ashamed of themselves.  Because our members on that 

committee have obviously gone in with every intention of 

discussing rule changes and these other members, seven of 

them outnumbering the other three, won't negotiate.  And they 

do put the chairman in an embarrassing position, and that is 

absolutely wrong.  It should not be happening. 

 

Now we've talked, Mr. Speaker, about things like other tools 

that we have available.  We've talked about using a filibuster 

and talking about things.  I guess it's all right to use those other 

tools too to jar the attention of the people, but sometimes a jar 

isn't enough.  Sometimes you have to, Mr. Speaker, get people 

to pay attention in another way. 

 

In private life the old saying is: hit 'em in the pocket-book, it'll 

make 'em start to think.  Well we don't have that tool in 

parliament; we can't hit the government in the pocket-book.  So 

what works out in the society won't work here. 

 

(2215) 

That's why these gentlemen's agreements, the gentlemen 

agreement to have a consensus before making changes has to 

be the only rule that can work to change rules because there is 

no recourse, there is no way of forcing a government to be 

responsible. 

 

I believe that the members opposite have conveniently acquired 

short memories.  It is too bad that they can't think back to the 

comments that they made in 1989 when a similar motion to this 

one at hand was being discussed -- very similar.  There was a 

massive outcry from the NDP that their democratic rights were 

being trampled upon.  It was agreed that the motion would be 

handled in an all-party committee.  And as all the members in 

the House today know, agreement was not reached. 

 

The government of the day did not strong arm the people.  

They did not force a decision.  They allowed the process to 

continue to work.  And that is where the difference comes in 

philosophy, because that government knew that it would be 

undemocratic. 

 

Unfortunately for the people of this province that government 

is no longer here.  And on July 7, 1992, this government forced 

the motion in committee and now they will attempt to force it 

to pass here.  It was not an agreed decision.  It was not an 

agreement in committee.  It is a precedence, a precedence of 

change. 

 

And the government has a fight on its hands.  Because we 

cannot sit idly by and allow such a major change in our 

democratic structure to take place in the fashion in which it's 

being done. 

 

The farmers in this province will be the first to be directly 

affected, Mr. Speaker.  And that is unfortunate for them as a 

group of people.  But all of the people of Saskatchewan will be 

affected.  The reality is that if a government gets out of control, 

if they can establish the right to break contracts, to tamper with 

evidence, who's next?  If the opposition can't ring the bells and 

walk out, what stops this government from bringing in labour 

legislation that would set minimum wage at $10 an hour.  

Nothing.  Not a bad idea he says.  Think about it.  I heard that.  

It came right from the government side.  Not a bad idea.  Ram 

it through.  The member from Swift Current likes that idea.  

We just pump it through and nobody could stop us. 

 

All right, let's take it a step further.  Suppose, Mr. Speaker, the 

right to ring the bells is gone and there's no other tool in place.  

What happens next year if the government decides that 

everyone who could afford to buy a Saskatchewan bond this 

year was too rich because he could afford to buy bonds and 

didn't need that money to live on, and therefore we'll confiscate 

the money by a Bill that we'll ram through this Assembly.  

Well, how about if you'd say that that's too silly, you wouldn't 

go that far. 
 

How about you decide that the treasury is being broke because 

interest rates go down to 3 per cent, instead of being at 7 where 

they are now.  So you retroactively pass legislation changing 

the interest that you're going to pay on those bonds 3 or 4 per 

cent instead of 7.  You could do it.  There would be no way the 

opposition could stop you.  And you might do it because you've 

proven track-record already that you're willing to break 

contracts 



1332 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

retroactively.  If you'll do it to farmers, why wouldn't you do it 

to the folks in Regina?  If you'll do it to the people in the 

country, what's to stop you from going the next step? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an important issue.  We have everybody 

from travel agents, to researchers, to tourist associations, to 

road builders, all concerned; RMs (rural municipality), all 

kinds of people expressing concerns that the opposition might 

not have enough strength to save them from the kind of 

disgusting actions that have been going on. 

 

We heard this government last fall, Mr. Speaker, talk to the 

people of Saskatchewan about decreasing taxes, how they were 

going to increase services.  I haven't counted the list but I think 

that there must be two dozen new taxes already imposed.  I had 

a list.  I should have brought it along for you.  It was about four 

pages long of all the things that people are paying extra on. 

 

People are very fearful, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition will 

not have the strength to keep this revolution back to an 

evolution; to keep the lid on, the way things are going.  We've 

talked about a lot of things that could happen, Mr. Speaker, and 

that's necessary, because in the democratic process when 

something as important as the bell-ringing is going to be 

removed, people have a right to know what is going on. 

 

And the only way that they're going to get that right fulfilled is 

if we can take enough time so that the media can get the 

message out to the folks.  It's the only tool now that we're going 

to have left, is to stand here and to discuss the issue so that 

folks have time to take a reading on it and to understand it. 

 

When we, Mr. Speaker, decided to use the bell-ringing the one 

time that we have used it in this sitting, through all of these 66 

Bills, there were a number of issues on the order paper that the 

government should have gone to work with.  They should have 

left this piece of paper off of the Table today and they should 

have gone to work on their Bills and their budget. 

 

We should have done that because right now the chiropractic 

patients in this province don't know where they stand.  The 

government has said that they're going to pass legislation 

changing the charging rates, and because the deadline that the 

government has stated was July 1, it has now come about that 

we're past that date and the government hasn't handled its 

business.  And that's not our fault. 

 

We came here prepared to work today.  When we rang the bells 

for the 18 days, we quite clearly pointed out to this government 

that we would be willing to go back and deal with all of the 

other needs of the government if they would simply pull that 

Bill off of the order paper.  If they would simply take that one 

thing out of the discussion, we could have worked for the 

whole 18 days. 

 

Could we not have accomplished many things in the time that it 

took for this government to try to prove that they are more 

bull-headed than any other government that ever existed; that 

they're willing to sit and take whatever comes to force their 

will, not only on this opposition but 

on the people of this province? 

 

We could have passed the Bill allowing the government to put 

into place its new health care measures.  We don't agree with 

those measures.  I want that pointed out loud and clear.  But we 

weren't prepared to ring the bells on every issue.  We proved 

that point.  We didn't like the idea that people who need 

chiropractic help and optometrists were going to have to now 

pay more.  A lot of folks wrote us letters.  I suspect I've got a 

pile that deep on my desks back there in my office yet, because 

I've saved them -- people who need eye care, who don't like the 

idea that these changes are coming. 

 

And right now, Mr. Speaker, because we're into this debate, 

those folks don't know if they're going to have to pay the old 

rate or if they're going to be charged the new rate retroactively 

sometime later on in July or August or September, whenever 

we get back to work.  Is this government going to back bill all 

of those people, back to the July 1?  Those folks are genuinely 

concerned.  There are a lot of people out there that live on fixed 

incomes. 

 

I had a lady call me the other day who is on welfare.  She gets a 

hundred . . . or $550 a month and it's important to her to know 

exactly where her money is going to have to go because any 

retroactive billing will put her in a position of not being able to 

buy her groceries. 

 

Now I know that there's not much sympathy in the government 

for a lot of those people that are on those low incomes, but the 

reality is that those folks have to live too.  And when you're 

going to make changes like this, and then you're going to stall 

your own business agenda for the mean-spirited things that 

you're doing here, then you're treating the people of this 

province very badly. 

 

The people of this province expected more when they elected 

you and they deserve more.  They didn't elect you to become 

their dictators; they elected you to become their 

parliamentarians.  They didn't elect you to take away the rules 

of the opposition.  They elected you to do the business of this 

Assembly and the business of this Assembly is not getting 

done. 

 

Quite frankly, quite frankly you could have gone to the orders 

of the day this morning, we could have followed the blues and 

you could have got a day's work done.  You could have done 

that 18 days ago and you chose not to do it.  The people of this 

province, Mr. Speaker, are disappointed and rightly so. 

 

I thought quite frankly, that it would take months before 

anybody would ever phone me about anything.  After all our 

party had been defeated by the biggest landslide since 1982 and 

I thought well, the folks will call the new government but 

they're not.  My phone is ringing all the time.  I've got piles of 

letters.  I got 408 letters to answer this week alone because the 

people are disappointed with what this government is doing. 

 

And changing this bell-ringing rule in the middle of the 

Assembly sitting time is going to make them even more upset 

when they find out why it's being done and when they realize 

that the business of this Assembly could in fact have gone on in 

a normal fashion, not only for today 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1333 

but also for the other 18 days that we spent ringing the bells 

over one issue, one farm Bill that could have been pulled.  One 

farm Bill that could have been put on the back burner just for a 

little while and you could have had your budget taken care of.  

You wouldn't have needed interim supply.  You wouldn't have 

needed all of those wasted days and wasted nights, must be a 

song like that.  Isn't that the way this government goes?  

Wasted days and wasted nights, because they haven't the good 

sense to get to business.  They're so determined to seize power 

that they're willing to let the people of this province suffer 

through anything while they grab it and take it.  Seizing power 

by force.  That's what this is all about. 

 

Taking away the rules of this opposition is only the beginning.  

In the end it will reflect on every individual in this province.  

Tampering with old, time-tested, old gentlemen's agreements, 

the old philosophies, the old standards.  Throwing away 

tradition, establishing precedents to create democracies into 

dictatorships. 

 

That, my friends, the Saskatchewan people will remember in 

the next election. They will be done with you and sooner than 

later if you have the courage to put it to the challenge.  You are 

finished in this province.  The people will defeat you in the 

next election. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 10:30 this House stands 

adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow afternoon. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 p.m. 

 

 


