




















































Hansard: August 17, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2573 

 August 17, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Deputy Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions 

have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7), they are hereby 

read and received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly preying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate the farm fuel 

rebate program. 

 

 Of farmers and citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 

humbly praying that your Honourable Assembly may be 

pleased to allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand for this 

year. 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to 

you, seated in your gallery, Mr. Vic Unruh who is here as a 

visitor from Calgary.  Mr. Unruh was a secretary-treasurer for 

the Prince Albert School Board and several other school boards 

before that, and has gone through several ministers of 

Education, and is interested enough in education to return to 

this place after his retirement.  And I want the Assembly to 

welcome Mr. Unruh . . . 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I also 

want to introduce a guest who is visiting the legislature from 

Saskatoon.  I'd like to welcome Hugo Alvarado, who is a 

well-known Saskatoon artist, to the legislature today.  Hugo is 

formerly a citizen of Chile.  He is active in the political 

community in this province, and he is active in the culture of 

this province through his art.  So welcome Hugo to the 

legislature.  And I'd ask you to stand. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Changes to Health Care 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

direct a few questions this afternoon to the Minister of Health.  

And to begin with, I would like to indicate to the minister that 

I'm very disappointed that you used a trick this morning to 

avoid answering questions in question period today.  Putting an 

embargo on your health plans until after question period is over 

is a little bit cute by half, I would suggest to you.  But will 

honour that embargo and not ask direct questions on that 

particular aspect. 

 

But I do want to say to you, Madam Minister, that we have 

frequently, over the last while, talked about your so-called 

wellness model.  Madam Minister how much money do you 

anticipate in saving with your imposing of this plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, Mr. Speaker, the member 

opposite can ask any questions that he wants, and I'm available 

to attempt to answer them.  The fact . . . the health care reform 

that we will be initiating or that we are initiating today in this 

province is going to encourage communities to come together 

on a district basis in order to co-ordinate and integrate their 

health care services.  And in the process of doing this, over the 

long term it will bring more programming to many of our rural 

communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I will be telling the members opposite that what is at 

stake here is the future of our health care system in the 

province.  And the system needs reform.  And there's 

absolutely no question that stakeholders support that concept 

throughout the province, and that became obvious in the press 

conference today. 

 

We will be asking the members opposite to join with us to 

provide for the future health care needs of our citizens and of 

our children and our grandchildren, and that is the intent of the 

health care reform today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, as regards the embargo, you 

know full well that an embargo placed on news releases and 

news conferences are valid until such time as the embargo can 

be lifted, which is 2:30, which is immediately following 

question period.  It's as simple as that, Madam Minister. 

 

And I ask you again, how much money is this so-called 

wellness program, a model of yours, going to save the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer, or do you have no concept of that?  

Has there been any analysis done?  How much money, Madam 

Minister, is this model going to save the Saskatchewan 

taxpayer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The members opposite can ask whatever 

questions they want, Mr. Speaker.  There is no embargo on the 

questions that they can ask us.  The fact of the matter is, is that 

as we proceed through the reform, there will no doubt be cost 

efficiencies created in the system because there will be 

duplication removed and co-ordination of services. 

 

We also want to see the system bring a higher-quality health 

care services to many of our rural communities because we 

believe that with a larger critical mass -- and in this case we're 

talking about districts of approximately 12,000 but it could be 

more or less depending on what 



2574 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

the communities want and what works for those communities -- 

we believe that through the development there will be more 

programming brought to our rural Saskatchewan.  This reform 

is not for the purposes of saving major amounts of money. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, it's becoming patently obvious 

by what the minister means that I can ask any question that I 

want, that there are no restrictions, because she has her answers 

prepared.  It doesn't matter the question that I'm asking; she's 

got her answer written out in front of her and she's going to 

answer her political rhetoric. 

 

Madam Minister, that's all you're doing.  You have not even 

attempted to answer my question.  Have you done an analysis?  

Is there a study that you have done?  What are the ramifications 

of the implementation in the forcing of your wellness model 

upon the people of Saskatchewan?  How much money is there 

going to be saved?  Have you done a study?  And, Madam 

Minister, if so, would you table it for the people of 

Saskatchewan to see? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite should quit acting 

like a spoiled child because that's what he's exhibiting here in 

this Assembly -- a spoiled child. 

 

This health care reform is driven by the desire to provide 

high-quality health care services to our rural residents.  You are 

implying that it's being driven in order to cut costs left, right, 

and centre.  And that's not accurate. 

 

We are going to be moving into communities.  It'll be 

community development at a developmental pace, and it'll be a 

developmental process.  It will be for the first time in the 

history of this province:  community deciding what the needs, 

the health care needs are in their community.  That's what this 

health care reform means to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

that is simply not good enough.  That is simply not good 

enough.  We have you here on your MCIC (Medical Care 

Insurance Commission) Bill that's going to de-insure 

chiropractors.  It's going to de-insure optometrists.  Now, 

Madam Minister, your stock answer there was that you had 

inherited a fiscal problem -- that it was fiscally driven. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, what I'm asking you right now is to tell 

us that this fiscally driven wellness model is designed to save 

money for the treasury and for your colleague sitting beside 

you, the Minister of Finance.  That's what's driving this.  It's 

certainly not a wellness model as such. 

 

Madam Minister, is there no study that you've done?  Is there 

no study on the impact, the ramifications of this 

wellness model? 

 

I'm asking you: what does that study show, assuming that 

you've done that?  And how much money is going to be saved 

by the taxpayer in the implementation and the imposing -- the 

imposing -- of this wellness model upon the people of 

Saskatchewan?  Now just answer that question, would you 

please, Madam Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite obviously doesn't 

understand community development.  He doesn't, and I'm not 

surprised.  For 10 years they were in government and they had 

no vision and they had no future for the people of 

Saskatchewan.  In fact they did what they could to destroy the 

future of Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Health care people throughout this province have been working 

on health care reform for over 10 years, and some of the 

stakeholders said that this morning.  For example, one of them 

said they greeted this reform with extreme relief that after a 

decade of urging government we were finally . . . someone was 

moving with the reform, finally. 

 

This reform is long overdue.  I urge you, instead of being 

negative and trying to destroy everything, to join with the 

stakeholders and the rest of Saskatchewan to put into effect a 

high-quality health care system in our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A new question to 

the same minister.  Madam Minister, you talk about vision.  

We talked about vision of the health care system just a few 

days ago in this Assembly.  And what are the optometrists 

telling you about your vision for Saskatchewan, Madam 

Minister?  I ask you that question. 

 

Many times in this Assembly, Madam Minister, you have said 

that you guarantee -- and you did this this afternoon as well -- 

that you guarantee public input before any substantive changes 

are made to Saskatchewan's health care system.  Do you stand 

on that, Madam Minister? 

 

And I ask you now then: will you today, this afternoon, right 

now, commit to full public hearings involving all parties of this 

Assembly before making any further dramatic changes to the 

health care of this province?  Will you commit to full public 

hearings, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite has one objective, 

and that is to be political and obstructionist, Mr. Speaker.  And 

let's just speak to enhanced funding in the health care budget 

for programs like home care and community therapies, for 

programs like family planning and an AIDS (acquired immune 

deficiency syndrome) strategy, for programs like SADAC 

(Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission) and 

northern health and community-based services.  There has been 

an enhancement of many of these programs in the budget and I 

think it's time for the members opposite to realize 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2575 

that. 

 

Yes, we are left with a financial mess.  There is no question 

about it.  But this government is not sitting on its hands and 

burying its head in the sand.  It's not.  It's moving ahead with a 

reform that is going to lead to higher-quality health care 

services for Saskatchewan people.  This is positive.  It's 

supported by the stakeholders.  And there are communities 

throughout this province that want us to get on with it because 

they're ready to get organized. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to Madam 

Minister, who accuses me of becoming political.  Heaven 

forbid that I become political in this forum.  I wouldn't want to 

do that.  I apologize for that, Madam Minister, it must have 

been a slip on my part. 

 

Madam Minister, we're going to talk about public meetings.  

You say you have public meetings.  I've been at your public 

meetings.  I was in Eastend, Madam Minister, and I saw what 

type of input people could have when you send bureaucrats to 

do your bidding to a public meeting, and how that public 

meeting is being controlled to get the end result of what you 

want.  And we're going to be discussing that, Madam Minister. 

 

But Madam Minister, your MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) from Shaunavon publicly made a commitment on 

your part to the people of Eastend who were worried about 

losing their hospitals, losing control of medicare in their area.  

Madam Minister, he made the commitment that by the middle 

of August you would be there in person answering the 

questions and the concerns that those citizens have had.  We're 

past the middle of August, Madam Minister.  What are you 

going to do to meet that commitment? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We are going to be having meetings 

throughout the province with people who want to be involved 

in moving immediately with respect to the health care reform.  

We will be having meetings in other communities that may not 

be as ready as others, as time goes on.  Those meetings will 

take place.  We have already had a lot of meetings and a lot of 

consultation and that will continue.  That is one of the 

commitments in our paper.  It is developmental.  We are asking 

communities to come together.  We will be going out and 

talking to them, and we will be having meetings. 

 

I'm sure the member will be there trying to create as much 

trouble as he can; there's no question about it; trying to 

undermine what he knows is absolutely essential for 

Saskatchewan, and what he knows has been recommended in a 

number of different forms for people throughout the years -- 

for at least 10 years or longer.  Stakeholders have been . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, you just finished saying it's 

absolutely essential.  Why is it absolutely essential?  Budget 

driven -- your fiscal responsibility; is 

that it, Madam Minister? 

 

Now, Madam Minister, a quick question.  You have more or 

less admitted in that last response of yours that it's absolutely 

essential that we do this, that it's a budget-driven, fiscally 

driven exercise, this wellness model on your part.  So, Madam 

Minister, I've asked you the question once before.  Mr. 

Speaker, how much money are you going to save?  And you 

refused to answer that question.  Well then, what are your 

expenditure-reduction targets, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The members opposite have been unable 

to get doctors to many rural communities.  They've been unable 

to get dental dentists to many rural communities.  They have 

been unable to get therapists to rural communities.  And what 

we're doing with this health care reform and why, it is 

absolutely essential that it is time that our rural communities 

obtain some of these services. 

 

And if we can organize on a district basis with a critical mass 

of 12,000 or more -- it could be less but 12,000 is the 

recommended minimum -- if we can organize on that basis, the 

likelihood of us getting more doctors out to rural Saskatchewan 

and more health professionals out there increases substantially. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, I'll give you one more 

opportunity.  First of all, how much money is this going to 

save?  Secondly, what are your potential reduction of 

expenditures involved in the wellness model? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- This health care reform is about better 

health care -- about better health care. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Now, I don't expect the member opposite 

to understand that because he was in government for over 10 

years and never understood the need to move more health 

professionals out of our cities into rural Saskatchewan, because 

they did nothing about it. 

 

They didn't understand the role that health care reform and 

co-ordinating and integrating services could play in improving 

the quality of health care.  And the Leader of the Opposition 

should be ashamed of himself . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'll tell you what this is all about.  Your 

wellness program is about this.  It's about the utter betrayal to 

the people of Saskatchewan by the NDP (New Democratic 

Party) government.  Utter betrayal.  That's what we're talking 

about, Madam Minister.  The utter betrayal. 

 

You talk about health.  What about the optometrists? 



2576 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

 What about the chiropractors?  What about the diabetics?  

What about the drug plan?  And you talk about our better 

health care system.  Madam Minister, we are talking about the 

utter betrayal of the health care system by this so-called NDP 

government that's concerned about people. 

 

Madam Minister, that's what we're talking about.  That's what 

we're talking about.  When you were in government . . . or in 

opposition, you promised more money for health.  You 

condemned a 4 per cent increase by us.  Now what are you 

doing?  The utter betrayal.  You've got a 4 per cent reduction 

on health.  That's where the hypocrisy comes in, Madam 

Minister.  That's where the hypocrisy is in. 

 

Madam Minister, through your wellness program, how many 

rural hospitals are going to be closed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 

said this health care reform is a betrayal of Saskatchewan 

people.  That's what he said.  Is he then saying that the SHA 

(Saskatchewan Health-Care Association), and SUN 

(Saskatchewan Union of Nurses), and the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons, are betraying Saskatchewan? 

Because they have made statements to the effect that this is a 

positive document and that they support health care reform in 

the province.  Are they saying that these stakeholders are 

betraying Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to tell Madam 

Minister that this side, that the opposition has never been 

against health care reform or rationalization of the system.  I 

have always been saying, yes there must be that.  We have to 

recognize that, Madam Minister, but not on the backs of the 

sick and not on the backs of rural Saskatchewan.  We are 

saying, Madam Minister, you've had choices.  And the choices 

that you're making are not those that are supported by the 

masses of the people in this province.  That's what we're 

concerned about, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, what has changed since you so loudly and so 

self-righteously opposed these changes while you were in 

opposition?  Now that you are the Madam Minister, what has 

caused you to change your mind? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite knows that we 

have continuously supported the need for health care reform.  

Many of the things that we objected to, for example in the 

Murray Commission report, are not in this document.  Murray 

suggested regions of 40,000 to 80,000.  We are looking at 

districts of approximately 12,000; they could be larger, they 

could be smaller. 

 

Murray suggested that the department should go in and draw 

up a map and tell Saskatchewan people what the boundaries 

are.  We are saying communities will make that determination.  

And that's what communities asked 

throughout the province. 

 

Murray said that there should be a 5 per cent tax levy on the 

municipal property tax base.  We have said we will meet with 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 

and SASCH (Saskatchewan Association of Special Care 

Homes) and the SHA and we will discuss that and determine 

what we're going to do with respect to funding. 

 

And I can continue with the differences between this document 

and former documents that were proposed, Mr. Speaker.  We 

listen to the people.  And the concerns that were being 

expressed from rural Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I think Madam Minister is trying 

to do a little sleight-of-hand work here about what she has said 

at one point and another. 

 

Madam Minister, back in 1990 you said:  I do not like the 

Murray Commission regional proposal.  I do not like that 

proposal; it goes too far.  That's what you said.  Because it had 

seven planning districts -- and you are now conveniently 

rolling those seven planning districts as if those were district 

boards, Madam Minister, and you know full well that is not 

right.  Each of those had 35 -- 5 times 7.  I mean each of them 

had 5, which would be 35. 

 

What have you done, Mr. Minister?  You have now indicated 

that you're going to be having 20 to 25 district boards.  You're 

completely in contradiction to what you said at that time.  And 

that's the point that I've been trying to do this afternoon, 

Madam Minister -- show your inconsistency. 

 

I asked you a little while ago what caused you to change your 

mind from the time you were in opposition to the time you 

were in government.  I did not get an appropriate . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the member have a question?  

Ask a question please. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, you targeted 66 hospitals for 

closing.  Today in your book you said that there would be 67.  

Instead, Madam Minister, I'm going to ask you whether or not 

the minister believes there will be any significant hospital 

closures resulting from her vision of Saskatchewan health care? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We have not changed our mind, Mr. 

Speaker, with respect to health reform.  We had brought out a 

document in November, 1989, that follows much along the 

lines of the document we have now, which had been fleshed 

out a little more, that talked about community input, 

community involvement and a community-driven health care 

system.  And that's what we have in our vision for health care.  

So we are going to be asking communities around the province 

to organize 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2577 

on a district basis, to co-ordinate and integrate services. 

 

And with respect to small rural hospitals, these communities 

will discuss whether or not they want to keep all the acute care 

beds that are there, or whether they may want to move to an 

integrated facility, or whether there is some other option they 

may wish to choose. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is communities are going to be 

making these decisions in the future of our health care system 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'd like to pick on Madam Minister's last 

point.  You are saying now that the communities are the ones 

that are going to have the decisions as to where the boundaries 

of these districts are going to be.  You're also saying that they 

have the decision within their hands as to whether they're going 

to close their community hospital or open it.  You're saying 

now that Eastend, for example, is going determine that yes, 

we're willing to give our hospital up; we're going to close our 

hospital because then it can go into Shaunavon. 

 

Are you, Madam Minister, that naïve that you think that the 

people of this province are going to actually do that?  Or is 

your purpose now just to take away your responsibility, put it 

on the shoulders of the district boards, and blame the people 

themselves?  Are you actually creating disunity within this 

province, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe that communities 

in Saskatchewan are very co-operative and will want to come 

together as I've witnessed in the last few months. 

 

I know the members opposite will be trying to make it 

impossible for communities to come together and implement 

health reform.  I'm aware of that.  But in spite of your 

obstructionist nature and your desire to ruin the possibility of 

improving the health care system for Saskatchewan people in 

the next few years, in spite of that this government is going to 

proceed with asking communities to come together to 

determine their needs. 

 

And I believe that in the Saskatchewan way communities will 

co-operate.  They will co-operate and make these decisions that 

are positive.  I have faith in the people, Mr. Speaker.  I have 

faith in the people. 

 

And the fact of the matter is, with respect to small hospitals, 

I've already heard from communities that like some of the 

options that are available and that the government can help 

them provide. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- My honest, considered opinion, Madam 

Minister, of that is that it's a bunch of gobbledegook that you 

just put forward here. 

Mr. Speaker, today is the day, in my opinion, that the NDP 

gave up their mantle of defenders of medicare. 

 

This is the Minister of Health who's presiding over the NDP's 

own self-destruction in the health care debate.  You started, 

Madam Minister, by imposing moratoriums on nursing homes 

and hospitals back in the 1970s, and now you intend to 

complete that process by blackmailing local boards into doing 

your bidding. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member from Rosthern has a lot 

of competition from his own leader and the from Government 

House Leader, and I wish they would give him his opportunity 

to ask his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate that.  

Now, Madam Minister, you're intending to complete the 

process by blackmailing local boards into doing your bidding.  

I was in Eastend and I know all about it.  Madam Minister, if 

local boards do not accept your model, your demands, will you 

assure this Assembly that the level of funding to such boards 

will not be decreased in an effort to blackmail them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm going to once again ask 

the members opposite to rise above their pettiness and to join 

us in the second generation of medicare in this province.  I'm 

going to ask the members opposite to put aside their political 

rhetoric and to join us in moving to a new generation of health 

care that's going to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I've asked the Leader of the 

Opposition -- now this is the second time today -- please not to 

interrupt.  Order. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Now I'm hearing some voices from 

over there.  I'm not quite certain who it was over there, but I 

think it was the member from Shaunavon.  He can correct me 

on it, but I believe it was. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm 

going to ask the members opposite to join us, to join us in this 

health care reform to developing a high-quality health care 

system for Saskatchewan people that incorporates a vision of a 

broad definition, a broad concept of health care that allows us 

to bring more therapies and more services to our rural 

communities and more doctors to our rural communities over a 

period of time as we go through this process and develop the 

second generation of health care. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Does the minister have leave to make a ministerial statement?  

The minister may proceed. 

 

(1430) 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

A Saskatchewan Vision For Health 



2578 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to table a 

paper entitled, A Saskatchewan Vision For Health.  This 

document provides the conceptual framework for the first 

major updating of our health system since medicare was 

pioneered here 30 years ago. 

 

I want to acknowledge and thank the hundreds of individuals, 

organizations, and communities whose input and suggestions 

over the last eight months have contributed to this paper and 

the ideas it sets forth. 

 

There are two main principles underlying this new approach to 

health: the concept of wellness as the goal of health services, 

and the community control of health care delivery.  This will 

mean a new emphasis on community-based services and more 

integrated approach to providing locally sensitive health 

services and the establishment of strong, local control 

structures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will be taking steps to enable communities 

and health boards to begin organizing themselves into health 

districts.  These new health districts will assess health needs in 

their communities and prepare plans for meeting these needs.  

They will receive control of the health budget available for 

their area, together with the authority to make their own 

decisions and manage integrated health services within their 

boundaries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government will take the leadership at the 

provincial level, in part through a new health council, while we 

invite communities and health boards to begin thinking of how 

they can integrate and deliver services under their own control 

through health districts.  And we invite families and individuals 

to join us in an approach to health care that emphasizes healthy 

life-styles leading to an improved quality of life. 

 

Saskatchewan people are ready for a new approach to health 

services and how they are delivered.  Indeed some areas of the 

province are already doing things presented in this paper.  We 

must now empower the innovators and clear the decks for those 

who want to apply the Saskatchewan spirit to a revitalization of 

our health system. 

 

This document is a conceptual framework.  Its purpose is to set 

out a vision and some of the strategies through which it can be 

realized.  We plan to begin immediately to work with 

communities and health boards across the province to 

implement the new concepts.  I invite all members of this 

Assembly, as representatives of the people, to be a part of this 

important process. 

 

As we work together toward wellness, we can enjoy better 

health and also insure a high-quality, revitalized, and secure 

health system for the future.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance, I guess, 

summarized more eloquently in a few short words than I could 

in half an hour what we have just witnessed, when he said, 

history in the making. 

And I say to members opposite, that is exactly . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- That's exactly the point.  And the more the 

Moose Jaw . . . the loose jaw from Moose Jaw hollers from the 

background and the more they try to cover their tracks with 

their . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  There was no interruption when 

the Minister of Health made her statement.  And I expect all 

members to give the same courtesy to the member from 

Rosthern. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- We're well used to the idea of the members 

opposite covering their tracks by a lot of loose rhetoric when 

the time comes when they've got themselves into a bit of 

quandary.  And, Mr. Speaker, the nonsense that the minister 

just read out in a loosely prepared text for the implementation 

for their wellness program I think indicates to the people of 

Saskatchewan just how loose this wellness program really is. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, to me and I'm sure to most of the 

people in Saskatchewan, it is the complete betrayal of what 

they thought that the NDP stood for.  During the election, Mr. 

Speaker, and during the election campaign, we were constantly 

reminded that we will be doing more with less, that we will be 

spending more money on health.  And what I was trying to do, 

Mr. Speaker, during question period is to elicit from the 

minister any response regarding the studies that this 

government has done as to the full impact that this so-called 

wellness model is going to have on the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Madam Minister, I sincerely remind you now that it is not 

obstructionism on our part; it's not simple-mindedness on our 

part when I get up and ask you these questions.  Because, 

Madam Minister, it's the people of Saskatchewan who are 

responding to your initial report on the wellness model that I 

leaked to the people of Saskatchewan.  And the only difference 

between that model and to your final product here, Madam 

Minister, the only difference is that the original had at least 

some meat to it.  The original at least had some of the details.  

That was the bureaucratic document that you thought you 

would be able to get away with. 

 

Now in response, after the people had a full look at that 

document, you come up with a document that's full of political 

rhetoric and very, very little else -- very little else.  And in 

response to the questions that the reporters were asking you 

during your news conference, was very little else -- no 

substance, no meat.  I don't think, Madam Minister, that you 

have really thought this thing through.  Certainly not the 

ramifications of what you're proposing here, you have not 

thought through. 

 

Now you say that we're getting up for political points.  Madam 

Minister, what I'm telling you is that we're responding to the 

people of Saskatchewan.  Haven't you taken note?  Have you 

not taken note, Madam Minister, of the petitions that have been 

tabled here, how many thousand . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  The member has 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2579 

taken considerably longer than the minister has taken and I 

wish he would wrap up his statement on the minister's 

statement. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, I 

simply want to tell you this.  When we were in government we 

had the Everyone Wins program, a program designed to 

emphasize healthy life-styles.  You ridiculed that.  You said 

that every penny that we spent in trying to get the people of this 

province to live . . . to lead healthy life-styles, you said that was 

totally unnecessary. 

 

Now you have the whole fabric of the health care system in 

Saskatchewan devoted to wellness.  Madam Minister, again 

why are you making those kinds of changes?  That's what the 

people of Saskatchewan are asking. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  Why is the member on 

her feet? 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I would 

ask to have leave to make a statement of interest to everyone in 

the legislature. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Congratulations to Sergeants-at-Arms 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

congratulate our Sergeant-at-Arms, Mr. Bill Goodhand, in 

becoming the president of the Canadian Association of 

Sergeants-at-Arms. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- We are all proud of the high calibre and 

professionalism of our employees in the legislature.  Will the 

members of the legislature please join me in saying: well done, 

Bill. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

would certainly want to join in with the member who has just 

spoken in congratulating Bill.  I've gotten to know Bill over the 

last six years or so, and I know that his exemplary duties 

performed in this House, in keeping order in this House, and 

assisting the Speaker in doing so, has been of the highest 

calibre.  And certainly the opposition, Bill, would like to join in 

on congratulating you on your achievement. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Economic Development 

Vote 45 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to please introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to 

introduced my staff who are with me here today.  First of all, 

Deputy Minister Frank Hart, who's seated to my right.  And 

immediately behind Mr. Hart is Bill Allcock, the associate 

deputy minister with responsibility for diversification programs 

and operations, and immediately behind me, Sharon Roulston, 

executive director of internal operations. 

 

The member opposite has given to us, Mr. Chairman, a list of 

questions.  I'm just not sure how we want to handle that.  But I 

look forward to a debate that I think will go on until 5 o'clock, 

and then at that point, because of prior considerations and 

commitments by the deputy minister, we will then move on to 

other items for the evening. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

welcome to your staff. 

 

We supplied the minister with a list of written questions that, if 

he would be so kind to send them over, we would appreciate 

that and then we can deal with them as we go along. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- We'll send those across to you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Okay, thank you.  I think what we had in mind 

was, we'll go through those questions after we receive them and 

see if there's any answers that we don't feel are adequate and 

then further add to them later. 

 

Mr. Minister, you've made a number of public statements 

suggesting that there are 700 companies at this point in time 

that are looking to diversify into the province of Saskatchewan.  

I'm wondering if you could provide us with a list of those 700 

companies and how many of them have been . . . or how many 

of them have indeed set up operations in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member opposite indicates that 

we have talked about 700 companies that either intend to or 

have inquired about moving to Saskatchewan, or companies, 

Mr. Chairman, internal, who are looking at expanding.  There 

would be more than that at the present time.  But I want to say 

to the member opposite, obviously there are confidentiality 

parts to this where many companies who are looking at 

expansion or looking at potential of moving to the province, 

obviously don't want their names bandied about in the 

legislature or in the media. 

 

But the commitment I would make to the member opposite, 

that if you were to make arrangements I would certainly sit 

down with him and confidentially go over the list of hundreds 

of names of businesses that are indeed looking at expanding or 

in fact the potential of moving to the province. 

 

I can get you a list of a number of companies that have already, 

since November 1 of last year, expanded in the province, and I 

will undertake to get you a list of those. 



2580 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

There have been many, as you might expect, who over the 

summer-time hired up extra people.  This is not new or 

different.  I think during any period of time there are hundreds 

of businesses looking at coming to the province or expanding 

in the province. 

 

And I guess I'm a little interested in why the opposition 

members are surprised that there would be hundreds of 

businesses either looking at coming to Saskatchewan or 

expanding.  We're pleased with the numbers, but I don't think 

it's unusual. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, it comes as no surprise to the 

opposition that indeed companies would be looking at 

Saskatchewan for expansion.  I'm just wondering if the minister 

could give us a list of any company that he had talked about 

that have come to Saskatchewan since November 1. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- As I mentioned to the member 

opposite, I can get for you a list of those companies that have 

expanded here in the province and who have come to 

Saskatchewan that we are aware of.  Obviously the department 

may not know of every company that has expanded or moved 

to the province.  But those that we can, and not break 

confidentiality for these companies, I will arrange over the next 

while to get for the member. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So what you're saying, even though there are 700 

companies that you have suggested wanting to actively set up 

operations in Saskatchewan, you're not aware of any. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- That isn't true, Mr. Chairman.  What 

I said to the member opposite is that we have said that we have 

had 700 -- and I want to make this clear to the member because 

he seems to be picking one part of the statement I made -- but 

there are 700 companies that are looking at expanding in the 

province or coming to the province. 

 

And you keep saying:  where are the 700 that you said were 

coming to the province?  I want to make it clear to you that the 

commitment and the statement made has been 700 companies 

looking at expanding or moving to the province. 

 

And there are a number of them that have expanded already.  

IPSCO you know about, building a new 24-inch mill for 

building pipe in Saskatchewan.  You'll be aware of that.  You'll 

be aware of Hitachi in Saskatoon, expanding here in the 

province, many community bond corporations that are 

expanding in the province; the Norquay alfalfa plant that has 

been opened recently. 

 

And so there are many companies that are expanding.  And 

there are many, many companies that are looking at the 

potential of moving to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could tell us how 

many new jobs have been opened up after those few, those 

companies you talk about have moved to Saskatchewan. 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member will want to know that 

21 new projects that have been completed, of those, 890 jobs 

created.  From the Business Resource Centre, about 770 jobs 

created, 371 saved.  And in total throughout the province where 

we have had some involvement: new jobs, 1701; jobs saved, 

936; for a total of 2637. 

 

Now obviously there are many, many new jobs that are created 

where the government has no involvement -- where you'll have 

. . . In fact I guess it's fair to say the vast majority of jobs in 

Canada and in Saskatchewan will be created by private 

entrepreneurs and farmers or business people simply going out 

and hiring extra people. 

 

And what we want to make clear here is that there is a role for 

the government to be involved in job creation, but it certainly 

isn't the total responsibility of government, just as it wasn't 

under your administration, to create all the jobs. 

 

That would seem like a premise that wouldn't be accepted, 

certainly by a right-wing party like your own, where the 

government should be the organization creating all the 

employment.  Because if you believe that, then you're not a 

Conservative but a socialist or something other than someone 

who believes that jobs could be created by the private sector. 

 

Obviously we believe very much in the mixed economy, that is 

that private sector will create many jobs in Saskatchewan, that 

the co-operative movement will create jobs, i.e., the jobs 

created in downtown Regina with the second tower being built 

by Credit Union Central. And if you drive down there you'll 

see a new crane that has just either gone up or will be going up 

in the next little while, building adjacent to the first tower at 

Credit Union Central yet another tower.  That is an initiative 

that has been started since the election. 

 

Obviously the member opposite shouldn't feel bad that that is 

happening under a New Democrat administration.  This is a 

co-operative that you shouldn't take responsibility for or we 

shouldn't take credit for.  The simple fact is that it's a 

co-operative doing well in Saskatchewan, even in these tough 

times, showing confidence in the economy, that they will go 

ahead and build a second office tower with the hundreds of 

years of employment that that structure in the construction 

phase will take, and then either saving or creating new jobs. 

 

So there are hundreds of jobs being created in the province.  I 

think the important thing to note is that the labour force in 

Saskatchewan is larger now than it was a year ago.  And while 

we're not taking credit for it, we're certainly pleased that that's 

the case. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could give us a list 

of the companies then that you have had direct government 

involvement with in the jobs associated with them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member opposite will know 

that in his question, Mr. Chairman, he wants to know all of the 

companies where we have had 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2581 

involvement where jobs may have been created.  This is . . . I 

can do that for him.  But he would have to realize this will take 

some time, because there are literally hundreds of companies 

that do business and will have expanded since the election, in 

terms of our Crown corporations, that will have done contracts 

with small private sectors in the rural underground cable for 

SaskPower, the construction of compressor plants along 

pipelines. 

 

And if the member's asking for all these hundreds of companies 

that will have hired up as a result of government initiative or 

government programs, I can do that.  But it would be a very, 

very long list of companies and it would take a fair bit of work.  

If you want it I'll do it.  But you have to realize that this will 

take some time.  Because in Saskatchewan, where we have a 

number of major players in the economy that have government 

impact:  SaskTel; SaskPower; SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance); SaskEnergy; and then many of the 

government-owned companies; along with the Department of 

Agriculture; Department of Rural Affairs; Department of 

Economic Development; Social Services; Justice probably 

have some contracts they sign with business people; that this 

will be a very, very huge task.  And if your attempt here is to 

prove that we haven't created any employment or aren't doing 

any business, this will result in, I think, disproving your theory 

that government isn't very, very active in creating employment 

right across the piece.  I can do it for you, but you have to 

know it will cost thousands of dollars to do the research and 

put together the lists and compile them.  And I'm not sure just 

where you are wanting to take this. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you said that out of 21 new 

projects, there's been 890 jobs.  Seems to me, out of 2,100 

projects that wouldn't be all that difficult, to provide us with 

that list. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would appreciate it if you could provide us with 

a list of where those 890 new jobs are that you've claimed to 

have created. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The 21 new projects completed 

were just those that our department had involvement; your 

question was where government has had involvement.  But I 

will get you the list of . . . You're asking for what government 

has been involved . . . I'll get you the list of . . . as best we can. 

 

But it will be a massive undertaking and it will be hundreds of 

projects where we have involvement through our government 

agencies and departments.  And basically, although there's 

turnovers every year, it will not show 890 jobs but will literally 

show thousands of jobs where government, through its 

procurement in payments . . . And I say again, this is nothing 

new.  This happens year after year after year in Saskatchewan 

where we have significant Crown corporations where 

thousands of jobs are created each year in terms of government 

involvement in the economy.  And I'll undertake, Mr. 

Chairman, to get that for you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, if you misunderstood the question, 

I'm sorry.  But the question was simply, in your department you 

have suggested that you have created 21 new projects and 890 

jobs and I'd appreciate the list of 

those jobs and those projects. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'll get you that.  As I prepare the 

figure list, we'll get what we can of those as well, and we'll be 

inclusive in getting you that project array. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Okay.  Mr. Minister, I want to deal specifically 

with a few examples of economic diversification in the 

province that I think the government should be taking a very 

close look at, and ones that I'm sure you're aware of. 

 

We'll start with the Saska Pasta project in Swift Current.  What 

is the status of that project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member will be aware that 

Saska Pasta, as it was structured under their government, came 

under the purview of Crown Investments Corporation and that 

our department is not involved in -- as I understand it -- 

actively negotiating that project.  I can give you a brief outline, 

as I know it, although the better person to ask this question of 

would be the minister in charge of Crown Investments 

Corporation. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I'm just not sure when it comes to 

questions that are not under the purview of the department but 

under the purview of a Crown corporation, how much detail I 

have to go into.  But I would say that the project is very, very 

much wanted by the people of Saskatchewan, in particular the 

people of Swift Current.  And obviously the arrangement, 

funding arrangement that we have made with business projects 

in the province since the election is that we insist that the 

private sector money go into the deal and then commitments by 

the government come forward, and that funding arrangements 

and share structures are in such a way that two things happen. 

 

One, the project goes ahead with the jobs and the beneficial 

spin-off, and at the same time the taxpayers who are putting 

their money in -- your neighbours and friends and family who 

put the money into these projects -- are protected. 

 

And that's the mandate of our government.  We made a 

commitment to change the style of investing which hitherto has 

been the taxpayers taking the lion's share of risk and others 

taking the lion's share of profits when they occurred.  And if 

failures occurred, the taxpayers taking the full amount of the 

loss. 

 

We're saying, if we're going to do joint ventures then if there is 

success, we should all share in the success.  And if there are 

losses and the companies don't work, then the private sector 

investor should be on the hook at the same level and the same 

rate as the other people putting money in. 

 

Now that wasn't the case prior to the election.  The people who 

took the risk in many of these projects, whether it was 

GigaText or Supercart -- and I don't want to go through them, 

all of those that failed -- Trinitel in Melville, it was the 

taxpayers' money that was put at risk first and the private sector 

was there as a back stop but was not on the front line. 



2582 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

Now I think we have an agreement with business people and 

with the business community that when we do deals -- and I 

think they very much respect this -- that the taxpayers' money 

goes in only after the private sector money is in the deal. 

 

My knowledge of the Swift Current arrangement on Saska 

Pasta is we're waiting for the private sector money to come 

forward and be put into the deal. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, it's interesting to note that you 

suggest you are . . . that the questions would be better asked in 

another department . . . to another department, yet it's clearly a 

project that has economic development potential in the 

province, and therefore I would expect that you would be 

aware of the details of the project and should be aware of them. 

 

And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could tell us to date 

what the cost to the taxpayer of Saskatchewan is involved in 

that project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member opposite will know on 

the items of questioning, Mr. Chairman, and I had asked you to 

listen closely, but this is a project being done by a Crown 

corporation -- Crown Investments Corporation.  And while I 

am aware of it, just as I'm aware of things happening in 

SaskTel where I'm not the minister in charge, I can answer 

questions on SaskTel and Crown Investments Corporation.  But 

the member opposite should realize and understand in 

government that there are structures and organizations that are 

responsible for certain projects. 

 

I say again, when it comes to Saska Pasta, that is not in the 

purview of Economic Development but it comes under the 

purview of Crown Investments Corporation.  I obviously don't 

have that information with me because it doesn't fall within the 

purview of my department.  But what I can get for the minister 

. . . or the member is a commitment that I will arrange for the 

minister responsible to prepare him a briefing note, and I think 

that will satisfy the need. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I wonder if, along with 

those pieces of information, you could give us, with respect to 

Saska Pasta, is the number of jobs that are expected to be 

involved, the amount of taxpayer dollars that are expected to be 

involved, the amount of dollars of investment the total project 

will realize. 

 

While we're on the topic of Saska Pasta, though, I wonder if 

you could give us your impressions of pasta production in 

Saskatchewan and whether you think that it's a plan that could 

have benefits for the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I think in the area of pasta 

production or upgrading any of the cereal grains like durum 

wheat or oats that are grown in Saskatchewan or malt barley or 

even pearling barley, any of these products that can be 

upgraded and add value to them on the way through 

Saskatchewan is obviously something that we will try to do.  

When it comes to meat production, the same is true as well.  If 

we can add value to them as they go 

through the system, it's very, very good news for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I think on that obviously you and I would agree.  I don't 

think there's any disagreement at all between members of the 

opposition and members of government that if we can have a 

pasta plant in Swift Current and it's viable and there's private 

sector money in the deal at risk -- same as the money from 

taxpayers -- if there's a market for the product and if the project 

is firm, we have every, every ounce of effort being put into that 

project to make it work because I think it's good for 

Saskatchewan.  And we will keep you posted very closely on 

the deal because we're obviously interested in making it work. 

 

But having said that, we obviously want to be careful that the 

deals we make are going to be successful.  And that is that 

there's a market for the product that's being produced; therefore 

a market plan has to be produced. 

 

And on the other side, that the investment is structured in such 

a way that the private sector is putting in their money and 

putting it at risk.  Because that's what private business is all 

about; that's what free enterprise is all about.  And I believe in 

free enterprise, so I think people should have the opportunity 

not only to make money, but obviously have the opportunity to 

lose it as well. 

 

And in many deals that were structured with the government in 

the past few years in Saskatchewan, it wasn't free enterprise.  

Because the private sector had no opportunity to take the risk 

of losing money because that was being covered off by the 

taxpayers.  That's not free enterprise.  That's something else.  

That's some other kind of economics, and we reject that. 

 

And the business people are telling us that they very much 

respect this new approach to economic development in the 

province.  That when we do deals, that the private sector -- 

where we do joint ventures -- that we share in the risk and we 

share in the profits and we create employment. 

 

So the deal is such that we want it and we want it very badly, 

but we're not going to put only taxpayers' money in the deal 

because we think the private sector has to be involved and take 

the risk as well. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, you tell us about your commitment 

to the Saska Pasta project and yet we don't see any tangible 

proof of that commitment.  In fact in the Swift Current Booster 

dated July 27, '92, columnist Mr. Peter Godfrey, he suggests 

that you have shown very little commitment to the project.  

And I'd like to just quote this short article about it: 

 

 The Hon. . . .  (minister opposite) is about as far from being a 

good economic development professional as the earth is from 

Mars.  Never in a month of frosty Sunday afternoons would a 

pro, like Cheryl Thompson here in Swift Current, make 

doomsday comments about a multi-million dollar project like 

Saska Pasta until the last cat was hung. 

 

 (The minister) . . . seems personally hell-bent to see this 

project die for Swift Current.  Why? 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2583 

Because it was a Tory deal?  Or does he want it to go 

elsewhere?  Ruin it for Swift Current and built it up somewhere 

else. 

 

 As said in last week's column, there's a good plan underfoot 

by people who care about this project -- which we sincerely 

hope our provincial government does -- plus the private 

capital is in place.  The business-people involved have spent 

seven years researching this project and it seems illogical 

they suddenly wouldn't have a market.  On and on. 

 

 Last words said -- let's wait and see and put some faith in the 

process which, by and large, usually works; and let's hope the 

government of Saskatchewan believes in Swift Current as 

much as (those) . . . who live here do. 

 

Mr. Minister, is it your contention that you would like to see 

the project in Swift Current die, as this columnist suggests, and 

move elsewhere?  Or do you indeed have a commitment to the 

Saska Pasta project in Swift Current? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- As I indicated to the member 

earlier, Mr. Chairman, we have a commitment to value added 

production of food products in Saskatchewan.  And I want to 

make it very clear.  And if you're talking to Mr. Godfrey, you 

may pass this on to him that we're very, very committed to the 

idea of producing pasta in Swift Current if the deal is as we 

have outlined, that is, that the private sector money is in and at 

risk, and the marketing plan is such that there is a market.  

Maybe you could, for us, tell us the company that Saska Pasta 

is going to be selling the pasta to.  You may have information 

that I don't have. 

 

But I want to tell you that the idea that your member from 

Melville had of building telephones in Melville -- and we now 

have many telephones built.  There's questions about whether 

they work or not -- but there's certainly no place to sell them to.  

And you would know as well as I do that it's very, very 

important to have a marketing plan in place.  Once the money 

arrangements are made and the private capital is in and if 

there's a marketing plan that shows that this project is feasible, 

I am very, very committed -- and I know our government is -- 

to value added products in the province. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, earlier on in the spring you and 

officials of your department took a trip to New York.  And part 

of the reason for going to New York, you suggested . . . and I 

understand you took a gentleman from the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool, Mr. Loewen, I believe it was, with you.  And one 

of the reasons that you were going was to find markets for 

pasta production. 

 

Now you're suggesting that if I know of any markets for pasta 

production that I should come forward and tell you.  Mr. 

Minister, I think that's part of your responsibility, and that was 

exactly part of the reason why you suggested you went to New 

York.  I wonder if you could update the Assembly on your trip 

to New York with respect to pasta production, what companies 

that discussions were held with with respect to pasta 

production. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member will know that our 

trip that we undertook in terms of being Minister of Trade, was 

to do a number of things. 

 

One, we attended a meeting in Washington with Julius Katz, 

who is the second in command so to speak to Carla Hills when 

it comes to trade.  And we spent a day dealing on trade issues 

in Washington, that is, with the NAFTA, North American Free 

Trade Agreement, being very much of the final stages. 

 

We took an opportunity to meet with Bill Merkin, the chief 

advisor to a number of people on trade, and came away with 

much greater understanding on the issue of the North American 

Free Trade Agreement, the U.S. (United States)-Canada Free 

Trade Agreement, as well as GATT (General Agreement on 

Tariffs and Trade) negotiation. 

 

And for members of the Assembly I think it's fair to say that 

from the U.S. perspective, they are less than optimistic that 

there is going to be a great deal coming out of the GATT 

negotiations over the coming year.  In fact I think it was even 

more pessimistic than that.  When it came to the Free Trade 

Agreement, I think it's obvious to say that the American 

government is relatively high on the deal and see it as very 

importantly necessary to two trading partners as close as 

Canada and United States. 

 

We obviously indicated to them that we had problems if any of 

these trade agreements would impact adversely on the 

Canadian Wheat Board or the Western Grain Transportation 

Act.  And we wanted to let them know that in their push under 

the Free Trade Agreement, the Canada-U.S. Free Trade 

Agreement, that they would have a great deal of trouble dealing 

away anything that would weaken the position of western 

farmers as it relates to the Canadian Wheat Board or the 

Western Grain Transportation Act.  So that part of the meeting 

was very informative, and I thought useful. 

 

When it came to other trade issues in New York and 

Pennsylvania and New Jersey, the other three states that we 

attended, the debate was around trade in Saskatchewan food 

products.  We met with people who were importers of peas and 

lentils and honey and chocolate and a number of other products 

that we produce in Saskatchewan.  And we made some 

arrangements whereby these people who are brokers in New 

York and the north-eastern United States would and could 

come to Saskatchewan. 

 

And I believe -- I can confirm this with my deputy -- but I 

think there will be those who will come here during this harvest 

season for the first time to look at the crop harvest in 

Saskatchewan because we believe, and here not being critical 

of the previous government or any government, but that we 

should have much more hands-on with our brokers in New 

York and other parts of the world and coming to Saskatchewan 

to understand our system and actually how easy it is to move 

product, whether it's wild rice or fish out of northern 

Saskatchewan, into these highly populated areas, that there's a 

huge market.  And so the brokers that we met with were very 

interested in what we had to offer. 

 

The other thing was tourism, we're looking at ways and means 

of making our trade office . . . and Mr. Michael 



2584 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

Cohen who runs the trade office in New York is very, very 

committed to doing what we can to see if we can appeal to and 

get more tourists to change their habit of going to northern 

Quebec and northern Ontario to come through Denver or 

through Minneapolis to Saskatchewan to fishing in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The other part of the trip, as you have indicated, was to meet 

with several companies that deal very directly with pasta.  And 

these companies -- and I can get you more detail on them -- 

were CPC International, which is a large broker in pasta 

products in terms of manufacture of pasta; Nestlé's which is a 

world leader in pasta, as well; Hershey's from Hershey, 

Pennsylvania -- we spent an afternoon at their head office in 

Hershey.  They manufacture many pasta products. 

 

And also Campbell's.  Campbell's, although many will not be 

well aware of this, but in Campbell products they consume 

many, many thousands of tons of pasta products when it comes 

to making soups and mixes and those kinds of things. 

 

(1515) 

 

And our reason for discussing that with them was exactly as 

you indicate:  to find out from them whether or not any 

companies from Saskatchewan had approached them; what the 

arrangements might be in terms of selling our product into that 

market because they are right across the United States, and in 

fact in many parts of the world.  So it was an education process 

for us, as well as for Mr. Loewen from the Wheat Pool who 

attended several of the meetings. 

 

I thought it was very, very worthwhile.  In fact, on the area of 

trade, obviously much of the work and consultation that we did 

helped us formulate the policy of the provincial government.  

When it came to products, I believe, we've already signed a 

lentils contract as a result of our trip to New York. 

 

And when it comes to pasta, obviously as this deal progresses 

to fruition -- and I'm very, very hopeful that the Swift Current 

plant will be successful -- we'll have a much better 

understanding of that market when it comes to the distribution 

and sale of pasta products. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would provide us 

with a complete list of all companies, all companies you were 

in contact with on the New York trip, as well as all companies 

that you've had any contact with, you or your department, with 

respect to pasta production in the Saska Pasta project in Swift 

Current. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, I'll provide that list of the . . . 

sort of an outline of the agenda that we had while we were in 

the United States for that five or six-day period. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- You mentioned that there was a lentil contract 

signed while you were there or shortly after your trip to New 

York.  I wonder if there were any other sales or sales orders 

made on behalf of your department or any other company in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member will know that 

these contracts are confidential, so obviously I'm not about to 

give contracts because they're made not between the 

government but between the broker in New York and the 

company in Canada. 

 

But here again the member, if he would like to confidentially 

come talk to me, I can provide him, in a confidential basis, with 

the amount of the number of pounds or tonnes of the lentils and 

seed contract that was arrived at. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wonder if the 

minister, in his conversation with respect to pasta and lentils 

and other projects, if he could give us information on who he 

sold the lentils to and whose lentils they are and if there was 

any potential for other people contracting lentils and how could 

organizations -- the pulse growers or farmers or other people -- 

get access to that information. 

 

The second question is -- obviously there are people who have 

looked at markets with respect to pasta, and we had talked 

about this before -- and did the minister take anybody with him 

that knew much about the pasta market?  And secondly, frankly 

if he didn't, does he anticipate travelling or exploring or taking 

people in the private sector -- whether it's those that are 

interested in the Swift Current project or others -- to more fully 

develop the analysis of the market for, what we have as 

information, that 2 to 3 per cent growth in the United States 

pasta market which, as the minister knows, is a large 

population.  Somebody's going to fill it. 

 

So as much information as possible on the lentil market, and 

then are you going to do more on the market side in terms of 

pasta? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I think those questions that the 

member from Estevan puts are very valid and good questions 

because the simple fact is -- he will know having been minister 

of Agriculture and Food for a number of years -- that having 

market for the product is absolutely essential when it comes to 

building plants or factories, whether it's Impact Packaging in 

Swift Current or whether it's Trinitel in Melville or whether it's 

Hitachi in Saskatoon, that oftentimes it isn't a question of 

whether you can make the product or not but it's the end use. 

 

And what made the Hitachi project in Saskatoon successful 

was the fact that we had a power plant being built that could at 

least consume the first amount of production that would then 

give them room to move on into the world. 

 

What made some of the other projects not work -- Trinitel 

being one of them -- is that the market plan, many argued, was 

simply not, was simply not right.  Austrak tractor in Weyburn 

is another example of, I think many would argue, not making 

sure that all the detail of marketing and financing were in 

place. 

 

So I want to make it very clear to the member opposite that 

we're very interested and excited about the Swift Current 

project and we agree with you that the pasta production and 

consumption in the western world is increasing and we believe 

there is a niche that we should 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2585 

fit into. 

 

The key is, though, that you have to know that with the export 

enhancement program that there is discussion that you can 

export durum from North Dakota to Turkey, use the export 

enhancement program as a lift on your . . . or a deduction on 

your durum that you export, manufacture it in Turkey at very 

much lower levels of salaries, and then ship it back into the 

United States and lay it into the United States at a very 

competitive rate with somebody making that pasta right in a 

small town in North Dakota where it was produced. 

 

And so we want to make sure that when we're investing 

hundreds of thousands, tens of millions of dollars in these 

projects, that all of the marketing plans are in place, that the 

financing isn't in such a form that the taxpayers take all the risk 

and the private sector merely stand by and accept profits when 

profits are made. 

 

These two main things, the member opposite will be interested 

to know, we're watching very, very carefully.  We want the 

plant.  And I'll tell him that as sincerely as I can.  That if this is 

feasible -- that we can produce pasta in Swift Current -- that the 

taxpayers will not be at a disadvantage in terms of their 

position of investment versus the private sector, and if the 

marketing is in place, I will very much want that plant and our 

government very much wants it in Swift Current.  Because as a 

resident of south-west Saskatchewan for a long, long time, with 

many of my friends and neighbours who produce durum in that 

area, we firmly believe that value adding that product makes all 

the sense in the world. 

 

And what we want to do -- we're committed to it -- make sure 

the deal is right, so that the plant in two or three or four years 

doesn't go the way of some other plants because we didn't do 

the marketing strategy right.  Or if it does go the wrong way, 

that the taxpayers are at a disadvantage as to the way the 

structure of the deal is made. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well fair enough, Mr. Minister.  I asked you if 

you could give us information on who you sold lentils to, and 

who provided them, and if more people can get access to that 

market, and what the pulse growers would like to have access 

to, and if anybody else.  So, who went along to sell the lentils?  

Who did you sell them to?  How were they marketed?  Who 

delivers the lentils?  And who owns them? 

 

The second thing is: are you doing any more research on the 

pasta?  Have you planned any market research on pasta?  If in 

fact the United States market is increasing -- and I'm sure your 

people have the estimate . . . but pasta consumption is 

increasing significantly in the United States.  And it's a big 

population, and we are big durum producers.  You are.  I am.  

And lots of people who are in agriculture.  So it is a market.  

Now that's very important. 

 

Third, let me point out that we all understand values of 

markets.  The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has, with an 

American company, very good market for malt; looked at it 

very carefully.  And expansion is going well, and the 

privatization went well.  Americans are happy, and 

Saskatchewan's happy, and people in Biggar, 

Saskatchewan are happy. 

 

The same applies in alcohol; markets are there.  Mohawk Oil is 

happy, Lanigan feedlot is happy -- at least with the FeedGAP 

still there -- and the Wheat Pool is happy. 

 

Other people are looking at those markets -- you mention 

Hitachi.  The same with fertilizer -- huge demand for 

Saskatchewan-based fertilizer.  That's why that plant's going to 

be very profitable.  Those market analyses are done. 

 

My information leads me to believe that there is a very large 

and growing pasta market.  Now we're in the business of durum 

in Saskatchewan.  So I'm asking -- not only on the lentil 

contract that you had, who you sold it to and whatever -- but 

have you done similar analysis . . . have you taken similar 

kinds of people on the pasta market analysis?  Have you even 

invited the man from Montreal who wants to do this to say, all 

right, let's the two of us get over there and look at the, whatever 

market it might be, from the west coast to the east coast 

because you have opportunity to do that.  That would be 

encouraging to people who want to see us process durum wheat 

here in Saskatchewan.  So would you respond to those two 

specifics? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member opposite asks the name 

of the company that we sold lentils to, and obviously this is not 

the way the . . . I mean, I didn't go there with lentils to sell.  

The deal was structured between a broker in New York and a 

broker in Saskatchewan.  And what I make a commitment to do 

is to go to them and if they have no problem with making that 

public, I will certainly do that.  Or I can certainly do that on a 

confidential basis with the member opposite. 

 

When it comes to increased pasta production or increased 

telecommunications production or increased power production, 

the member opposite will know that there is no guarantee that 

because, for example, people are using more telephones, that 

that's going to make a telephone plant in Melville successful.  

And he will be well aware that it's more complicated than that; 

that he's oversimplifying it by saying: people are using more 

telephones, therefore we're going to build a telephone plant in 

Melville and all will be well.  It's more complicated than that. 

 

And pasta is no different.  I mean the Wheat Pool has been 

evaluating and studying pasta production for many, many 

years.  And obviously Crown Management Board . . . and I 

want to reiterate to the member opposite again what I'd told his 

colleague from Kindersley, Saska Pasta does not fall under the 

purview of Economic Development, but under the Crown 

Investments Corporation, where you had it structured when you 

were in government. 

 

Now I don't mind talking about it because I am very interested 

and very much involved in it.  But when it comes to studies on 

Saska Pasta and market research, that is where the work in that 

area is being undertaken.  And I know that they're very, very 

interested and, I must say, excited about the potential of a pasta 

plant in Swift Current. 



2586 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

But however, regardless of whether there's a market increasing 

or not, we want to make sure that we know how we fit into it.  

Because I say again, it simply isn't a matter of building the 

plant, starting to chug the old spaghetti through the plant, fill 

the warehouses and the Quonset huts, and then say, now I 

wonder where we're going to sell this darned stuff.  You have 

to realize that it's more complicated than that. 

 

What we want to make sure of are two things with the plant in 

Swift Current: one, that that market research is done and that 

they have contracts or potential contracts -- not unlike the 

member opposite, I believe, did with Impact Packaging.  What 

they did is they went to Albertson's Foods in the north-western 

United States and they had contracts for the product.  That is a 

very good way of doing business -- that before you build the 

plant to make meat trays in Swift Current, you know where 

you're going to sell them.  And they had Albertson's all lined 

up to take the meat trays. 

 

Now they've run into other problems -- and I don't blame you 

one ounce for problems that there may be with Impact 

Packaging -- and they are being sorted out.  We intend that that 

plant . . . hope that plant will be very, very successful. 

 

But on the pasta plant we want to know and be very clear -- 

and I'm sure you'll understand -- that before we invest your 

neighbours' and friends' money in this plant, which is what is 

being called on, that there's a marketing strategy in place so 

that the day that the first loads of pasta come out of that plant, 

that we're not then looking around for the market. 

 

The other thing is, is that when we invest the taxpayers' money, 

that we don't put in all the risk money and that the private 

sector take only that profit when and if it occurs, that we want 

to make sure that we allow free enterprise to flourish in this 

province, that is that they take their risk with the potential of 

losing their money and they take their risk with the potential of 

making money.  And we're wanting to make sure that the 

private sector money is put in at the same time as the taxpayers' 

money and that the risk is shared, as opposed to many deals 

where the taxpayers in the past have taken the risk and the 

private sector has taken the profits. 

 

(1530) 

 

Business don't want that, and in the business community that I 

work in, they say this is a very fair way of doing it.  And when 

I talk to Mr. Hill or Mr. Phillips, and the people who do 

business in the province, they say you're very, very right in 

making sure the private sector money is into these deals before 

you expose the taxpayers' money. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you've talked about market 

research and you think it's necessary.  So we're just asking, 

where is it?  If you want to be partners, at least you could go 

with the partner that says that they have:  one, the analysis; and 

two, some money; and at least convince us or the taxpayer that 

you're prepared to co-operate and look at that market. 

 

You have not given any indication that you've looked at 

the pasta market.  And you say, well you don't think it's there.  

You know that it's there.  You know it's large and it's growing.  

Have you done the analysis of what kind of product, what it 

should look like and the demand, so that you can . . . As you 

say in your words, you have to do the market research.  So -- 

you've said that three or four times now -- have you done any 

market research?  If you're prepared to joint venture with a 

partner, as you say equal -- their money and your money -- 

have you done any of that analysis? 

 

Secondly, I'm not so sure what you did in marketing lentils if 

the deal was done before you went.  All right, then if it wasn't, 

then I want to know, okay, who's buying lentils and who's 

selling lentils and on whose behalf? 

 

Because you said you went down there to market lentils and to 

help the deal.  Isn't that the fact?  Well if that's the deal, if that's 

the truth, that's the fact, then I want to know, because it's at 

taxpayers' expense, whose lentils were you selling; how did 

you sell them; on what basis?  I mean you're there on behalf of 

the people of Saskatchewan, not just one company or not just 

somebody.  I mean what you do is public knowledge. 

 

So I do want that information and I'm sure the pulse crop 

growers and the pulse association would like that kind of 

information.  And I'm just asking if you've got similar kinds of 

deals or information or at least analysis or studies on the pasta 

market.  And I don't think you have.  Because if you have, you 

haven't told us.  You've told us how important it is to have 

them, but you haven't said a thing about whether you have 

them or not. 

 

Because I understand that.  We've looked at it in barley and in 

malt and in alcohol and fertilizer, and lots of different projects.  

And I agree with you, the market analysis is important.  But it's 

more than just talking about it. 

 

As my colleague wanted to know, if you have done some deals, 

we'd like to know about them.  And if you're serious about 

pasta and the market, then maybe you could talk to us about 

what kind of plans or co-operative efforts that you might have 

with the private sector, including the Wheat Pool, to go 

examine that market.  And if you'd share some of those with us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I say again to the member opposite, 

Mr. Chairman, that obviously the largest amount of work that 

is being done on the Saska Pasta project -- let's talk about that 

because that's where he keeps coming back to -- is being done 

by the Crown Investments Corporation.  And the reason it's 

being done there is because that's where you set up the project 

when you undertook it and announced it. 

 

What was clear to us when we took over government, even 

though you had announced it as a done deal, that there was no 

research into marketing.  That you made the deal and the 

commitment without having done any market research.  Why 

you did that, I'm not sure. 

 

But within CIC (Crown Investments Corporations) at that time, 

there was literally no market research done on where you were 

going to sell that product, even though 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2587 

you had started well down the road into committing millions of 

dollars of taxpayers' money.  That's a fact.  That's what you had 

done. 

 

Now why you chose to put it in CIC -- you can rise in your 

place and say why you put it in CIC as opposed to in SEDCO 

(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) or 

Economic Development.  You can also tell us why you made 

the commitment of millions of dollars of taxpayers' money with 

no market research, because there was no market research 

done.  I agree with you, you have to do that market research. 

 

One might say the reason you made that announcement with no 

market research is because it was in a seat that you knew was 

marginal and you wanted to win it in the next election, so you 

needed an announcement, but you didn't have time to get the 

marketing research done.  I don't know why you did it that 

way. 

 

But what I can tell you and make the commitment to you, is 

that that research and study and analysis is being done by the 

staff people in Crown Investments Corporation, working 

closely with the Montreal group who want to build the plant in 

Swift Current. 

 

So that we know two things.  One, that when and if the plant is 

built, there is sale immediately for the product.  And I'm sure 

you'd agree that that is the proper way to do business.  That we 

shouldn't just put the taxpayers' money in tens of millions of 

dollars and let them have it to produce pasta without knowing 

that they have contracts to sell into the markets of the world. 

 

The other thing is that we want to make sure that when the 

money is invested on behalf of the taxpayers, that it isn't at risk 

more than the private sector money.  It's not that the taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan don't want to invest in the province, but what 

they're tired of is taking all the risk and then on the other side, 

the profits go to someone else. 

 

When it comes to the sale of Saskatchewan seeds around the 

world and in north-eastern United States, I say again, that 

obviously the trade office that you opened, sir, and the 

individual you hired there, Mr. Cohen, is very much involved 

on a day-to-day basis, trying to facilitate the sale of 

Saskatchewan products, whether it's wild rice, whether it's 

lentils, whether it's peas, whether it's fish, whether it's honey, 

whether it's chocolate into that area of the United States. 

 

And the reason that we kept that trade office open is because I 

think that was one of the trade offices . . . unlike Hong Kong or 

Minneapolis or the one that you closed, I believe in London, 

they just weren't cutting it, according to the statistics that were 

being produced. 

 

But you also know that when deals are facilitated by 

government you can't just stand up and say, well here's the 

deal.  And there are confidentiality clauses in these agreements 

and those kinds of things.  And I'll tell you very clearly, if they 

agree that they would like this to be made public . . . You'll 

know that in the grain trade, Cargill doesn't make its deals 

known to the public.  I mean you've been there.  You were 

minister of Agriculture; you understand the Canadian Wheat 

Board; you know they 

don't make their deals public. 

 

And I really would urge you to . . . I'll sit down with you, brief 

you confidentially on this contract.  If they don't mind it being 

public, I don't mind telling you.  But obviously in a sensitive 

area where you're dealing and where half a cent a pound makes 

an important difference, obviously . . . When the minister in 

charge of the Wheat Board goes on a foreign international trade 

excursion to China or Russia and they announce a deal, they 

don't then sit down and tell the world how the deal was worked 

out because they're the government.  And that's ludicrous for us 

to suggest that. 

 

I tell you this: that we went to New York; we went to 

Washington; we went to Pennsylvania and New Jersey.  We 

met with a lot of people in the trade who say there's great 

potential for tourism in Saskatchewan from that area of the 

world, great potential in the pulse seeds from this area of the 

world, including wild rice, as you will know, and that there is 

great potential in the United States for pasta. 

 

So I say to you that on those issues . . . the Swift Current 

project, we're excited about and hope it comes to fruition.  And 

we're pleased that you and your government made some initial 

contacts and work on that.  We're surprised it was announced 

without any market research and without proper, we feel, due 

diligence being done on the deal.  We think you should have 

taken it along further and had markets for it. 

 

But then, that's opinions.  But it's fair to say that we're hopeful 

that that deal will be brought off and that the private sector as 

well as the public will be well served in the deal. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well maybe the minister could provide us, and 

be prepared to provide us, the analysis of the markets.  Because 

I know that the partner in Montreal has done a considerable 

amount of research and shared it with government officials.  

And what we're after is, if you're really interested in pursuing 

that in a deliberate, in a sincere way.  Because if you 

discourage it, then it will fall. 

 

And they're tough enough to do at the best of times.  So if you 

get people . . . you have people who are interested in putting 

money forward, then we should hear about it.  And what we 

want to know is, if you are doing more market research with 

respect to pasta, that we'd like to have access to it or at least be 

able to table it here so that, in fact, we know that the investors 

from across Canada know that it's real, it's very real. 

 

The second thing I'd like to find out is that . . . and the reason 

we go back to it is that you that you were marketing lentils and 

wild rice.  And all we're asking is that, I mean, couldn't you be 

a little bit more specific.  Because you don't have to go to New 

York to know that there's a large population in the United 

States.  You don't have to go to New York to know that we've 

got a lentil crop and we've got pulse crop and wild rice.  It's 

what you do when you get there at taxpayers' expense. 

 

So you could make 15 trips back and forth.  And you've 



2588 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

criticized other people who were in various positions in 

Minneapolis or some place else.  So we're asking you: what did 

you get done?  You say, well I think we sold some lentils.  

Well then you're not sure whether they did or not.  Or if they 

did, you can't tell, or because the grain trade did it and you 

don't want to talk about it.  Well then you must . . . You've got 

to wonder, you know, what the man in New York is doing 

there.  So he's putting them together. 

 

If there are new markets, certainly you could exchange . . . I 

don't need the information, but you could give it to the 

industry, if there's any new information, and that's really what 

we're after -- if you've got a new kind of market.  If you weren't 

there doing what we think that you were doing, well then we're 

going to call you on it because you obviously are going at 

taxpayers' expense. 

 

And I can tell the hon. member that if you look at the success 

of going into markets -- take Harvest Meats, out of Yorkton.  

The minister might know how they're doing.  They're doing 

pretty well going into the United States through the 

Minneapolis market.  And it's going to be a very big success.  

And they've done a lot of market research.  And it takes that 

kind of market research and type of quality product that is 

being produced at Harvest Meats to make sure that that will 

work. 

 

That kind of market research and analysis done by the private 

sector is available, and it's available in pasta.  So what we want 

to know is, just make sure that you are staying with it with 

respect to markets in the United States, particularly on projects 

where you've got the indication that the private sector will 

come up with $10 million, and that the market analysis is there. 

 

And I would say to the hon. member -- and I want to make a 

point of clarification -- certainly the people who, in the private 

sector, had put forward their analysis of the market in the 

United States . . . and it is a tremendous market. 

 

Now the third point, and it's not necessarily your portfolio, but 

we talked about it the other night here in Energy, is that market 

research, and the minister knows, market research was done on 

lots of energy projects.  And he mentioned Hitachi was 

successful because the market was there.  We did a great deal 

of market research.  The private sector has done market 

research.  SaskPower has done market research.  And on 

economic development, one of the biggest job creators that we 

can have is in energy. 

 

And that's one where there certainly wouldn't be much of an 

excuse that we haven't done any market research.  The demand 

is there for energy.  The demand is there for alternate forms of 

energy.  The demand is there for all kinds of things that we can 

do. 

 

So if we're looking at sound economic development -- whether 

its processing of our resources in food or processing our energy 

resources; whether it's coal or gas or oil or uranium or others; 

just as whether it's gas and then fertilizer and then into other 

jurisdictions; or it's barley into malt and then into United 

States; or whether it's feed into alcohol into Mohawk Oil and 

others -- that market research, and many of them, have been 

completed. 

 

And certainly with respect to the AECL (Atomic Energy of 

Canada Ltd.) concept and the agreement we signed, included 

all of the memorandum of understanding -- a great deal of 

market research, a great deal of market research.  And it's 

strong, almost an inelastic demand for an awful lot of it. 

 

So we aren't just going to be encouraging the minister and his 

staff, and maybe some of these portfolios don't touch yours, but 

in economic development they're going to overlap and they're 

going to end up in your lap because you're responsible for that. 

 

We want to know that in the analysis of markets, number one, 

that you're actually going to do them.  And number two, when 

they are done then you don't look for another excuse not to do 

it for some other reason.  Because obviously we can find 

reasons to not do projects, whether it's on the market side or I 

don't particularly like this company or something else.  But if 

there's strong demand and you have the analysis, we want to 

know that we're not missing opportunities. 

 

So again, if you want to provide information either to the pulse 

crop growers or anybody else about anything that you found 

out on the lentil market or the pasta market, they'll be very 

interested. And I would also say to the hon. member, there's 

been a great deal of research done on the demand for energy 

projects.  And certainly in the discussion we had here the other 

night and the discussion you and I have had with respect to the 

memorandum of understanding, we could initiate all kinds of 

projects on energy alone here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I appreciate the member's 

comments when it comes to the analysis of the market because 

I think that's important.  But it's got to go a step further than 

that. 

 

You can analyse that there's a 10 per cent increase I say in 

usage of telephones and then go out and build a telephone 

plant.  But unless you have actual, very, very solid contacts and 

potential sales for these telephones, it doesn't much matter 

whether it's increasing 100 per cent.  You have to know where 

you're going to sell the product. 

 

Pasta's no different that that.  It's a very, very tight market.  The 

huge conglomerates that end up using the majority of the pasta 

products have a very, very tight rein, as you well know.  And 

you have to break into that.  And Hitachi is a very, very good 

example of one of those that worked. 

 

When it comes to consultation on trade missions, the member 

will know that I've spoken to him personally about his 

involvement with the Chinese community and trips to China 

and I would very much appreciate any information that he can 

give us in terms of his trade missions that he has gone on. 

 

And I've talked to his former deputy premier, Mr. Berntson, a 

number of times about trade missions.  I've talked to Mr. 

Berntson a number of times about AECL and 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2589 

the way the deal was formed, about our problem with the 

portion that dealt with the reactor and the waste disposal site, 

laying out very clearly how we had problems with the reactor 

portion of the agreement and with the waste site because we 

believed, one, on the waste site, that the public of 

Saskatchewan didn't want Saskatchewan to become a dump site 

for nuclear waste from across the country or across the world. 

 

That may change.  The public in Saskatchewan may at some 

point want to do that because there is, as I understand it and 

obviously there will be, a large amount of revenue that would 

be generated from storing nuclear waste in Saskatchewan.  But 

at the present time I believe the public of Saskatchewan don't 

want that to happen.  Therefore we said no to the agreement. 

 

But when it comes to research on nuclear uses, whether it's 

irradiation of food or medicine or even research on a CANDU 

3 (Canadian deuterium uranium) reactor, we have clearly 

indicated to the federal government in every way possible that 

we would very much like to have AECL look at the potential of 

coming to Saskatchewan to do research. 

 

And I say to the member opposite that we're very, very 

interested in jobs coming to Saskatchewan, but obviously they 

have to be done in such a way that they don't put at risk the 

environment of the province.  That is why people are 

concerned about a nuclear waste disposal site in Saskatchewan.  

And they're also very concerned about the model of 

investment.  That is, that the taxpayers shouldn't be taking all 

the risk. 

 

And I say to the member opposite, who I believe is a 

free-enterpriser and believes in the free-enterprise system, that 

most business people in the province don't expect the taxpayers 

to take all the risk and for the private sector to get all the profits 

if the deals are successful. 

 

So I say to the members opposite, I'm very interested in the 

analysis of the pasta market.  But you have to take it one step 

further and that is, where are the contracts that we will fill and 

how do we fit into that expanding market? 

 

When it comes to Hitachi, I give full credit for the deal, as we 

did at the opening, that the former deputy premier, Mr. 

Berntson, did have involvement in making that deal work.  And 

the simple fact is, is that we now have facilitated and helped 

with an expansion. 

 

And the member opposite will try to say, look, you guys aren't 

doing anything and nothing is happening.  But I think in 

fairness we give you credit for the fact that they came in the 

first place.  I think if you were being fair, you would say, and 

we appreciate very much that you helped negotiate out a deal, 

and be involved and facilitate the expansion of Hitachi.  I think 

that, in the spirit of co-operation and good will, would be the 

way any reasonable person would look at Hitachi. 

 

When it comes to the commissioning of Shand, obviously you 

were the government around and one can question whether 

Rafferty and Alameda should have been built, but obviously 

that is something that you did. 

When it comes to the 24-inch mill at IPSCO, obviously Mr. 

Phillips says very clearly that that came as a result of the 

government's change to some tax laws.  And you continue to 

say, well you're not doing anything and there's nothing being 

done in the province.  And your member gets up and takes 

credit for the IPSCO expansion the day we make the 

announcement, and down plays it.  I mean either this is 

co-operation or it's just adversarial. 

 

But I think when it comes finally -- to the former premier -- 

when it comes to trade missions, I think you're absolutely right 

that when you go on these trips, you have to be able to defend 

to the public the cost of your rooms, the cost of air fare, how 

many people you took with him, and at the end of the day 

whether or not you got results. 

 

I mentioned to the member from Kindersley earlier that people 

from New York are intending to come to Saskatchewan to look 

at the harvest, some of them for the first time.  One of them 

will be, we expect, the individual, the owner-president of the 

company who bought the lentils.  And I make the offer to the 

member opposite from Estevan, when that individual comes to 

town I would very much like to sit down with him and we'll 

talk about how that deal was structured. 

 

And the fact is, is that I think the trip to the United States -- 

you may not agree -- but I think that the fact that we went to 

four states in five days, met with Julius Katz, the trade 

negotiator on the NAFTA deal, and consulted with Bill Merkin, 

one of the main consultants in Washington on trade, that we 

met with a number of brokers in New York; we went to 

Pennsylvania and Hershey foods who are large consumers of 

pasta; we were in New Jersey with a number of different pasta 

producers and people who purchase Saskatchewan products, 

that it was very worthwhile; that we did it on a shoe-string 

budget when it comes to where we stayed and how we 

travelled. 

 

And I think at the end of the day there are results.  That I would 

like to sit down with you sometime, and when the individual 

comes to Saskatchewan maybe we could sit down and have a 

coffee and talk about trade and pulse crops. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you got into several things 

that . . . when you . . . Let me just come back to your trip.  

When you make a trip and you said you talked to many people 

and many brokers and people who knew about pasta and so 

forth, we want to know what you've learned.  And you haven't 

told us a thing today.  You said well, we learned about this and 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well sure, he said many things 

but we have no specifics. 

 

We don't know any markets.  We don't know the names of the 

people he talked to, in terms of those that know about the pasta.  

You said many pasta people.  Well who did you talk to that are 

pasta people?  Who did you talk to who were lentil people?  

Who'd you talk to that are potential contract people? 

 

I mean that's the kind of stuff that people . . . that individuals 

want to know.  So if you could provide that.  Because if you 

went to five states in four days well you might as well go to 20 

states in 10 days.  And you'll come 



2590 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

back and it's been a whiz trip.  And what did you learn?  And 

what did we pay for?  What have you got out of it?  That's what 

we're asking and that's a fair question.  I think you would 

appreciate that. 

 

So if there are people who are interested, or if these are new 

people who are purchasing lentils or new people who know 

information about pasta, the market people want to know that. 

 

And if you went there on taxpayers' expense, we're all paying 

for it.  It's not a secret.  It's not a secret.  If you took one 

company with you as opposed to other companies, we'd be 

interested in that.  Who went with you on this mission that it's 

now confidential?  We don't know who did the deals.  Well 

what . . . you know, the public would like to know.  Did you 

take industry people with you?  Are you going to take other 

industry people with?  That's a fair question.  The taxpayers 

would certainly like to know that. 

 

I mean you want to get into a discussion with respect to the 

IPSCO announcement.  I mean our administration had already 

indicated we'll provide the tax concessions for an expansion.  

And then you come in and you won and you cancelled it and 

then you bring it back in again to try to take some credit for it.  

If we want to argue about that back and forth, I mean we knew 

what was necessary to make sure that you would have that 

expansion. 

 

The third thing with respect to AECL -- I just want to make it 

clear -- the member says the dump site.  I mean nobody said 

that, only you said that.  The dump site -- waste, dump, that's 

what you just said, in Hansard.  Yes, the disposal site.  Okay.  

All right where does it say that there is the disposal site?  It 

says, you'll study the research, the fuel cycle, and waste 

management.  And so . . . no sense frightening people.  That 

isn't in the memorandum of understanding or an agreement -- 

research is fine. 

 

And the same with reactor.  I mean you mention, well we're not 

sure we want this reactor.  Well we'll just study -- that's what 

we're looking at.  We just want to know that you have an open 

mind to this economic activity so that in fact we can look 

honestly and openly at economic development, and that we 

know that we're working together on it.  Not everything that we 

did was negative, or not everything was positive.  And the 

same applies to the things that you might be doing. 

 

And the last point I want to make here before we get into some 

more details, you say that we don't want a situation where the 

taxpayer has all the risk and the private sector gets all the 

profit.  Would you describe a situation where the taxpayers had 

all the risk, and the private sector made all the profit? -- made 

all the profit.  Okay, so that you can give us examples of what 

you mean by that, where they made all the profit and the 

taxpayers . . . Because if you're talking about community 

development bonds, we have a large number of them in 

Saskatchewan.  We initiated them. 

 

The people put up money, and the private sector puts up 

money.  Sometimes they would fail, and the guarantees would 

have to be honoured.  Now that means that the private sector 

put up some money, and the taxpayers put 

up some money.  And in many cases we find those community 

development bonds are popular.  In fact you've done bonds 

now even . . . in fact you talked about them here, where you 

have them across Saskatchewan because they are equitably 

shared.  And if you look at projects where we put up some 

money, the people of Saskatchewan and the private sector's put 

up some money, over and over and over again we find that 

that's precisely what they're looking for. 

 

So you keep raising the point, well we don't want the private 

sector to make all the profit and the public sector to take all the 

loss.  Usually when they go into these things, if it's a joint 

venture, they're profitable together.  And if they fail, they lose 

money together.  That's what you're looking at when 

community development bonds . . . or whether we're looking at 

all kinds of other projects.  And there are literally thousands of 

projects, certainly hundreds and hundreds of projects if not a 

thousand or more in Saskatchewan, where it has been a joint 

venture and a credible joint venture.  Some make it and some 

don't, but they go into it together. 

 

The hon. member raises the point, well we're not going to do a 

situation where the private sector takes all the profit and we 

take all the losses.  Well I would like you to further explain all 

the times that that has happened so that we can understand 

what you're talking about, and whether you're just trying to 

discourage investment here, or whether in fact you're looking at 

all the projects that the province of Saskatchewan has done 

with co-operatives, with rural communities, with co-ops, with 

foreign firms, processing plants, meat-packing plants, 

upgraders, paper mills and pulp mills, and fertilizer plants, and 

all of those that are now built or process of being built and 

completed, if he's saying that they're all . . . oh, the private 

sector took all the profits and we took all the losses.  Because 

that's not the case.  And I don't think it's just as easy you 

standing up here saying, well now that I've come back from 

New York, things are different; the private sector won't take all 

the profits and the public sector won't take all the losses.  That 

isn't the case. 

 

You can find projects where you made some mistakes with 

respect to investing in things, whether they're computer 

companies called Nabu, or others.  And they happen.  

Administrations go through it.  You went through it.  I went 

through it.  But you can't just backhand everybody and say, 

well now wholesale that it's not going to be like that. 

 

When you put projects together or anybody puts projects 

together, it's a combination of private sector and public sector.  

And we see that in projects across the province and indeed 

across Canada.  That's what they're looking for. 

 

The private sector offshore is interested in coming in here.  

That's why I asked the Minister of Energy the other night, 

would he be interested in joint ventures.  And we certainly 

would ask you if you're interested in joint ventures, if it was in 

energy or if it were some other things. 

 

So maybe you could clear up the statement you made with 

respect to the IPSCO expansion.  Maybe you could clear up 

whether in fact somebody said there had to be a 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2591 

site here or a disposal place.  Wasn't it research?  And certainly 

with respect to community development bonds, from my 

experience, community development bonds all across the 

province of Saskatchewan -- and there are many -- people put 

up some money and the government guarantees it and then you 

share the risk.  And that's the way they're designed.  And I 

think you're doing them right now all across the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, if I could, by leave, 

introduce guests before I respond. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1600) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, here today is Dr. 

Graham McDonald, president of the Asia Pacific from 

Vancouver, seated in the I believe west gallery.  With him, Mr. 

Paul Hill, business man extraordinaire from Regina, and Mary 

Chan who is well known in the Asia Pacific group here in 

Regina.  I would like all members to join with me in 

welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Economic Development 

Vote 45 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I just want to . . . And I don't want 

to get into the bad deal/good deal.  As the former premier 

mentions, all governments have good deals and bad deals.  And 

I would expect as time goes on, some of the deals that are made 

by this government . . . Although we're proud of what we've 

done so far, whether it's been our involvement in tax changes 

that have helped IPSCO or whether it has been the Hitachi deal 

in Saskatoon or the alfalfa pelletizing plant at Norquay, that we 

think these deals are going to be successful. 

 

I think many people were concerned about the public exposure, 

for example, on the GigaText deal.  And I don't know what 

money Guy Montpetit lost in that deal.  I do know what the 

taxpayers lost.  And so I . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . But I'm 

saying, not comparable at all.  I mean one had a bunch of old 

computers that he couldn't do anything else with and he sold 

them to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan for close to 6 million.  

That's not a good deal.  I'm not going to . . . I don't . . . like 

that's past and it's past and . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Well get it straight -- get it straight. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I would like you to explain it, 

if you care to.  But I mean I think there the taxpayers lost way 

more than the private sector individual.  And I'm sure if you 

had that one to do over again, you would restructure that 

somewhat differently.  I just know you would because that was 

not a good deal. 

And what I'm saying, that when deals are made we have to 

bring in the public money and the private money so they can 

share the risk equally.  And in Swift Current that's what's being 

negotiated now between CIC and the people in Swift Current.  

And I'm sure you're not saying, well the taxpayers should take 

all the risk there.  I know you aren't.  Or should have a different 

share structure than the private sector and have a share 

structure that puts the taxpayers at a disadvantage to the private 

sector.  Why would you want that?  What would be the point? 

 

The other point on the Swift Current project is that we want to 

make sure there are contracts to sell the pasta.  That seems to 

me to go without saying, that the government on behalf of the 

taxpayers would want that to be in place.  And so while we're 

anxious, I say again, that the plant in Swift Current go ahead, 

the truth of it is we'd have to have a deal that's satisfactory both 

to the private sector because they just won't take any deal that 

we offer, nor should they, but nor should the taxpayers just take 

any deal. 

 

When it comes to IPSCO, I want to make it clear that in his 

comments of August 13 -- this is the IPSCO building $23 

million addition -- Mr. Phillips said, changes in provincial 

government tax erased IPSCO's idea of installing the new mill 

in the United States.  That does not give the impression that 

your government was about to or had given any commitment to 

make that tax change. 

 

And I'm not taking credit for that deal.  I mean obviously the 

people at IPSCO and the workers at the plant will take credit 

for the fact, and many people who worked in the plant before.  

But I'm just saying, in fairness, I'll give you and probably more 

the former deputy premier, Mr. Berntson, lots of credit for the 

fact that when they were building Shand he had the foresight to 

go to Hitachi and say, look, if you're able to provide the needs 

of Shand 1, then could you come to Saskatoon and build a 

plant. 

 

But I think it's fair to say as well that that plant didn't 

necessarily have a long life when it came to Saskatoon.  And 

there certainly was no plan to expand it.  And the fact is, it has 

expanded under our administration. 

 

And so I'm just saying to you that all is not doom and gloom in 

terms of the economy of Saskatchewan.  And in fact, I think 

the housing starts, which were up by over 100 per cent across 

the province, including Estevan, where they're up by 400 per 

cent over last year . . . I'm not going to say that's because you 

were defeated as premier, they're suddenly excited in Estevan. 

 

But the simple is that when housing starts go up by 100 per 

cent, it is one of the best indicators that the public -- not the 

politicians but the public -- are expressing confidence in the 

future of their province.  And you may say well it's lower 

interest rates and it's this and that.  But it's happening no where 

else in Canada, where housing starts are up by 100 per cent, so 

it's not only interest rates because interest rates are the same 

across Canada. 

 

And I think things aren't perfect by any means in 

Saskatchewan, but my discussions with business people have 

been very positive.  I think things are going relatively well, 

given the circumstances that we find ourselves in, 



2592 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

and with some support and some optimism in this province, I 

think that there are many people who say they are more 

optimistic today, for example, than they were a year ago. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's interesting that you are 

trying to take credit -- I don't know why you'd bother -- for 

housing starts up in the province and you know that over half 

the housing starts and the increases are in the city of Regina 

alone, and that's in good part because of FCC (Farm Credit 

Corporation) moving here and Crown Life moving here, which 

were both our projects.  That's one fact. 

 

The second is that interest rates are at a 20-year low.  The third 

is that RRSPs (registered retirement savings plan) are eligible 

for new homes and the down payments are now down to 5 per 

cent rather than 10 per cent and you're taking credit for all that. 

 

I don't know why you'd even bring it up.  I mean that's such 

folly.  I mean if that's the kind of the thing that you expect the 

public to believe about you and your administrations, it just 

doesn't wash -- it doesn't wash at all because . . . (inaudible) . . . 

well, the members chirp back and say, well this is something 

they can really take credit for.  Well clearly the public knows 

that that's just not the case. 

 

What we're after -- and I called you on it because when you put 

together community development bonds as we have, and you 

can help the alfalfa plant or you can have expansions like 

Hitachi, Marubeni, or even expansions at IPSCO -- we want to 

know that you've got your facts right.  And the community 

development bonds are instrumental in this taking place.  It's a 

very good idea and I'm glad you're continuing it and I give you 

a bouquet. 

 

Now whether it's carried on alfalfa plant or whether it's carried 

on with pasta, we just want to know that you're committed to it. 

 

With respect to IPSCO, you and I and everyone knows that we 

got tremendous encouragement from tax harmonization 

because you get all your sales tax back in manufacturing in 

Saskatchewan.  It was worth a great deal of money to 

manufacturers like IPSCO.  Now you cancelled that.  And then 

you come running back and say, well but we've done this little 

thing; therefore we can take credit for this expansion.  But we 

just want to make sure it's on the record that harmonization 

meant you were sales tax free for a province of Saskatchewan 

in manufacturing, processing, business, and farming.  That's 

very important, and it was encouraged by Roger Phillips, the 

chamber of commerce, the boards of trade, co-operatives, 

farmers.  It was very important.  It has a big, big impact. 

 

So I just want to make sure that you recognize that.  And then 

you cancelled it.  And then you come back in and say, well we 

got kind of close; we kind of fit this one in.  Because you didn't 

want that to go down because that expansion is important.  

Because there has been the market research and we do do it 

here.  So I just want to draw that to your attention. 

And then I asked the hon. member, well show me all the places 

where the private sector made all the profit and the public 

sector got all the losses.  And he was hard pressed.  He says, 

well the GigaText . . . I think GigaText owners lost more or 

lost less than the public sector . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well he doesn't know for sure at all. 

 

And let me just ask the hon. member: is it not true in the Nabu 

case, Mr. Minister, how much did the government lose, and 

how much did the private sector lose . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Did that happen?  I mean it was 4 or $5 

million. 

 

Now I don't want you to just say and end up leaving this House 

with the impression that in fact we'd set up an arrangement 

where the private sector could make a bunch of profit and the 

taxpayers make a bunch of . . . This happened all over the 

place.  It's just not the fact. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It did. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- It's just not the case.  And the hon. member said 

they did.  Well give me the examples.  I want an example 

because that's important.  Because if you want people to come 

in here, they've got to be able to believe you on the kinds of 

packages that you're going to put together.  And if you're 

saying the NDP policy is now responsible for housing starts 

and that's a non-partisan indication of how successful you are, 

and it's because of interest rates and the federal RRSP and the 

down payment requirements and half those changes in the city 

of Regina where Farm Credit and Crown Life are moving here, 

then people say, well maybe you're kind of stretching it a little 

bit in saying that's the big, you know, the big world of the 

national government or international interest rates, not just 

economic development strategy on your side of the House. 

 

So we just want to make sure that you are providing the kind of 

information that we want to have and you're not stretching it 

too far. 

 

Let me ask just a further question of information.  On the 

AECL agreement, I believe as we said the other night, and I 

believe that you and I have talked, we're not that far from 

having an agreement . . . AECL.  Would the minister . . . and 

he may not want to comment because it's not necessarily linked 

to these Estimates.  But I think that the research agreement, if 

the memorandum of understanding is fine . . . he is the minister 

responsible for SaskPower, and they have the subagreement 

which had AECL moving out here.  The minister, Mr. Penner, 

had offered to provide the information on the AECL 

agreement, the subagreement between AECL and SaskPower. 

 

Would the minister, in his portfolio as Economic 

Diversification, be prepared to look at that part of the 

agreement, see if there's anything that he might like to talk 

about there, and be prepared to provide that kind of information 

to me or to . . . either publicly or in a mutually acceptable 

office -- so we could find out if we're frankly getting pretty 

close to redoing an agreement that would be acceptable to both 

parties, Saskatchewan and the federal government. 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2593 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I think it's fair to say to the member 

opposite that following his discussion last week with the 

member from Swift Current, I think the member from Swift 

Current made it quite clear that we are more than a little 

interested in jobs that may come from research into the nuclear 

industry that may come from AECL or from the federal 

government, however you may want to phrase that.  And we've 

had ongoing discussions and communication with Mr. Epp and 

Mr. Bill McKnight. 

 

And I talk to Mr. McKnight from time to time, not only on 

AECL but economic development in general.  And also it's fair 

to say I've had a very, very brief discussion with yourself, sir, 

about things that we might discuss that would make the AECL 

deal in some format work for the people of the province. 

 

And I say there we're very highly interested in getting research 

jobs into Saskatchewan; however we're hard pressed to make 

any deal that would commit the taxpayers to over a billion 

dollars of expenditure on a CANDU 3 reactor or 450 

megawatts of power that we don't need at this time. 

 

It could be some day in the future the institute that's studying 

this whole area of power needs of the province from 2003 to 

2020 will comment and make recommendations that we build 

hydro power or that we build coal or that we build nuclear or 

we build wind or solar.  But that is some way down the road. 

 

SaskPower and the government don't believe that signing a deal 

that leads us directly to building a CANDU 3 reactor and 

spending a billion dollars of taxpayers' money is in the works 

right now.  It just doesn't make sense economically, and we 

don't think we need the power. 

 

But when it comes to a deal that would see research coming to 

Saskatchewan from AECL, I cannot make it more clear -- even 

though I wonder sometimes why the press and people don't 

report it -- that we're absolutely working as hard as we can to 

get research positions into Saskatoon that would see research 

on irradiation of food, on nuclear medicine, on design and 

analysis of the CANDU 3 reactor, or other projects that AECL 

may want to do.  Because I agree with you -- and I think on this 

we do agree -- that Saskatoon is a perfect place to build this 

kind of a training facility. 

 

(1615) 

 

We wonder why, in the memorandum, when jobs are being 

moved to Saskatchewan and AECL is establishing jobs in 

Saskatchewan, that we have to pay as much as we do, when in 

Ontario the Ontario government doesn't put any money into 

new jobs in Sheridan Park or into their research facility, that I 

know of.  And yet when it comes to Saskatchewan -- and this is 

the pitch I put to our federal colleagues -- how is it that 

Saskatchewan taxpayers have to pay for jobs that come from a 

federal Crown corporation? 

 

I don't think you put a lot of money on the table when Farm 

Credit Corporation, for example, moved to Regina.  And while 

it may be in the end that there has to be some 

monetary involvement in terms of the research, one would 

wonder why the federal Crown agency has a policy as it applies 

to Ontario to create jobs, and yet a different one when it comes 

to Saskatchewan where the provincial taxpayers have to put 

large quantities in terms of the deal that was initialled by your 

government, $25 million, in that kind of a project. 

 

Now I'm not arguing against that.  But I'm just trying to 

negotiate with the federal government as to the plan they have 

in Ontario and whether it's the same one they have for 

Saskatchewan.  Because I think you'd agree that a federal 

Crown corporation should have the same set of rules for 

taxpayers in Ontario as they do in Saskatchewan. 

 

So I agree with you.  We're trying to get the research positions 

into Saskatchewan and in such a way that it develops the most 

potential for Saskatchewan taxpayers and workers in the 

province. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I'll come back to AECL, but I just 

wanted to ask you: what additional money did you put into the 

expansion in Hitachi?  You've said that there's an expansion 

there and it's because of something that you did.  Could you tell 

us what you did? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- On the issue of housing, I neglected 

. . . I say to the member from Estevan on the issue of housing, I 

think if you go back and read Hansard you'll find that I was 

very careful in not taking credit for the housing starts. 

 

And what I said very clearly is that oftentimes when economies 

turn around, housing starts are the first indication that the 

public is gaining confidence in the economy of that area.  And 

what I'm saying here is that when you look at the many 

communities around the province you'll find that while Regina 

is up and Saskatoon is up, one might think that it would end 

there.  But the simple fact is that housing starts right across the 

province are up, and up considerably. 

 

And I just want to run through that so we . . . I agree that 

Regina is up and I'm not questioning your numbers, but to just 

put this into perspective, this is not only a Regina phenomenon.  

And what I'm saying is that even though we're in relatively 

tough economic times, the fact that, for example, in Estevan, 

housing starts in '91 between January and May were two, this 

year it's ten.  It's not a lot, but in terms of building a house and 

the employment created in that, there are some extra jobs. 

 

Because as you know also when people build houses, they 

often complete them one year and they don't finish the interior 

completely up and then the next year as money comes 

available, they finish the basement; the year after they do the 

yard.  So those houses in your constituency of Estevan going 

from two to ten will mean a number of new people will be 

working at housing. 

 

And I think that's an expression of confidence in their economy 

that goes far beyond the interest rates.  Because that isn't 

happening in many other rural parts of Canada.  And the 

numbers aren't going up by the same extent.  It's not that I did 

anything in Estevan; I'll be the first one to admit it.  But I say 

it's an expression of confidence. 



2594 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

In Moose Jaw, for example, the housing starts have gone from 

6 to 18.  That may be as a result of the fertilizer plant; it may be 

the result of FCC in part.  But the fact that they're building 

homes here is an expression of confidence in their community 

and their province. 

 

North Battleford going from two to four.  Prince Albert from 4 

to 13.  Saskatoon up by about 10 per cent.  Swift Current, zero 

started last year, five this year.  Yorkton going from three to 

five, and on and on. 

 

So I just want to make the point on housing, that while I agree 

with you that there is impact from the Crown Life moving to 

Regina, and Farm Credit Corporation -- I give you full marks 

for those projects -- but it goes beyond that, that there's an 

element of optimism that's psychological.  And the only thing 

that I would ask you, sir, is that we try in our every attempt not 

to kill that because we may not want to give credit to anyone or 

we want to have gloom and doom for our next election results 

and all of that, that we try at every step -- all of us -- to yes, ask 

the tough questions and ask tough questions about my travel to 

New York. 

 

I mean I think I'm getting far more criticism as the Minister of 

Trade for not travelling and making these contacts than I am 

for doing too much.  So I kind of appreciate you saying that I'm 

doing too much because that gives a little balance to the queries 

out there because many people are saying, well as Minister of 

Trade you've been there nine months, and you've been out of 

the country once.  And when you compare that to previous 

ministers of Economic Development and the seasons they did 

their trips, there's some curious analogies when you go through 

the nine years.  I'm not going to get into that this year. 

 

But the fact is, is that we want to ask tough questions, but we 

don't want to kill the optimism.  That's the only point I make on 

housing.  That there's an expression of optimism, and we hope 

it continues. 

 

The other issue of Hitachi and the amount of investment, I 

don't think there was any direct investment in terms of 

taxpayers' money going into the deal in terms of money being 

injected.  I think it was more a role of facilitating.  I don't think 

any direct injection of money has been done in terms of the 

Hitachi arrangement. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well I just wanted that cleared up, Mr. 

Minister, because on housing, we see that it's the federal 

government's actions that clearly have caused people to invest 

in housing across Canada, including Saskatchewan.  And 

they're going to do it if there wasn't a government in 

Saskatchewan.  It was only a federal government as a result of 

the lowest interest rates in 20 years in RRSPs and only 5 per 

cent down. 

 

And now with FCC coming in here, which is the federal 

government moving here, we see over 50 per cent of the 

increases in all of Saskatchewan taking place in this city.  Now 

when you look at Hitachi, it had nothing to do with the 

provincial government either.  It was all WDO (western 

diversification office) money.  The federal government again 

has injected money into that expansion. 

So you can't take credit for the housing, and you can't take 

credit for Hitachi expansion, and you certainly can't with 

respect to community development bonds although I give you 

credit for doing them and continuing to do them.  And I hope 

that you will.  And you've frankly been a little hard pressed to 

come up with all these companies that took all the profit and 

the government takes all the loss.  It's a kind of a blanket 

statement.  It leaves a negative taste in people's mouths out 

there.  It's fine for on the political campaign if you want to say 

that's the way it was, but there's too many projects that are 

creating in a diversified Saskatchewan. 

 

And in your trips, it's not the question you take a trip.  We just 

want to know what you did if you took one.  And that's what 

we've been trying to find out.  And we still haven't got much 

information out of what exactly you did in five states in four 

days or vice versa -- four states in five days.  So we'll continue 

to ask you. 

 

Mr. Minister, if we could come back to, and I take this . . . I 

don't want to get into an argument with you here; in fact it's 

exactly the opposite.  Maybe you could just confirm in a 

general sense that when the . . . on your understanding of the 

memorandum of understanding on the agreement between the 

Government of Saskatchewan and AECL.  I signed this 

agreement along with Jake Epp, and we went through it with 

the member from Swift Current the other night. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Which one are you talking about? 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Memorandum of understanding between the 

province of Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada on 

the AECL agreement -- the umbrella agreement. 

 

And we went through it in some detail the other night.  And on 

coal and gas and nuclear and so forth, the minister was 

comfortable and he said several times that he was perfectly . . . 

he had no problem with that memorandum of understanding.  

And you're certainly familiar with it.  And he said, if you had 

some problems, it might have been in the details of the power 

agreement with AECL. 

 

Are you comfortable with the general agreement -- the 

memorandum of understanding -- as the Minister of Energy has 

said that he is, with the verbiage that's in here?  And it's the 

same verbiage on coal and oil as it is on nuclear, and it's to 

evaluate the feasibility of establishing various kinds of things, 

so it's all research.  Would you say that you're comfortable with 

the memorandum of understanding, just in a general sense? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes I think it's fair to say -- and I 

want to make it clear that you're talking about the umbrella 

agreement and not the AECL . . . I'll just wait till the member's 

. . . I just want to make it clear that we're now talking about the 

umbrella agreement and not the AECL-SaskPower agreement, 

that we're talking about the general energy umbrella agreement. 

 

It's fair to say that at one of our initial meetings in Ottawa with 

Mr. Epp, we clearly indicated to him that the umbrella 

agreement was something we would like to 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2595 

continue to work with him on.  And even in the other 

agreement, there were certain clauses that we could accept and 

certain clauses that we couldn't accept. 

 

So it's not the umbrella that we're really negotiating or very 

much worried about.  We've set that aside at a very early 

meeting in Ottawa, and we're now working on a different 

definition, and that is as it would relate to research by AECL in 

specific.  Where would this take place?  Would it be on 

medical research?  Would it be irradiation of food?  Would it 

be CANDU 3 research?  And we've indicated to them that 

we're not in position to make a decision on a reactor because 

we don't need one.  We're not in a position to say yes to a waste 

disposal site.  But when it comes to the other parts of the 

agreement, we're very interested in that discussion. 

 

I just want to say again to the member opposite.  In terms of 

travel I indicated to the member from Kindersley -- and I want 

to make this clear because you keep coming back to it that you 

want to know where we went -- I indicated to him that I was 

getting him a complete list of the so-called itinerary of all the 

places we went in those four states. 

 

And I also want to say to you very clearly that when it comes 

to further discussion about that, I don't mind sitting down any 

time.  And I've asked you already privately that you consult me 

on your trips to China because at some point I'm hoping to be 

able to travel to China and the Pacific Rim.  And I think some 

of the travel that you did . . . although there were questions 

raised about it at the time.  But we don't have to re-invent the 

wheel, that there are potentials that you've started, projects you 

might want to share with us.  And I'd be very interested in 

spending an hour or so with you talking about travel because I 

agree with you; when ministers travel, when government 

travel, the most important thing is the result of that. 

 

And when it comes to the New York lentil and peas and beans 

and that sort of thing, we have some brokers coming to 

Saskatchewan in the near future.  It might be an opportune time 

for us to sit down, and we can explain where we went and who 

we talked to.  And you may have ideas there because I respect 

very much that you have a background and an education in 

agricultural economics, and that would be helpful. 

 

So I want to say that the final issue was on the issue of housing.  

No, I'm not standing here today taking credit for things that are 

happening in Saskatchewan.  Not that I couldn't; I mean you'll 

take credit for everything you can.  But I just don't feel that in 

terms of job creation and the whole idea of IPSCO or Hitachi 

or the Norquay plant, it's not my role to take credit for it.  

That's not how it works.  Nor do I think that it's your 

responsibility to take credit for many projects that happened 

while you were in government. 

 

And that's the way economic development works.  There's a 

partnership where the large majority of the credit over the years 

-- as long as we're in government, as long as I have anything to 

do with it -- will go to the private sector and entrepreneurs.  

That's not to say that I don't intend to be out at as many 

openings and ribbon cuttings -- most of them I hope have no 

government 

involvement because I really believe that's where most of the 

economic development will come from -- and saying thank you 

to these private sector people who are putting their money into 

business with no government help, taking all the risk because 

that, in my mind, is where we should be headed. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I've got a question.  Well we won't pursue it, 

but there's nowhere in the memorandum of understanding that 

says that you have to operate CANDUs in Saskatchewan or if 

you have to have a site for anything that you're going to 

research on the fuel cycles and how to make and manufacture 

and market and use them.  We'll just put that on the record. 

 

But I would go back to the minister on a theoretical point, and 

it is quite significant.  We've spent a couple of hours here 

talking about market research.  And the minister says, we don't 

think that we'd like to have a CANDU here because we might 

not need the electricity for a little while.  And yet he spent this 

whole couple hours telling us that he wants to do market 

research to find out what he should build first. 

 

The minister knows we manufacture and we'll be marketing 

fertilizer, not just for Saskatchewan but for the United States 

and the Pacific Rim.  He also knows that we'll manufacture and 

we'll process oil and heavy oil and synthetic crude, not just for 

Saskatchewan but for the United States and other parts of 

North America.  He also knows that we do the same for pulp 

and paper.  He knows we do the same and could do the same 

for turbines and that we could do it for pasta.  And we do it for 

malt and we do it for alcohol and we do it for beef and we do it 

for all kinds of technology. 

 

Why is the minister now hung up on the argument that he 

doesn't need to manufacture this new technology because the 

demand stops right in the province of Saskatchewan?  Is not it 

true that Manitoba markets electricity into the United States?  

Quebec markets electricity into the United States.  We market 

energy, gas and oil into the United States.  Why couldn't it be 

conceivable that we could develop this technology and market 

it world-wide?  We could develop the power and market it into 

the United States.  And why does he just think, well we might 

not need this right now; therefore I'll just wait. 

 

Has he done a market research on energy and the technology 

that would indicate to him that there's no market in the U.S. or 

no market in the Pacific Rim for all of the things that we could 

do with this technology and this research?  And is he absolutely 

convinced that we couldn't be competitive in making and 

manufacturing this technology, including the energy to a huge 

U.S. market and now maybe even a North American market?  

Why does he want to, all of a sudden after this two hours of 

conversation about markets, limit himself to only 

Saskatchewan?  Why does he think that's a valid excuse for not 

going ahead with this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well the member will know . . . is 

that I just said is we wanted to go ahead with the 



2596 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

project.  So I'm not sure why he's now saying we don't want to 

go except for political reasons.  I don't know why you're doing 

that. 

 

I've indicated to you three times that we wanted to go ahead 

with the deal with AECL that would be research oriented, 

could be design oriented in terms of the CANDU 3 reactor for 

export.  I've made that point to you, and I don't know why 

you're trying to say now that we don't want the deal. 

 

Electricity is quite a different matter, but you shouldn't put 

them into the same bundle and say we're opposed to all of the 

exports that may come from that kind of a deal because I've 

told you very clearly  And either we're having a serious 

discussion here or we're playing games.  And I really prefer, 

because you're very able at having serious discussions, I would 

much rather have the serious discussion.  So I want to get that 

clear, that we are very interested in getting a deal with AECL 

where we do research into those items on nuclear reactor for 

export. 

 

I think you're right that there is potential there, and Saskatoon 

is the best place to do it.  We believe that.  For medical 

research, irradiation of food, we're very interested in research. 

 

When it comes to building a CANDU 3 reactor and exporting 

the power, that gets to be much, much trickier as you will know 

because Manitoba is very much in a surplus position when it 

comes to power and have plans to become even more that way 

inclined.  The power company to the south of us has a surplus 

of power.  We're looking at that because there may be some 

potential there.  And Alberta, as you know, has just made a 

major announcement that they're going to be going very 

directly into turbine production of power to consume some of 

their extra gas that they have in Alberta. 

 

So within the realm around us, when it comes to Manitoba and 

the Williston basin and then up the other side into Alberta, 

there's not great potential for power sales coming from a 

CANDU 3 reactor given the price that you would have 

producing that power out of a CANDU 3.  And I think you 

know that.  Now if you have ideas, contracts where you think 

we could be selling that power, I would be more than interested 

in hearing those from you.  But the SaskPower officials are 

telling us that it is a very, very abundant market right now. 

 

Now it's true; south there are markets in the growing area of 

south-western United States.  But then of course you know 

transporting electricity that distance is very, very difficult, 

unlike gas where you have a very easy access to the U.S. 

market once you hit their main pipelines.  The loop goes right 

around the United States.  And you take gas off one area, put it 

another, and it happens very easily.  Power, as you know, is 

much, much different.  If you have to transport it thousands of 

miles it begins to be a very, very expensive proposal. 

 

So I want to make it clear so that we get it right.  When it 

comes to the products that might come from the research of 

AECL in Saskatoon, we're very interested.  And we think there 

is a big market, and we would like them in Saskatoon.  When it 

comes to building a CANDU 3 

reactor in Saskatchewan and exporting the power, there we 

have no clear evidence that that would be a viable project. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well it would just . . . Thank you, Mr. Minister.  

I just want to make sure that you are consistent in your 

comments.  And I'm very serious.  Maybe you didn't 

understand the question because you were busy talking when I 

was asking the question.  So I will ask it again. 

 

In theory if there is a huge country and a market to the south of 

you, I don't know why you would ever consider limiting the 

demand.  It's like Alberta doesn't want to find more oil because 

it's got enough right now.  Or you don't want to find more 

products here because you have enough here.  We shouldn't 

grow more wheat because in fact we've got enough in 

Saskatchewan.  It's a ludicrous argument. 

 

And Manitoba exports electricity and Quebec exports 

electricity, and they do it over power lines.  So not just because 

Manitoba doesn't have enough electricity or Quebec doesn't.  

Quebec doesn't need any more electricity, Mr. Minister.  That's 

the point. 

 

And Alberta doesn't need any more oil.  We don't need 

necessarily any more uranium.  But it's here, and we can export 

it.  So to categorically rule it out is not . . . in theory it certainly 

doesn't make any sense.  And it doesn't matter that Alberta has 

energy or Quebec does.  It's who wants the energy because we 

spent this whole two hours talking about market analysis.  The 

market is not here. 

 

So your argument that you won't build it because you don't 

need it here doesn't fit your earlier two hours worth of 

discussion.  So I'm absolutely serious in the conversation.  And 

if you want to carry it on, you certainly can.  But you don't 

make any sense. 

 

So doing the research obviously makes money.  And the 

demand for energy is something that you should continue to 

look at, and I'd certainly hope that you would. 

 

Let me also raise the question, and maybe you could add some 

more information with respect to clearing this up.  I wonder if 

the minister would like to talk more about the announcement 

that was made with respect to Promavia today, and if he has the 

information.  It has something to do with Economic 

Development and Diversification.  I know he's working on 

other projects like this.  But from the announcement, I 

understand that that too is winding down and that might not 

work.  And is it in the same category as the pasta plant?  Is it a 

market analysis problem?  Is it a combination of things?  Or I 

wonder if the minister . . . maybe he would rather have his 

colleague respond some other time.  But it's part of Economic 

Development and we're just trying to find out what kind of 

things might be working and what kind maybe we've got 

problems with. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I appreciate the member giving me 

the leeway to so-called, hand this off to the minister 

responsible in CIC, but I would like to take the opportunity to 

say, as the member from Estevan will know, this project is one, 

I guess that I will use, as where 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2597 

we need the private money in the deal, along with the 

taxpayers' money in order to make it work. 

 

My understanding is, is that your government put $2 million 

into the deal and that was made on the commitment that the 

private sector would then come forward with $18 million of 

private sector money.  And they were given a certain length of 

time to do that.  And that deadline was not achieved and then it 

was extended.  And what has happened here is the private 

sector money still hasn't come into the deal. 

 

And what we have basically told the private sector folks today 

on the Promavia, is that we are putting this project, because of 

the lack of private interest in the deal, in the non-active 

category, but leaving it open that when they get the private 

sector capital, if they do, that we're very interested in doing the 

deal.  And so here again we see a project where the private 

sector capital isn't in to be risked at the same level as the 

taxpayers' money. 

 

And I think most business people in Saskatoon and across the 

province and the financial editors of most of the newspapers 

understand how this works, that it would be not logical for the 

taxpayers to put and chase the $2 million we're already going to 

-- or already have put into this deal -- to chase it with more 

money before private sector money comes into it. 

 

So that's basically the status.  It's been put into the inactive 

column but that my department and Crown Investments 

Corporation is very interested in Promavia, if and when they 

get the $18 million of private sector funding. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's fair enough.  I 

obviously believe that a good part of the lack of the 

announcements in projects are because of the lack of 

confidence in your administration and their inability of the 

private sector to come up with the monies in part linked with 

the fact that here may be trade union legislation.  There have 

been tax increases.  And there have been threats of another 

kinds that are of a political nature that doesn't augur well for 

confidence.  And I just make that point. 

 

Secondly I also make the point that you have campaigned 

against tax harmonization which would have been very helpful 

to a company like Promavia.  So that they manufacture 

anything here, whether it's steel, whether it's airplanes and 

others, they became sales tax free in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Now that's a very big confidence builder.  And 

that confidence index goes way up.  Now you cancelled that, 

and I honestly believe as a result of that you're seeing 

companies back off Saskatchewan because they said, look, the 

tax advantages aren't here.  It's not the same. 

 

Now you have decided to cherry pick the odd one.  And you 

say, well we better back-fill on IPSCO.  I wonder if the 

minister in light of that, is he prepared to look at more and 

more of these targeted tax possibilities that his Minister of 

Finance has talked about and he has talked about and the 

Premier has talked about when you have obviously 

manufacturing and diversification and other things that are 

here.  It would be extremely helpful if we could find, that you 

could consider them important enough. 

If he would target something like a public share offering that is 

looking at raising $18 million in Promavia as he did with 

IPSCO on the lines of harmonization, then I believe that you 

could have a very significant project here.  And is he . . . In 

cabinet what kind of process is he into that would say, well I'm 

going to choose this project but not that one.  I'm going to do 

this one but not that one.  We've had too many of them: the 

pasta plant go down; the airplane manufacturing operation go 

down; AECL agreement go down; and some other things go 

down.  Where people are . . . Other than the federal 

government with WDO and the federal housing changes and 

the federal government there with respect to GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program), there's just not a lot of items that 

you can stand up and say, well this is real confidence here in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So would you be prepared to give some of the same targeted 

tax measures that you gave to IPSCO to an international 

manufacturer of airplanes that obviously has a big demand?  

And he was talking about demand before.  The demand 

analysis is done.  If you look at private sector confidence, is 

there anything that he might be able to do to stimulate private 

sector confidence in this situation to help out? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to . . . I 

wonder if I could have leave to introduce some guests before I 

go on to the answer. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'm going to take a crack at these 

names, although I apologize for the pronunciation, Don, if I 

don't get them right. 

 

But seated in the west gallery is Don Ross and Merv Phillips.  

Do you just want to stand up and be recognized.  

Accompanying them are translator Jack Hui, Yuan Wei, Miss 

Liu, and Guo Pen.  I want to . . . 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I could tell by the hesitation before 

they stood up that I was having difficulty with the 

pronunciation.  But I really want to welcome them here today.  

They're here to look at some investments in the city of Regina.  

And I wish them the best, and I'm sure all members welcome 

them warmly here. 

 

(1645) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Economic Development 

Vote 45 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to say to the member 

opposite, when it comes to taxation, obviously the Minister of 

Finance will have much more to say about this than I.  But I 

think as the economy recovers and as we all 



2598 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

hope and know it will, that we obviously will look at tax 

regime as one of the ways of stimulating the economy.  Now 

how much we can do at one time or in any one budget is very 

difficult to know.  But what we do know is that some of the 

changes that took place in this year's budget led very directly to 

an expansion in the steel industry.  So it's something that we 

are very much interested in doing.  And it will be a question of 

whether there's need and demand, one.  And secondly, whether 

with the huge deficit that we have that we can facilitate that in 

light of the very, very tough decisions we're having to make on 

our spending side versus our taxation side. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I'll just ask a question and then turn it over to 

my colleague.  Would the member make a summary comment 

on his view of how much he thought the removal of tax 

harmonization hurt the manufacturing and processing sector 

here in the province of Saskatchewan.  Because it was 

significant.  Has he done any analysis on how much it really 

hurt the manufacturing and processing sector? 

 

I ask the member again if he'd give us some comment in terms 

of his portfolio of Economic Development, how much it hurt 

manufacturing and processing in Saskatchewan to not have 

access to tax harmonization where in fact your sales tax, 

federal and provincial, would be exempt and refunded.  Would 

he not acknowledge that that was a significant benefit to 

manufacturing and processing in our jurisdiction compared to 

others? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member will know that taxation 

obviously is very, very complicated in the impact on jobs and 

wealth creation.  That's fair to say.  And I really would like him 

to direct the detail of that question to the Minister of Finance 

once we get into the Finance Estimates. 

 

But I want to tell him that as we make decisions on the budget, 

my role as Minister of Economic Development will be, in 

conjunction with information from our Crowns and from our 

department, to come forward with ideas that will make sense in 

terms of using the tax system as it would relate to industry to 

create more jobs. 

 

I think it's fair to say that in looking at the harmonization 

program, it was felt that the cost to the economy was greater 

than the good that it would do, and we're going to have to 

nudge this along much slower.  That we will target and focus 

those areas where we can get the maximum number of jobs for 

the tax changes that we're making, as opposed to very 

broad-scaled changes that were proposed by the previous 

government. 

 

I say again that there's no perfect system in this.  This is an art 

that you'll get as many opinions as you have economists as to 

what would be the best way to go.  I think it's fair to say that 

we believe as a result of our analysis, that there was great 

damage done to the economy through harmonization.  And that 

we felt that the tax regime we implemented -- not 

uncomplicated to say the least -- that we implemented, would 

do a better job of stimulating the economy. 

 

Now are we succeeding or not?  All of the indicators that I 

have would indicate that it's not bad.  The population of 

Saskatchewan is stabilizing since October of '91.  One can 

argue why that's happening.  International immigration is 

stronger during this period.  Unemployment rates still the 

lowest in Canada, although not as good as we would like it to 

be.  The farm cash receipts up by 7.2 per cent.  There again you 

know that that is very much driven by someone far outside of 

the province. 

 

Record grain deliveries to our country elevator system, feeder 

and slaughter markets up somewhat . . . And so I say to him, 

when we look at housing starts up by 100 per cent, oil 

production up by 6 per cent, potash sales up by 3 per cent, 

uranium production and sales up during the January to May 

period, that we're optimistic.  Is it going to work?  Well we're 

going to do our very, very best to see that it does. 

 

And I don't mind the members opposite being critical where it 

warrants, and I'm sure that over the next four years you'll have 

plenty of opportunity.  But I think there's also the potential of 

killing some of the optimism that there seems to be now.  And 

I'm sure the member opposite will come on board on those 

projects that are positive and help us, for the benefit of business 

people and the workers of Saskatchewan to make the system 

work. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, as a 

result of your government cancelling the AECL agreement, I 

wonder if you could tell us what the direct loss . . . direct cost 

in terms of jobs are for the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well as the member knows, there 

was no jobs lost because there weren't any here.  And one can 

speculate on how many jobs might have come as a result of a 

deal being finalized.  But obviously this deal was signed in the 

first days of the election campaign last October.  And those 

who are sceptical about it would argue that that's what it was, 

was an election ploy.  I think it was more than that. 

 

But there were no jobs lost because there were none here. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, you know full well had the AECL . 

. . had your government embarked on the agreement with the 

AECL that there would have been in the neighbourhood of 200 

direct jobs associated with the AECL agreement, and probably 

thousands of jobs in the future -- potential was for thousands of 

jobs in the future.  I wonder if the minister could update us as 

well, what the cost in terms of investment dollars in 

Saskatchewan, the loss of the AECL agreement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I'd say to the member opposite 

that there were no jobs here.  And there certainly weren't any 

on the horizon when we took over with what was called the 

memorandum of understanding -- memorandum of 

understanding.  And the chairman will know, and the members 

will know, that it was far from an agreement.  There was no 

agreement. 

 

And you will know . . . The member from Kindersley has 

probably signed agreements and that in the past.  And he'll 

know the difference between a memorandum of understanding, 

which was on the table at the time we became the government 

in October . . . There was no 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2599 

agreement.  There was a memorandum of understanding. 

 

That is something far, far from an agreement that would 

confirm, as he would put it, hundreds of jobs, or thousands of 

jobs in the future.  This is one of the reasons the . . . I think the 

people tired of the previous government, were all these 

exaggerations of the thousands of jobs. When?  Not today.  But 

just elect us and sometime in the future there's going to be 

thousands of more jobs.  They just simply quit believing that, 

those exaggerations. 

 

And I think it's fair to say that in the memorandum -- and I 

want to make sure the member opposite understands this; and 

as I think he does, this was not an agreement but a 

memorandum -- the number 170 was used. 

 

In the work that we're doing now with the federal government, 

the number is 170 jobs.  So we haven't lost anything.  We're 

still negotiating at the memorandum of understanding level.  

You had no jobs.  What you had initialled was a memorandum 

of understanding.  What we're still working at today is 170 jobs 

and a memorandum of understanding.  So for you to say that 

we lost these jobs -- we had them in Saskatoon, and now 

they're gone -- is false.  What you had is an MOU 

(memorandum of understanding).  What we're still working on 

today is an MOU that would get 170 jobs into Saskatoon. 

 

Now whether or not the federal government and the federal 

Crown corporation decides to come to Saskatoon is another 

question.  It was certainly a question in October when the 

election was held.  It was certainly a question because there 

were no jobs in Saskatoon, and there was no agreement.  And 

what you would have had to do after the election, had you won, 

is work out an agreement.  And that's the point that we're at.  

We are working on a memorandum that would see 170 jobs 

come to Saskatoon in the area of research.  So we haven't lost 

anything.  We simply haven't brought to conclusion where you 

left off on a memorandum of understanding. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, there's a lot of people in 

Saskatoon I think would disagree with you and disagree with 

you whole-heartedly.  And I'll just take the time, Mr. Minister, 

to read the comments of one columnist in the Saskatoon Star, 

August 2, 1992, Mr. Roy Norris's comments. 

 

The biggest single accomplishment of this government is it 

remained loyal to tradition by turning down a multibillion 

dollar nuclear development.  No uranium refinery or storage 

site or nuclear reactor will clutter the Saskatchewan landscape.  

This is bad news for people looking for jobs, but good news for 

the left-wing faithful who make up the backbone of the 

Romanow government. 

 

Now the government has set its sights on putting an end to 

another evil -- the mining of uranium.  This November at the 

party's convention in Saskatoon, the left-wing element will 

launch this attack.  The convention will be asked to pass a 

resolution banning uranium mining.  If they succeed and the 

government complies, we can indeed turn out the lights. 

Well, Mr. Minister, you said that there were no jobs associated 

with this.  And yet columnists and people all over the province 

are saying that there was, if not hundreds of jobs, possibly 

thousands of jobs associated with nuclear development in this 

province.  And you're saying that there's no investment dollars 

lost in this province.  But yet people all over the province are 

saying that there's thousands of dollars worth of direct 

investment and millions of potential, if not billions of potential, 

of investment in this province, Mr. Minister. 

 

And yet for whatever reason . . . I can't seem to figure this all 

out -- but the Minister of Energy says he's in favour of the 

development.  You said earlier this afternoon that you're in 

favour of the development.  And yet we see nothing happening, 

nothing happening whatsoever.  And I think it's a clear 

indication, Mr. Minister, of what we can expect from you -- a 

whole lot of political rhetoric and yet nothing happens. 

 

We've seen nothing happening with the AECL agreement.  And 

you're saying, oh we don't want the waste site.  But it didn't say 

that there had to be a waste site.  It said, studying the potential 

for a waste site in the province.  And yet you don't seem to 

agree with that. 

 

Mr. Minister, people all over this province are wondering, 

where is your economic development plan?  We haven't seen it 

at all.  And yet when asked, when the Premier was asked in 

question period earlier, July 6, he was asked if he will table an 

economic development plan.  And yes, he said.  And here's his 

comments, July 6, '92: It is our intention to table an economic 

development plan before this legislature adjourns or prorogues.  

The answer is yes. 

 

And where is it?  We're a few days away from the 70th day -- 

no economic development plan.  Your Premier, the Premier, 

promises it.  He promises that you're going to be coming 

forward with it, yet nothing, absolutely nothing. 

 

AECL, gone; Promavia, gone as of today; Piper, likely gone.  

We're wondering what's happening with that.  It's likely gone.  

Saska Pasta, in spite of all your comments, everyone down in 

Swift Current doesn't believe you, sir.  They believe that you're 

trying to put the can on that project down there. 

 

Thousands of dollars, millions of dollars of investment in 

different projects all over the province, Mr. Minister, and you 

don't want to take any responsibility.  You simply say: if the 

Tories had any hand in it, it has to go.  If the Tories had any 

hand in it, it has to go.  That seems to be your stock answer. 

 

That's why the AECL agreement, you couldn't possibly go 

ahead with that, because the previous administration might be 

able to say, we had a hand in it.  Couldn't possibly go ahead 

with it. 

 

Promavia, we see today that you're winding it down.  No, you 

showed absolutely no commitment to that project right from 

the outset, and now we see the results of your actions, Mr. 

Minister.  Another province, Quebec, is very likely going to 

pick up that project.  And you're aware of it, and we're aware of 

it.  The newspapers wrote tomorrow, I 



2600 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

predict, will be full of that kind of comment, that the project 

will likely go to Quebec. 

 

One has to wonder where the Piper deal is going to go.  One 

has to wonder where the Saska Pasta project's going to go, Mr. 

Minister.  You've shown no commitment to these kinds of 

projects.  You've shown no indication, no economic 

development no plan -- absolutely none.  And yet earlier in the 

session you said 700 companies are waiting with bated breath 

to get into Saskatchewan.  We asked you here on a number of 

occasions this afternoon, Mr. Minister . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  It being 5 o'clock, 

this committee recesses until 7 o'clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


