




















































Hansard: August 07, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2093 

 August 7, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise 

today, Mr. Speaker, to present to the legislature petitions 

signed by many, many, literally thousands of people in the 

province.  And I would like to read the preamble and the prayer 

of this petition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 To the Honourable Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

legislature assembled: 

 

 The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 that back pain and other highly prevalent 

neuro-musculo-skeletal disorders are extremely costly to the 

Canadian economy; 

 

 that scientific evidence clearly illustrates that chiropractic 

treatment is the most effective and efficient therapy for such 

disorders; 

 

 that in the face of an ever increasing pressure to adopt 

expensive new forms of high technology treatment, 

chiropractic care has proven to be a low technology, low cost, 

conservative, and safe form of treatment, consistent with the 

true wellness model of health care; 

 

 that the government publicly asserts it remains committed to 

the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

comprehensiveness, accessibility, portability, and public 

administration; 

 

 that the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to chiropractic patients; 

 

 and that the government's proposed restrictions on this 

therapy will clearly cost more in both dollars and in patient 

disability. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have close to a thousand petitions here.  My 

colleagues will also be handing in many.  This will bring it to 

about 6,000 petition names that we have handed thus far only 

on the chiropractic practices of this government. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have 

many petitions to present today.  And because they're on the 

same topic as my colleague from Rosthern, I will just read the 

prayer. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

And I have over a dozen pages here, Mr. Speaker, a couple of 

hundred names.  Places like Melfort, Porcupine Plain, Canora, 

Pathlow, Fosston, Paddockwood, Zenon Park, Melfort, Tisdale, 

Annaheim, Naicam, Prud'homme, Creighton, Archerwill, St. 

Benedict, Mistatim, Porcupine Plain, Bruno, Asquith, Prince 

Albert -- lots of Prince Albert -- Hudson Bay, Wadena, St. 

Brieux, Nipawin, Birch Hills, a whole page of Saskatoon, 

Morse, Kyle, Swift Current, Ernfold, Hodgeville, Allan, Eston.  

I would say, Mr. Speaker, that just about the entire province is 

represented in the 12 pages that I present to the legislature 

today.  I do present. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join with 

my colleagues in presenting a petition with respect to 

chiropractic care.  I will just read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

There are 15 pages, 16 pages of petitioners here, Mr. Speaker, 

about 230 to 240.  People come from Lumsden, Strasbourg, 

Findlater, Regina, Craven, Bethune, Tuxford, Silton, Melville, 

Spy Hill, Yorkton -- several from Yorkton -- MacNutt; we find 

several from the Saltcoats area; and more and more from 

Yorkton; a large number from Regina, from all parts of the 

city, couple, three, four pages; Aberdeen, Saskatchewan; we 

have some more from Saskatoon; several from various 

constituencies there, Langham, North Battleford, again a large 

number from Saskatoon, Blaine Lake.  I received several more 

from the area of Saskatoon and in Saskatoon and Langham; 

Radisson, Saskatchewan; Watrous; and more from the city of 

Saskatoon; a large number from Hague; Elrose; Warman; 

several from Langham; Saskatoon again; Radisson.  I see also 

Limerick, Saskatchewan; from Moose Jaw, a large number 

coming in from various addresses; some more from Limerick; 

and Gravelbourg. 

 

I'll table these, Mr. Speaker. 



2094 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to also table 

these petitions that have been sent in as a result of changes in 

the chiropractic care, and I want to provide them to the 

Assembly at this time. 

 

They are from all over Saskatchewan, and I will not read the 

names, but there are significant from my own city of Swift 

Current. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have also about 14 

pages of petitions, and I will not read the preamble, I'll just 

maybe read the prayer: 

 

 Therefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to reverse 

its decision to eliminate full coverage and universal access to 

chiropractic treatment, and that your Honourable Assembly 

withhold consent from any government proposal to 

discriminate against chiropractic patients by charging them 

fees not assessed by any other medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners humbly pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these also come from a wide area -- Kenosee, 

Wawota, Parkman, Kenosee Lake; Windthorst, I think it is. 

Kennedy, Kinley, Carlyle, Kipling, some more from Carlyle, 

and Kenosee again. Oxbow, Kennedy, Arcola, Viceroy, 

Corning, a lot from Regina, Mr. Speaker.  I will not give you 

the addresses.  There are several pages right from the city of 

Regina. 

 

And also, into Southey, Butterfield, Broadview; a lot more 

Regina. Regina, a lot of Regina. Osler, Southey again; a lot 

more Regina people; another full page of Regina, Saskatoon, 

Hepburn.  It's all across the province, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

table these at this time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I believe 

it's fitting that we have these petitions to present to the 

Assembly in light of the debate that has been taking place 

regarding the health issue and the fact that there are many 

people, as we see in the petitions, have indicated that they are 

very unhappy with the way the government has dealt with the 

health and the chiropractic services. 

 

And at this time I would like to read the prayer on the petitions 

that have been presented to me to present to this Assembly: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment, and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And as my colleagues have indicated, petitions have 

come from right across the province.  I have petitions signed 

here from Regina, people from Broadview and Lipton and 

Climax.  Mr. Speaker, from Rhein and Kamsack, Canora, 

Wadena, Wroxton, Buchanan, Churchbridge, Fort Qu'Appelle, 

Hyas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fact one of the petitions here, obviously must 

have run out of room and they turned it over and they filled it 

up on the back as well, so there's an indication that there's a 

strong feeling out there, that people are very dissatisfied with 

the process.  So, Mr. Speaker, I present these petitions. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a 

number of petitions to present about chiropractic care.  I'll just 

read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to read through the names of the locations from 

where all these petitions come from is like reading a road map 

of Saskatchewan:  Weyburn, Yellow Grass, Colgate, Carlyle, 

Manor, Fillmore, Tyson, Ogema, Saskatoon, Rosetown, 

Dundurn, Cochin, Regina, Crane Valley, Swift Current, Prince 

Albert, Madison, Domremy, Snowden, Meskanaw, Albertville, 

Weirdale, Christopher Lake, Borden, Eston, Moose Jaw, 

Briercrest, Avonlea, Caronport, Craik, Mortlach, Fir Mountain, 

Chaplin, Limerick, North Battleford and Battleford, Hafford, 

Handel, Unity, Cut Knife, Luseland, Macklin, Wilkie, Senlac, 

Scott, Major, Landis, Yorkton, Saltcoats, Wroxton, Stornoway, 

Sturgis, Tonkin, Ituna, Bankend, Endeavour, Langenburg, and 

Churchbridge.  All told, Mr. Speaker, there are 21 pages of 

petitions I wish to present to the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have as well 

many petitions to present to the Assembly today: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

We have from the towns of Denzil, Saskatoon, Macklin, 

Kendal, Unity, Wilkie, Biggar, Landis, Balcarres, Indian Head, 

Fort Qu'Appelle, Glenavon, Vibank, Buchanan, Calder, 

Wynyard, Ogema, White City, Regina, Yorkton, 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2095 

Melville, Grayson, Saltcoats, Wroxton, Canora, Esterhazy, 

Churchbridge, Sheho, and Ituna.  Many, many pages to present 

today, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Lots of 

Churchill Downs. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Deputy Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions 

have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby 

read and received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  I give notice that I shall on 

Tuesday next ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding community-based land trusts as a possible solution 

to the farm debt problem facing rural Saskatchewan: (1) Is 

the government currently considering this as a potential 

solution to the farm debt crisis? (2) If so, provide the names 

of the individuals with whom the government has consulted. 

(3) Provide the names of the persons who have made 

submissions concerning the establishment of 

community-based land trusts as a solution to the farm debt 

crisis.  And (4) what is the present status of the government's 

community-based land trust policy? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice 

that I shall on Tuesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the employment practices of the minister 

responsible for Saskatchewan Government Insurance: what 

are the names, positions, and salaries of all persons hired 

since November 1, 1991? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Tuesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the employment practices of the minister 

responsible for Saskatchewan Transportation Company: what 

are the names, positions, and salaries of all persons hired 

since November 1, 1991? 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have two questions.  

I'll read them both consecutively. I give notice that I shall on 

Tuesday ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the employment practices of the minister 

responsible for Saskatchewan Forest Products: what are the 

names, positions, and salaries of all persons hired since 

November 1, 

1991? 

 

And my second question, Mr. Speaker, is I give notice that on 

Tuesday next I ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the employment practices of the minister 

responsible for Saskatchewan Development Fund 

Corporation: what are the names, positions, and salaries of all 

persons hired since November 1, 1991? 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a couple 

of questions.  I shall give notice on Tuesday next, ask the 

government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the employment practices of the minister 

responsible for Saskatchewan Energy Holdings Ltd.: what are 

the names, positions, and salaries of all persons hired since 

November 1, 1991? 

 

And the second question, Mr. Speaker, I shall give notice . . . I 

give notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the government the 

following question: 

 

 Regarding the employment practices of the minister 

responsible for Saskatchewan Power Corporation: what are 

the names, positions, salaries of all persons hired since 

November 1, 1991? 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Tuesday ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the employment practices of the minister 

responsible for Sask Water Corporation: what are the names, 

positions, and salaries of all persons hired since November 1, 

1991? 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Tuesday next ask the government the following question: 

 

 Has the government through any department or Crown 

corporation, including Executive Council, made any payment 

by salary, contract, per diem, or honorarium to a Mr. Thomas 

Brooks, and what has the total amount of such payments been 

since November 1, 1991? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Tuesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the assertion in the Speech from the Throne that 

the government is negotiating with over 700 firms interested 

in relocating to Saskatchewan: provide a list of those firms, 

the nature of their business, and their current head office 

location. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Tuesday next ask the government the 



2096 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

following question: 

 

 Regarding the employment practices of the minister 

responsible for Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation: what are the names, the positions, and salaries 

of all persons hired since November 1, 1991? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, a good 

friend of mine who is sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Jake Klippenstein who used to live in Swift Current, now lives 

in Regina.  Please welcome him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly, 

a number of guests in your gallery. 

 

We have some folks from our home community, from my 

home community, Prince Albert, Brian and Trudy Sklar, along 

with their sons Aaron and Damen.  You will be familiar, I'm 

sure, with Brian, a well-known entertainer in Saskatchewan.  

He heads a band called Prairie Fire.  And one of his band 

members are with us today, Ken Tranthen from Bakersfield, 

California. 

 

I would as well ask members to give the folks a warm 

Saskatchewan welcome to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Meeting with Business Community 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question today 

will be to the minister responsible for Economic Development.  

Mr. Minister, the list of groups and sectors within our society 

who are disillusioned with your government in a short 10 

months begins to grow each day.  We've had farmers, 

pensioners, diabetics, chiropractors and their patients, 

optometrists and their patients.  Mr. Minister, the list goes on 

and on.  And now I understand that you and the Premier have 

met with a large coalition of our business groups in the 

province to try and answer their questions about not having an 

economic plan. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: can you tell the House 

today, specifically what plans, what detailed economic 

strategy, was presented to these groups who represent hundreds 

of thousands of people in our province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to respond 

to the member that the meeting held yesterday in Saskatoon 

was positive and very constructive, unlike many of the 

discussions and points made by the members opposite. 

The meeting was very useful and was one of many hundreds of 

meetings we've had with business people since we came to 

government.  The main point made by the business people was 

this:  that given the $14 billion in debt that we were faced with 

when we came to government, they were very encouraged by 

the fact that we were trying to get that debt under control.  And 

I think implied in that that they were very pleased that those 

members opposite were no longer in government.  That was the 

main point of the . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Having said that, obviously with 

$14 billion in debt hanging over our head, it is a very, very 

difficult task that we have in front of us.  That's obvious.  But I 

want to say clearly to the members opposite, that exciting 

projects like the expansion of Hitachi in Saskatoon . . . when 

under their administration, that plant was set up to do Shand 

one, and then there was great expectation it would shut down. 

 

Not only are they keeping it open, but they're expanding the 

size of it.  And they plan to lead to hundreds of jobs in the city 

of Saskatoon that weren't there when we took over because that 

plant wasn't determined to do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, that response you gave is why 

these people are feeling so frustrated.  This group of people is 

serious, Mr. Minister, and they simply don't accept the fact that 

you like to blame everyone else in the world for your problems. 

 

I quote, Mr. Minister: 

 

 . . . the business community is feeling increasingly 

overwhelmed and frustrated by your government's legislative 

agenda . . . 

 

Once again, Mr. Minister, I ask the question:  do you have 

anything concrete to tell this legislature today in regards to the 

meeting with the business people yesterday?  They're asking, 

where is the beef, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I think it's clear that 

the business people of the province were very, very concerned 

and frustrated with the lack of economic development over the 

past 10 years in Saskatchewan.  They were also very concerned 

about the large amount of taxpayers' money that was being 

invested in bad business deals here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In today's editorial in the Leader-Post, I want to quote from it, 

but it deals with that issue.  It says: 

 

 Left unresolved are the plans, announced last year by the 

previous government to mate the expertise . . . 

 

This speaking of Westank-Willock.  It goes on to say: 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2097 

The former Tory government prided itself on hard-nosed 

business acumen.  In reality, it poured taxpayers' money into 

a number of projects that were either dying or stillborn.  

GigaText and Westank-Willock come to mind, while 

Promavia, which proposes to build jet trainers in Saskatoon . 

. . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again from 

the minister we don't get answers.  We hear platitudes, we hear 

evasion, we hear excuses. 

 

Mr. Minister, and I quote again.  The private sector folks are 

saying: 

 

 We have all been frustrated by your government's 

'consultation' process to date and the lack of balance in 

recognizing the vital role of our private wealth-creating 

sector in a mixed economy. 

 

That's what they're saying to you, Mr. Minister.  Now beyond 

blaming someone else for your problems, can you tell this 

Assembly today the portions of the economic blueprint which 

you laid down to the business community in Saskatoon, so that 

the rest of the people in this province can feel comfortable with 

it?  Give it to us today, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the members opposite that the meeting that was held yesterday, 

and which the Premier attended and other members of cabinet, 

that the business people there who expressed that they were 

very concerned about the high debt in the province as a result 

of the previous government's bad management -- and they 

wanted to make that clear -- want to have more involvement in 

terms of the white paper on the economy that's being developed 

by the government.  And we gave a firm commitment that their 

involvement was not only needed but very much wanted and 

that we would deal with it as quickly as possible. 

 

The other point they made is that they wanted to have input 

into the legislative agenda in the future, which they didn't have 

with the previous government, and we made a commitment to 

allow them input into our legislative agenda.  I think the other 

thing that is clear by many business people is they're upset with 

the childish attitude of the members opposite in holding up the 

. . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

chamber of commerce, the mining association, the construction 

association, the Canadian Federation of Independent Business, 

home builders, hoteliers -- I mean they've all said, shape up, 

Mr. Minister.  Shape up, Mr. Premier.  Give us a plan.  We let 

you off the hook in last 

year's election; now we've got to have a plan. 

 

My question, Mr. Minister: do you have to get to the point, Mr. 

Minister, where every person in this province is negatively 

affected by your legislative agenda before you will wake up 

and come forward with a plan that deals with the economics of 

18,000 less jobs than last year?  Mr. Minister, give us part of 

that plan today.  Give us some of those jobs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, what the 

members are saying flies in the face of reality, where housing 

starts across the province are up significantly.  Statistics 

Canada indicates in their most recent report that there are 5,000 

more people employed in Saskatchewan this month than last 

month.  That's the fact. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, what's clear is that the 

business people in Saskatchewan didn't take us off the hook at 

the last election, but in fact put those members in the 

opposition on the hook at the time of the last election when 

they kicked them out.  That's what is clear here. 

 

Jobs and employment is up in Saskatchewan.  The members 

opposite simply don't realize that the most recent statistics 

show that there are 5,000 more people working in 

Saskatchewan in July than there were in June as a result of the 

economic development in the province.  Housing, jobs in 

Hitachi, many hundreds of jobs being created across the 

province, not as a result of GigaText, that's true . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, I can understand your frustration 

with the lack of a honeymoon that you supposedly were going 

to have with Saskatchewan people, but the problem is, Mr. 

Minister, that the failings are evident to everyone.  I mean 

headlines like: the first nine months in office disappointing, are 

all around this province.  And that, Mr. Minister, from 

someone who wasn't a big fan of the previous administration. 

 

Now I say to you . . . my question, Mr. Minister, is: does your 

Premier's version of economic development simply consist of 

cancelling AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.), shutting 

down Westank-Willock, shutting down Saska Pasta, shutting 

down Promavia, failing to attract Piper?  Is that your 

government's economic plan?  Because if it is, Mr. Minister, 

we face a very bleak future.  Is that your economic plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I say again to the members 

opposite who are gloom and doom since the day of the election 

. . . and one would think that they still can't get over the loss.  

They're wishing for frost so that the 



2098 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

farmers are disappointed; they want drought; they want people 

to be without employment, even though we have the lowest 

unemployment rate in Canada.  Also Saskatchewan labour 

force, as indicated by StatsCanada, grew by 8,000 over the 

period from June to July 1992.  That's confidence. 

 

If you look at many of the events across the province, the 

numbers are going up, the debt is coming under control, and 

employment is being created.  The members talk about the lack 

of a honeymoon here in the province of Saskatchewan.  What 

we're saying is we're here to do work, not to make rhetoric the 

way the members opposite are doing.  And we'd like to get 

down to work here in the legislature and get some of the Bills 

passed and get the budget passed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, the business community were 

very specific with you and your Premier.  They talked about 

your legislative agenda.  They talked about the projects being 

put on hold.  They talked about the impossibility of drawing 

private capital to this province because of that regressive 

agenda. 

 

Did your Premier and yourself, Mr. Minister, yesterday tell the 

business community which of these projects you would be 

asking them to project and bring ahead because you were 

willing to drop certain parts of that regressive agenda?  Did you 

give them that assurance yesterday, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to say again that the meeting 

held yesterday was very productive and I think everyone went 

away feeling very good about the meeting. 

 

What was clear, that we told them certain things were going to 

change in doing business in Saskatchewan, that we were going 

to quit taking hundreds of millions of dollars from business 

people and private citizens and pouring it into things like 

GigaText and Peter Pocklington and Joytec and Supercart, and 

we're going to quit doing that.  And they were very pleased 

with that commitment. 

 

We also said that the new style of management in 

Saskatchewan was going to be to allow the private sector to 

take a lead role in economic development, unlike what was 

happening under the previous administration, particularly the 

member from Estevan who believed he personally had to have 

his finger in every business deal that was made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, that is not what your Premier said 

yesterday.  And even though, Mr. Minister, you might like to 

be premier some day, your Premier of today said that the 

government's legislative agenda would have to be changed. 

Now which one is it?  Is it the unprecedented power of 

bureaucrats to search and seize property?  It is occupational 

health and safety?  Is it the minimum wage policy?  Which 

ones, Mr. Minister, did your Premier give the commitment to 

the business community yesterday so that they can get on with 

bringing jobs to the province when you won't.  Which ones 

were it, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicated to 

the members that the charter on environmental rights, I believe 

-- that may not be the exact title of the Bill -- but we indicated 

when we introduced it that we would be using that as a white 

paper.  That will probably stay on the order paper. 

 

But in terms of getting the work of the House done, we would 

like to get a number of Bills done this afternoon, if the 

filibuster of the opposition would end.  But we have intent of 

getting through our legislative agenda, but the childish nature 

of the members opposite and their wasting of time leads . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the same minister.  Mr. Minister, I quote once more from the 

business community: 

 

 "Clearly, we're not happy with the consultative approach 

because it doesn't exist in a lot of cases . . ." 

 

That's the people that you met with yesterday, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now, I would think given the fact that your Premier, your 

Premier, your leader, gave the business community some 

confidence yesterday, according to you, that that won't be the 

process that is followed any more, that the first 10 months has 

been sham and that you're going to change your ways, will you 

now tell this Legislative Assembly and the people it represents 

those commitments that you gave yesterday so that everyone in 

this province clearly understands that you've changed your 

ways, and we're on a new agenda? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the members that the business people who were met with 

yesterday were very pleased with the consultative process and 

the quickness that the meeting was being arranged. 

 

I want to say clearly to the members opposite that when the 

national unemployment rate is 11.6 per cent under a federal 

Tory government and ours is running much lower than that, 

that would give an impression that we're doing not badly  

_- not perfect, but not badly. 

 

I want to say that the recent negotiations on NAFTA (North 

American Free Trade Agreement) which are very near to 

conclusion, like the Free Trade Agreement, will be yet another 

nail in the economy of Canada.  And the 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2099 

members opposite would be helpful if they would get a hold of 

their buddies in Ottawa and tell them to wait on the NAFTA 

agreement until the details and implications on Saskatchewan's 

economy are figured out. 

 

That's a positive thing you could do rather than all of your 

gloom and doom and crepe-hanging that we see here in the 

House today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Changes to GRIP 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, your GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) Bill does more to confirm the 

worst fears of farmers; it exceeds them.  Your hack job leaves 

farmers who . . . what farmers rely upon for income up to the 

whim of someone who sits behind a government desk. 

 

Now what comfort is there for farm families in need of cash 

when you can change regulations to increase premiums and 

reduce pay-outs any time you want? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from the Liberal 

Party possibly doesn't quite understand the Bill about which 

she spoke a few days ago, nor the process by which it came to 

be. 

 

The fact is that the program that was established last year, 

carelessly, had major construction difficulties in it.  A broad, 

consultative process made up of people that I hope that the 

member opposite respects brought forward a report.  I have 

read the recommendations of the report here to the House -- I 

will do it again if the member has not heard them -- that 

suggested the precise changes that were made this year, that 

these changes are made within the context of the provisions of 

the federal-provincial agreement which allows these kinds of 

changes.  And the federal-provincial agreement then provides 

for options for people who do not want to participate in a 

program if changes are made. 

 

It was . . . There were conflicting provisions in this carelessly 

constructed piece of legislation last year that required a specific 

deadline which did not make sense in a long-term, three-year 

program, and so the legislation we have introduced simply 

removes the requirement for that very specific notice and 

replaces it with a more rational notice . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the same 

minister.  Twenty-four per cent of the people of this province 

happened to vote for this little party, and they have a right to 

have their questions answered, sir. 

 

You had the nerve to take away the legal rights of farmers, and 

put it in black and white in your Bill.  You had the nerve to 

change things retroactively and put that in black and white in 

this Bill.  So why won't you have the courage to lay out in 

black and white what farm families can 

expect for income, and how much they will have to pay for it 

through premiums. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone needs to be aware that the construction of the 

program, as designed in 1992, is the construction exactly as 

recommended by the advisory committee that was put in place 

to recommend the farm income program for this year. 

 

With respect to the premium concern, again the member 

opposite, if she hasn't heard the explanation before, I will give 

it to her.  You may be aware that last year the federal 

government, as a carrot to get farmers involved and get the 

provincial government involved and to get the previous 

administration a little political room, paid 25 per cent of the 

premiums for the program in Saskatchewan and paid 10 per 

cent of the province's premiums.  So it should then not be 

astounding that the premiums this year would rise not by 25 per 

cent but by 33 per cent, which is 25 over 75 . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, it's fairly obvious that your 

colleagues didn't listen to that answer or they wouldn't be 

applauding it. 

 

The reality for these people is that they have to plan, sir.  It's 

become obvious that your government . . . that that's a word 

that you quite can't comprehend.  For a program like this that 

was designed to provide long-term, foreseeable income for 

Saskatchewan farmers . . . And it's ironic that as the Minister of 

Agriculture you do not have the decency to guarantee GRIP 

pay-outs and premiums by spelling them out for people. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you not agree that you are undermining 

whatever predictability is left in GRIP by leaving it to the 

mercy of you and your department, whose only aim it appears 

to be is to save money regardless of how many farm families it 

may affect? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure where the 

member opposite is with respect to her understanding of the 

program.  The premiums are very clearly definable.  The 

farmers will very soon have their premium statements in the 

mail.  The farmers were given Estimates of their premiums 

when they signed up for the program, and they are higher 

because of the premium methodology established by the 

federal government.  If the member opposite does not 

understand that very basic and simple fact, then the member 

opposite ought to first understand the program before getting 

into it. 

 

With respect to the income projections, they are also 

predictable according to the design of the program.  Farmers 

have 80 per cent crop insurance coverage if they have below 

average yields, and they have a deficiency payment based on 

the area average of crops that are produced relative to the world 

prices and then indexed for their individual productivity.  The 

individual 



2100 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

productivity of a farmer is reflected in the payments they 

receive for their long-term average yields.  This is a very 

definable income program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, an NDP (New 

Democratic Party) lawyer does not believe you.  People who 

are from Ridgedale and Moosomin do not believe what you are 

saying.  And what you are . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .  

Order.  That has not stopped other members in the House 

either, I believe. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

there are people in this province who are wanting to know what 

to do with their lives.  And the reality of your Bill, sir, is that in 

spite of all the things that you say, you have the right to change 

regulations at whim.  You have the right to change, 

retroactively, regulations at whim.  That is within your Bill and 

anybody can read it, and people have read it. 

 

You did not try to deal with civil servants fairly in your 

government when you broke contracts with them, took away 

their legal rights -- all under the guise that every single one of 

them had a George Hill contract.  You didn't even try to hide 

your heavy-handedness when you took away the legal rights of 

bulk fuel dealers in this province.  Now you've stripped the 

rights of families, farm families . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I want to remind members that 

the minister has taken at least two or three times the amount of 

time that she has taken asking the question, in asking the 

question. I want the members to allow her to ask the question.  

And while I'm on my feet, I'll ask the member to put her 

question directly. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question to 

the minister is: why would anyone in the province of 

Saskatchewan, why would anyone in Canada or internationally, 

sign a contract with your government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone clearly indulges more in cheap politics than in 

research. 

 

The member opposite, if she were to first spend some time 

trying to understand the program and how it came to be 

brought forward, would understand that it was brought forward 

by broad consultation.  If the member opposite would try and 

do a little research and find out about what the pay-outs were 

and look at one farmer's contract and exactly find out that the 

premiums are definable and the returns are predictable and that 

they are bankable, contrary to everything she said in debate the 

other day, it would be instructive and not destructive kind of 

discussion she would get into. 

 

The member opposite needs to recognize that the Bill very 

simply cleans up an administrative incompatibility between 

two programs that were meshed together carelessly last year. 

I think if the member wants to work for farmers, the member 

ought to look at the facts and bring forward positive 

suggestions like the rest of the farming community does in 

discussions with us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

your government is the one that's betting a thousand on cheap 

politics.  You either don't understand the seriousness of what 

you are doing, or what is even more scary, you do.  There is no 

long-term stability provided in the '92 GRIP.  At any time, you 

can change the regulations at will, even retroactively, and you 

can wipe out farm income.  That is in black and white in your 

Bill. 

 

How can farmers feel confident when you now have that kind 

of power to alter this program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite enjoys 

taking cheap political shots without doing enough research to 

understand what it is she's talking about.  The member 

opposite, if she believes in the future of agriculture, if she 

believes in programs that are affordable by Saskatchewan 

taxpayers and programs that help farmers do a better job of 

farming, rather than the serious design flaws of the previous 

program, the member opposite would take the approach of 

bringing forward positive suggestions. 

 

Nobody has begun to pretend that the GRIP program is in any 

way a perfect program.  I said before that GRIP, you can't 

make a silk purse out of a sow's ear.  Of that there's no doubt. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave of the 

Assembly to make a brief, personal statement. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Member's Absence 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to inform 

my colleagues, the legislative staff who've been so supportive, 

and my constituents, that I will be absent from this Assembly 

next week.  My husband has been fighting a difficult medical 

problem and I will be accompanying him to the Mayo Clinic.  I 

wish all of you well in your important deliberations, and I hope 

to be back in my seat soon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

             Bill No. 71 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2101 

Medical Care Insurance Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

Madam Minister, we spent pretty well three hours this morning 

going through this Bill 71, which purports now to set up two 

levels of health care in this province, basically for those that 

can and for those that cannot afford to pay your massive 

increases in costs and delivery of the health care system. 

 

Specifically we spent a lot of time on the optometric portion 

thereof.  The optometrists are very upset; the people are very 

upset.  There has been, as is evidenced, virtually no 

consultation whatsoever by you with these people before you 

implemented your program. 

 

And in question period just ended we saw ample evidence of 

that, that this is a pervasive problem within your government.  

We just heard about the various business community leaders 

finally, after threatening your government, your Premier, that 

things had to change around, they finally got a meeting. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Is that relevant? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Certainly it's relevant, Madam Minister.  It 

forms the picture of what I'm trying to paint.  Since the 

chamber of commerce had said, clearly we're not happy with 

the consultative approach because it doesn't exist in a lot of 

cases, Madam Minister.  That is the conclusion of the business 

community.  And there are 15, I would say, 15 community 

organizations, business organizations, in the province that 

signed that letter of condemnation and saying we have to have 

a meeting with the Premier. 

 

Now you say, Madam Minister, that in the optometric services, 

in Bill 71, that you followed a consultative approach.  I'm 

saying to you . . . no it's not just me saying it, it's the care 

givers and the care receivers in the province that are telling me 

as Health critic, Madam Minister, that you're not doing that.  

This is a unilateral decision on your part to make these 

changes.  It's a unilateral decision on your part. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, we have tabled in this House already 

close to 10,000 petitions: chiropractic services will amount to 

virtually 6,000; optometric services are at 4,000.  And they're 

rising on a . . . you can laugh with your official there, that's all 

right.  Let's take this seriously now.  Let's take this seriously.  

I'm talking about 10,000 people, although all of them have not, 

I grant you right now, been tabled, but we have them in our 

office getting them ready. 

 

We have 10,000 of these petitions that people have signed.  

Now that takes an effort for people to go and to sign a petition 

saying, we're not happy with the process and particularly we're 

not happy with the end result that you've come up with.  Those 

are significant numbers.  Now I know they're coming into our 

office right now -- I asked my secretary -- to the tune of about 

500 petitions a day that are coming in.  That's rather significant 

and it must say something to you. 

 

During the course of the afternoon I'm going to give you a 

few options whereby you can, if you're still determined to go 

off in the direction, maybe we can divert it somewhat so that 

the impact on the citizens of this province is going to be less. 

 

Now just prior to the noon break, I asked you the question: how 

much is this new project of yours going to save the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer?  And you indicated to me that for the 

year 1992-93 we were going to save four and a half million 

dollars, and the years thereafter, about $5.9 million in savings 

to the Saskatchewan taxpayer with this program that you have 

unilaterally decided to follow. 

 

Then I asked you the question . . . and you were saved by the 

bell.  Unfortunately for you that's not the case now.  I will 

repeat that question seeing that you've had two hours to 

contemplate it. 

 

What is the other side of that equation?  You saved $4.5 

million, but have you given any consideration at all, Madam 

Minister, on the flip side, the other costs -- the hidden costs, 

perhaps, as it were -- for diseases that have gone undetected; 

for people whose vision has been unnecessarily deteriorated 

further than if they would have had a timely examination; and 

other factors.  I'm sure that you have an analysis where you did 

a cost-effective analysis.  I'd like you to give that and share that 

with the people of the province now. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- That matter was considered.  There's no 

evidence there's a flip side. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Madam Minister, what you're telling me 

now is that there will be absolutely no negative effect at all.  

What you're telling me now, that the optometrists are totally 

wrong, totally wrong, because there will not be one person who 

will miss an eye examination because of the $50 that they're 

going to have to pay.  There will be not one diabetic, not one 

diabetic who will miss one of their two annual examinations 

that they're going to have to pay for, and particularly diabetics 

that are so vulnerable for disease. 

 

You are telling me now that there is no costs. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There's no evidence there will be an 

increased medical cost. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What about human cost? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- People who can't afford services will be 

helped under the safety nets. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What about those who can barely afford and 

have to make a choice whether they're going to buy food, in 

your terminology, or have an eye examination.  What about 

those? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- If people can't afford the eye examination 

and are entitled to coverage under the safety nets they'll be 

taken care of. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- We went through the safety net this morning 

with SIP (Saskatchewan Income Plan), FIP (Family Income 

Plan), and SAP (Saskatchewan Assistance 



2102 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

Plan).  Those 90,000 people are covered.  I'm concerned about 

the 910,000 other people in this province, the other 91 per cent 

that are going to have to make choices.  Madam Minister, are 

you not concerned about them? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The people who are close to the line are 

entitled to coverage under the Family Income Plan and they 

will get total coverage. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, I'm trying to be very serious 

about this because it's a serious topic.  Please don't be arrogant 

or flippant on this.  I'm asking you a question about low income 

earners that do not qualify for FIP.  They are still going to have 

to make choices.  They are still not in a position where $50 

twice a year, if they're diabetic, does not mean something to 

them.  It's rather significant. 

 

I'm also talking about seniors, Madam Minister, for whom you 

have just added a $211 a month surcharge in their living 

accommodation.  You've just taken $211 out of their pocket.  

Many of those seniors are now going to be with $200 in their 

pocket, maybe $300 in their pocket, for a month.  This is going 

to be rather traumatic on them I assure you, Madam Minister.  

Is this not a concern of yours? 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- This government enhanced the SIP 

program in this budget.  The seniors who need income 

supplement will qualify under SIP, and if as a result of 

requiring optometric exams they qualify for SIP, then they will 

receive help from the government. 

 

So people who are working and are poor can get their income 

supplemented under FIP and SIP programs.  These are what 

these programs are for. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, to me you're coming across 

now as a callous individual, because you're not addressing and 

answering my question. 

 

There are people out there who are going to have to make 

choices.  The vulnerable people, those are the ones that I'm 

concerned about.  And I have identified a number of them for 

you already.  I'm not talking about those that qualify for SIP 

and for FIP and for SAP.  I know that.  I'm talking about the 

next generation, as it were.  They are the vulnerable; they are 

the ones that are going to be having to make choices.  You're 

telling me that they're automatically going to spend $50 on an 

eye examination.  I question that and I have concerns about 

that. 

 

Why not reconsider, at least partially, your program here, that 

would accommodate those that are vulnerable in our society?  

That's what I'm asking you to address. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I have said on numerous occasion this 

morning, that these programs are always under review. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I guess what I'm after, Madam Minister, is 

some more specific commitment on your part than that.  That's 

kind of a wide-ranging statement that doesn't really say 

anything.  Can you be more definitive in terms of what 

precisely are you going to be doing?  What precisely do you 

have in mind? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I indicated these programs are under 

review.  The situation's being monitored.  After this is done, 

over a period of time, it gives us an opportunity to make an 

adequate assessment. We will make decisions. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What's an adequate period of time, Madam 

Minister, so that people who are watching and listening have an 

idea of what they can expect from your government? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We will be doing this on an ongoing 

basis in the months to come and I don't have a deadline as to 

when we will be coming forward with all the information.  The 

fact of the matter is the programs are under review and as we 

move into the next budget cycle, the results of that will be 

taken into consideration. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, is it true that optometrists 

get referrals right now from doctors because doctors' offices are 

not equipped to do the job of optometrists? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Routine eye exams are not covered. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What about those eye examinations referred 

to by a doctor and the doctor's office does not have the 

equipment in order to do a proper evaluation?  And I'm led to 

believe -- and these are my own words now -- most doctors' 

offices would not be properly equipped to do an effective eye 

examination such as this and the doctor then would refer them 

to an optometrist to do the thorough job that they think that this 

individual needs. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Routine eye exams are not covered, 

whether a doctor does it, whether an ophthalmologist does it, 

whether an optometrist does it.  And it is true that optometrists 

are better equipped to perform routine eye exams. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So what's going to happen then when people 

stop going to optometrists? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There is no evidence people will stop 

going to optometrists. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Madam Minister, that's what I was 

trying to tell you this morning.  There is evidence.  

Optometrists are telling us right now that there is a drop in the 

utilization rate.  There is a drop.  The evidence is there if you'd 

be only willing to see it.  The utilization rate is dropping, 

Madam Minister, and what I'm telling you and what 

optometrists are telling you . . . and what about the 4,000 

petitions that we have in already?  Are these people all wrong?  

Are these people all blind that they don't see and share your 

vision? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There was a substantial increase in usage 

in May.  The optometrists indicate that usage has dropped in 

June, which is understandable because many people went in 

May.  And that's the fact.  There is no evidence that there is 

going to be a substantial drop in use of optometric services 

over a long-term period.  You can't 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2103 

rely on one month after there's been a substantial blip, or 

increase in services, the month following that as being 

evidence of a decrease in services. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I agree with you that there certainly is a 

blip in this program somewhere.  I'm going to, for the record, 

just read in a short statement that I received from an 

optometrist, an optometrist that is rather upset with the 

government's program and some of the effects that this 

program is going to have.  And this optometrist entitled it, "A 

Vision Program Without Vision". 

 

Madam Minister, this is what the service deliverers out there 

think of your program.  And this optometrist writes to me: 

 

 These recent optometric program changes fail to recognize 

primary eye care for what it truly is.  As the government 

itself has stated, this change was for fiscal reasons only.  

They will be saving on coverage for routine eye exams.  (And 

the example given is refractions).  However, someone is 

misinformed.  An eye exam is not just a refraction. 

 

 In addition to their qualifications to treat refractive anomalies 

and binocular problems, optometrists have established 

credibility to recognize, diagnose, and participate in the 

management and treatment of ocular diseases and ocularly 

manifested systemic problems. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, it continues on: 

 

 In the absence of early detection, diseases such as glaucoma, 

which is a leading cause of blindness in Canada, (as you must 

be aware, Madam) will flourish.  Macular degeneration is the 

number one cause for central vision loss in those that are 50 

years and over.  These will not be diagnosed in many. 

 

 Diabetic retinopathy and undiagnosed diabetes itself will be 

unrecognized in many.  What the government feels they will 

save on so-called refractions will be spent in the ultimate 

rehabilitation of those with eye disease progress to a more 

advanced stage. 

 

And that's the point I've been trying to make with you as well, 

Madam Minister.  This optometrist goes on.  And I would ask 

you, Madam Minister, to respond to these concerns that this 

optometrist is expressing.  And if after I'm finished, I'd be 

pleased to repeat any of the portions that you fail to grasp or 

understand what they were trying to get at. 

 

 Almost 15 per cent of patients seen by optometrists are 

referred for eye diseases and other health conditions that are 

not only identified but recognized as requiring secondary 

care.  The optometrist of the '90s is not merely a refractionist 

. . .  

 

And that's why they have been felt insulted by some of your 

answers that you have been giving thus far this morning and 

afternoon.  I'll restate that after my 

interruption there. 

 

 The optometrist of the '90s is not merely a refractionist but 

provides such services as dilated fundus examination to 

check the retina, tonometry, and visual field tests to evaluate 

for glaucoma, retinal and anterior segment photography in 

the evaluation of eye disease, and countless other diagnostic 

tests and therapies. 

 

Madam Minister, note this. 

 

 The vast majority of these tests have never been paid for by 

medicare, an actual cost savings to our government that will 

now often be done at government expenses or perhaps 

unfortunately not get done at all. 

 

This optometrist goes on: 

 

 Does our government recall several years ago when parts of 

our eye care system were burdened by ridiculously long 

waiting lists?  No one wishes to return to this scenario. 

 

 The ophthalmologist's skills must be utilized effectively.  

This secondary and tertiary eye care level cannot continue to 

serve those truly in need if burdened by unnecessary 

referrals. 

 

That's also something that I had been pointing to your attention.  

And this optometrist continues: 

 

 This is already happening.  This is not an effective use of 

manpower, nor an effective cost saving.  There are almost 

100 optometrists serving 83 primary locations and 44 

secondary locations in Saskatchewan.  They are the form of 

eye care in most rural parts of Saskatchewan.  Their annual 

vision care project serves old age, special care homes, 

pre-schools, day cares, and our remote northern communities 

and reserves. 

 

 Optometrists under the previous medicare coverage were the 

only profession whose patients were subject to time limits for 

their coverage.  Does this sound like a system that would be 

or could be abused? 

 

 The system as it exists now does not provide a minimal 

safety net of care to Saskatchewan residents. 

 

That's what I brought out this morning.  The Saskatchewan 

Association of Optometrists believes at the very least the safety 

net should include - 

_ should include, Madam Minister -- medical referrals from 

physicians, those with eye diseases, diabetics, and senior 

citizens.  The many phone calls, the petitions signed -- our 

unfortunate testimonials -- tell us that many of the residents of 

Saskatchewan feel the same way. 

 

I would be interested, Madam Minister, in your response or 

responses to some of the concerns brought out, not by myself, 

but rather through me as a conveyance to express the concerns 

of your professionals that are out there 



2104 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

delivering this eye care service. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I have answered this question numerous 

times today already.  I am aware of their concerns.  We have 

heard the concerns that are expressed, and we are reviewing the 

situation on an ongoing basis. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, you are not being forthright 

and honest with the people of Saskatchewan.  Either that, 

Madam Minister, or you just couldn't be bothered to put a 

proper effort into answering the concerns of the optometrists. 

 

Is this a sign of arrogance?  Is this a sign of unconcern about 

what these professionals are stating?  These are not my words, 

Madam Minister.  These are, in my opinion, legitimate 

concerns that are being brought forward, and they wanted a 

response. 

 

Now there were a lot of issues there, and I told you that if there 

was something there that you couldn't remember or didn't pick 

up quite fully, I would be prepared to reread that for your 

edification so that you would be prepared to give it some 

thought before you made a flippant answer that I've answered 

that already and don't bother me by asking me questions like 

that. 

 

I don't think it's good enough for the people of Saskatchewan, 

Madam Minister.  I think they deserve more attention from 

you. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We've spent three hours this morning 

discussing many of the issues that were raised in that letter.  

The fact of the matter is, is I've indicated that we are 

monitoring the situation, that we are reviewing the programs, 

and we will be consulting with optometrists and other health 

care professionals in the months to come.  I have said that 

repeatedly.  My position hasn't changed since this morning. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- That's exactly . . . you're right, Madam 

Minister, and your colleagues are encouraging you by saying, 

that's right, that's right.  They don't want you to change your 

position. 

 

Madam Minister, that's the point.  That's why I'm standing 

here.  That's why we're still in this legislature.  That's why the 

people of this province are disturbed with you; your position 

hasn't changed. 

 

There's nothing that we seem to be able to say or do in this 

legislature that will change your mind.  And when we are 

persistent, when we keep at you, then we have your colleague 

there, the House Leader, getting up and making motions that 

put closure on everything. 

 

I suppose from your attitude right now you are prepared to call 

it a day.  I don't know whether you want to join the rest of your 

colleagues, wherever they are.  But I think what is happening 

here, what is happening here is that you are thumbing your 

nose.  I rest my case.  I rest my case, Mr. Chairman. 

It's amazing, it's amazing, Mr. Chairman, how such a handful 

of people can make so much noise -- a handful of people can 

make so much noise.  And that is in response, Mr. Chairman, 

that is in response to our insistence that the people of 

Saskatchewan deserve answers. 

 

You, Madam Minister, got up and said, we have already spent 

three hours on this and that's enough and I don't want to talk 

any more about it.  I read you a very legitimate statement by 

the health care giver, the optometrists, entitled "A Vision 

Program without Vision."  And it was chock-full of legitimate 

concerns.  What did you do when you got up?  You said, I 

spent three hours on that already and I think I've answered 

those and I'm not going to say any more.  And you sat down. 

 

Madam Minister, that's not good enough.  We want you not to 

be like Julius Caesar, constant as the northern star, but to be 

willing to listen to suggestions and ideas and make some 

alterations.  But you just finished saying, I haven't changed my 

mind.  I haven't changed my mind.  And that's why we're here.  

It's not me that is asking for these changes.  It's the people out 

there that are delivering the services and that are receiving the 

services that are asking me to make my point as emphatically 

as I can. 

 

And that is exactly what I'm doing, trying to make myself 

heard over your colleague from Meadow Lake.  But I think 

you're hearing me.  And I'm saying to you, Madam Minister, 

the concerns expressed in that "A Vision Program without 

Vision" needs more of a response than you have been willing to 

give so far. 

 

Now I'll give you one more opportunity, but if you insist in 

refusing, then I will pass that message on to them. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The fact of the matter is, is the member 

has asked these same questions throughout the morning and 

they have been answered in detail.  The fact of the matter is, is 

we've heard the concerns of the optometric association and 

we're continuing to consult with them and other people across 

the province.  And we will be monitoring and reviewing the 

situation. 

 

We've heard what has been said and we are continuing to 

consult.  That's the fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Madam Minister, we've brought in 

petitions.  We've read the prayers that those petitions are based 

on.  I've given you some very, very serious questions that have 

been passed on to me and are being asked by people out there.  

I read to you that "Vision Program Without Vision. 

 

There are other letters here and I want to put this in the record, 

Madam Minister, letters that I am assuming that you received 

as well because it's basically addressed by saying "Dear 

Member of the Legislative Assembly."  And thereby I also 

assume that all of your colleagues will have gotten a copy of 

this letter.  I'm not quite sure whether any of your colleagues 

have bothered reading it or whether they have answered it.  I'm 

assuming because they're all hon. members of this Assembly, 

that they will have forthrightly answered them. 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2105 

But I want to put this letter on record as well.  And it says, and 

I quote, Mr. Chairman: 

 

 Since June 1, 1992, our government has chosen to de-insure 

optometric coverage for all types of vision services for those 

over the age of 17.  Although there is still limited coverage 

for those on supplementary income plans, SAP, SIP, and FIP, 

many will fall between the cracks (Madam Minister).  Of 

most concern are those who are unable to afford care, 

particularly some of our residents, example: seniors, who 

have a higher incidence of eye problems and eye disease.  

Many of these conditions can be only properly treated by 

early detection.  The optometrist in most Saskatchewan 

communities is the only readily accessible health practitioner 

able to check for some of these conditions. 

 

 And what of those already diagnosed with actual eye 

diseases, or those who have one of the many health problems 

which have a visual repercussion?  Too bad if you're a 

diabetic with two children on a fixed income.  Since I must 

now pay to visit the person who has always taken care of my 

eyes, I may have no choice but to put off my eye care. 

 

Madam Minister, I want you to pay attention to that line that 

this person has said: 

 

 Since I must now pay to visit the person who has always 

taken care of my eyes, I may have no choice but to put off 

my eye care. 

 

There's a name attached to the bottom of this letter, Madam 

Minister.  This is not a figment of my imagination.  It's a 

concerned person out there.  And she continues: 

 

 For our government to believe they are allowing all our 

citizens access to the same sort of health care is a mistake.  

For our government to believe this decision is in our best 

visual welfare, is a mistake.  I believe that this may 

ultimately prove to be a deterrent for some in keeping their 

good visual status.  Eye examinations are necessary to 

maintain our health.  Good vision adds not to the quantity of 

life but most definitely to the quality of life (Madam 

Minister). 

 

 I wish to voice my opposition to the cutting of optometric 

vision services from medicare.  I appreciate your 

consideration of my concerns and trust you will reconsider 

this decision. 

 

Madam Minister, that's why we spent three hours this morning.  

I have lots of letters like this.  These are in addition to the 

petitions and so on.  It's a concern that these people have.  And 

I want you then, Madam Minister, because you did not feel it 

warranted your time or effort to respond to the optometrists, 

maybe you would want to respond to this individual whose 

name is signed here at the bottom but I will not make public.  

Maybe you will respond to her, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- If the person cannot afford to pay for 

an eye exam, they should get in contact with the government.  

If there's some way of helping that person, because they cannot 

afford to and they qualify under the programs, we will do it. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And the ones who can't afford, if they leave 

out their food, and again I use your own terminology, then they 

will make that decision whether to buy a gift for their child for 

Christmas, again your terminology, or to buy sufficient food, or 

to have an eye examination.  What you're saying then, Madam 

Minister, is that it is up to them to make that choice. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There are programs available for people 

with inadequate income. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm glad we had this opportunity this 

afternoon, Madam Minister, because I hope there are a 

substantial number of people who are watching and listening.  

Because what is being revealed, I believe, from my perspective 

. . . and I stand to be corrected because I'm not sure how this 

thing is going across -- but I think what we have here is a 

revelation for many people. 

 

I'm sure that many people out there in voters' land, if you will, 

in October of '91 rejected us . . . and they did; I'm the first one 

to admit that -- but I still maintain that they rejected us because 

they thought that they were voting for something better.  I 

sincerely believe that the people out there voted for you 

because you said that you would do more in health.  You said 

that -- that you would spend more on health.  You said that. 

 

Now you're pretending to . . . whoops, my goodness, you open 

your eyes and you find out that the deficit is higher than you 

thought it was.  Madam Minister, that is not so.  That is not a 

fact.  You knew.  You knew prior to the election.  You knew 

while you were running your election strategy the fiscal 

position of this province. 

 

We were out there trying to tell you.  We were saying to the 

people, if you vote for us it means an expanded GST (goods 

and services tax), expanded PST (provincial sales tax).  We 

said that.  We said to the folks, you're going to be taxed 7 per 

cent extra, because we understood that.  We also understood 

how the province would benefit by the $280 million that would 

be coming in from federal coffers if we harmonized. 

 

And you made a conscious effort, Madam Minister, as a 

government, and you said no, we can get the Tories on this 

issue because the people hate the GST.  And if we get them 

into a corner, the people will reject the Tories because nobody 

likes the GST.  Oh yes, member from Humboldt there is very 

smug on that. 

 

We were upright, forthright, honest with the people, and said, if 

you vote for the Tories it'll mean higher taxes.  We said that.  

Because that's the only way on that particular side, other than 

increase income through expanded economic activity, which 

was AECL.  And we said, this is another area that we're going 

to address in order to attack the problem. 

 

But they liked your story, and I don't blame them.  They liked 

your story because it sounded 



2106 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

easy, it sounded painless, Madam Minister.  And they voted for 

you.  They voted for you on that basis because they trusted 

you.  They had never seen you in government before, Madam 

Minister, and you made a good picture on the television tube.  

And they said yes, that member is someone that I can believe 

in.  And so they voted for you across the province indirectly 

because they liked what they saw in you. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I am not hearing that much positive 

right now about you and your plans.  This is not a personal 

attack, this is what you're doing as a government and as a 

minister.  They don't like that.  There are 10,000 people on 

these two issues alone that are supporting us.  Now that may 

not seem like a high figure to you, but those are there.  The 

care givers are also there. 

 

And they're telling us, Madam Minister, that there's got to be a 

better way.  Efficiency, savings, yes.  But there are other ways 

in which we can do that.  And you're coming up now by saying, 

well so be it.  We're not going to do anything about it.  You just 

finished saying, I haven't changed my mind.  So we've spent 

now four hours or whatever it is on this particular topic, and 

you're saying you're not going to change your mind. 

 

And I suppose if I dare talk another hour on this, your 

colleague, the House Leader, will say, well that's enough of 

that. Closure -- bang; that's enough, you can't ask any more 

questions. 

 

That's what we're experiencing in this House. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- There's no substance here. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Oh, this is not substance.  The Minister, Mr. 

Chairman, thinks that this is not substance.  I think it goes right 

to the core; I think it goes to the heart of the problem. 

 

The motivation for what you are doing is deficit driven, 

budgetary driven.  Your Finance minister is putting the screws 

to all of you ministers saying,  do it. 

 

And the problem that we're having, Madam Minister, is that 

you're doing it but you're not consulting prior.  You make a big 

show about consultation.  And I'm suggesting to you, Madam 

Minister, that that consultation is not there.  It is not there. 

 

You're doing these things first, and then you're going around, 

after it's been found out, basically saying to the organization, 

this is the way it's going to be.  You've got X number of dollars 

to spend; we'll negotiate with you; we'll consult with you.  But 

after that $8 million, how are you going to spend it? That's all 

you've got.  That's all you've got.  If they're lucky, this is what 

you will admit to. 

 

Madam Minister, we've got a lot of other ground to cover in 

this whole topic.  But what I'm going to do now is give you an 

opportunity to at least indicate to the people that you are 

prepared and that you are really willing to listen to the people.  

That it's not just a lot of fluff.  That it's not just a lot of rhetoric 

about the fact that you are consulting. 

 

I'm going to propose an amendment to The 

 Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act that will allow you 

to do precisely that.  And I hope that what you will do is give it 

some careful consideration before you reject it out of hand. 

 

(1530) 

 

This is a proposed House amendment, moved by myself, that 

says, clause 11 of the printed Bill: 

 

 amend clause 11 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after clause . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  I'm not clear here 

now.  Is the member moving an amendment at this time? 

 

I don't mind if the member wants to make mention of an 

amendment or to discuss possible amendments that might be 

necessary, but I don't think it's necessary for him to indicate the 

precise wording of the amendment and who's going to be 

seconding the amendment.  That can wait till the specific 

clause. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you.  I never did say who was going to 

be seconding. 

 

What I'm saying, Mr. Chairman, is I'm giving notice to the 

Minister of Health that I'm going to be making an amendment.  

You're telling me I cannot read an amendment -- a proposed 

one? 

 

This is the amendment, Madam Minister: 

 

 Adding immediately after clause (i.3) as being enacted 

therein the following: . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the minister on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- What I would hope is the member would 

provide us with a copy of the proposed amendment, and when 

we get to the relevant clause -- because it's my understanding 

that under clause 1 we don't deal with specific sections -- when 

we get to the relevant clause we can then discuss the 

amendment. 

 

The Chair: -- It's up to the member whether he wants to 

provide the minister with a copy of the amendment prior to 

moving the amendment.  The Chair has no control over that. 

 

But again I would tell the member that clause 1 provides an 

opportunity for general discussion of all aspects of the Bill, but 

that if he has a specific amendment to move at a later clause, 

then he should wait till that time.  Although I don't object to 

him generally discussing the need for an amendment later on, I 

don't think it is necessary or incumbent on him to read the 

specific amendment as such at this point. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well thank you, Mr. Chairman, for that ruling.  

I have certainly no objection to giving the minister a copy of 

my proposed amendment.  Because what I've been talking 

about so far is the need for a consultative process.  And you 

know, Mr. Chairman, what I would really like to see is that 

there be something here: 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2107 

requiring the minister to seek advice and provide a 

reasonable opportunity for receiving advance public 

consultations and recommendations on any proposed 

regulation or any proposed amendment to a regulation made 

under clauses (i.1) through (i.3). 

 

That's what I want you to consider, Madam Minister.  And I 

think if you take a look at what I have just read to you, that you 

will look favourably upon it, because this will give the 

opportunity for people to really have the consultative approach 

that you're so fond of talking about. 

 

I have one further thing, Mr. Chairman, that I would like to add 

to the discussion.  And again I want to read this into the record 

because what this basically is is further concern being 

expressed by the Saskatchewan Seniors Association, resolution 

passed by the Seniors Association Incorporated, and it's 

entitled: Emergency Resolution presented to and approved by 

the board of the Saskatchewan Seniors Association, Madam 

Minister, and it deals with the topic, health eye program. 

 

 Whereas the importance of good vision is obvious to all and 

the fact that visual abilities decrease with age is well known, 

and whereas early detection of eye disease as well as early 

detection and treatment of declining visual abilities can result 

in the preservation of good vision and more independent 

life-styles and a better quality of life, and whereas with the 

high incidence of cataracts, glaucoma, macular degeneration 

and other chronic eye diseases and because optometrists 

presently provide 90 per cent of all initial or primary eye 

examinations, and whereas de-insurance of these vital 

optometric services will present a financial barrier to 

accessing this important service to many with the greatest 

need, therefore be it resolved the Government of 

Saskatchewan be requested to follow their wellness program 

and restore full optometric vision coverage for senior citizens 

of Saskatchewan to save much more expensive later 

treatment. 

 

This is an emergency resolution presented and passed by the 

board of directors and totally supported by the Saskatchewan 

Association of Optometrists.  Madam Minister, this is a fax that 

I received from the Saskatchewan Seniors Association. 

 

Now you said . . . you will probably say, I'm not going to 

respond to that because I've talked about it before.  Well if you 

want to just ignore another group of people in this province . . . 

now I'm dealing with the seniors.  They're saying the same 

thing. 

 

Madam Minister, they have expressed a series of concerns, and 

if you want, I can reread so that you can fully understand their 

concerns.  And then I would like you to respond in more than 

just a flippant, offhand, I've-covered-that-already type of an 

attitude because this is what I'm going to have to report to the 

seniors' organization, whatever your response is going to be. 

Madam Minister, how will I respond to the senior citizens? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I have answered questions of this nature 

for some three or four hours.  I've pointed out the fact that we 

have a deficit in this province that is crippling us as a result of 

actions taken by the former government when they were in 

power.  They went from a $140 million surplus to a $15 billion 

debt. 

 

As a result, there are tough decisions that have to be made and 

difficult decisions.  They are not easy decisions to make.  And I 

have said this morning on several occasions that we wish we 

could pay for everything.  We wish we did not have to 

de-insure optometric services.  We wish we didn't have to do 

that. 

 

We are concerned about people who tell us they may have 

difficulty paying, so we've established safety nets to try and 

deal with that.  And if there are seniors who are having 

difficulty and who are on the SIP program, they will be fully 

covered. 

 

So the fact of the matter is, is that what we hope is that a 50 to 

$60 charge per year is manageable for people.  I have said that 

we regret having to take decisions to try and get the Tory 

deficit under control.  I regret that we're put in that position.  

And the seniors know that.  The seniors themselves say that 

this government was put between the devil and the deep blue 

sea. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is, is we will be reviewing the 

impact of these changes in the months to come.  We will be 

talking to groups and organizations and consulting with groups 

such as the seniors' group and the optometric association.  And 

through these consultations and a reviewing of the programs, 

we will be developing policies for future years. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to ask the 

minister a couple questions.  It's interesting, Madam Minister.  

My father-in-law is 85 years old and in order for him to listen 

to the church service on a Sunday morning, because he does it 

from his home, his charge went from $11 -- or I think it's $12 -- 

to $27 a month.  Those are the kinds of increases you're asking 

for individuals across this province. 

 

I think that that's a little outlandish, but I want you to know that 

that's the cost that these services that seniors require to be a 

part of the wellness that you have said that is a part of all of the 

things that you want it to be.  These are services that they need 

to have as individuals, to provide themselves not only 

entertainment, Madam Minister, but also an involvement in the 

community. 

 

The power rates have gone up, telephone rates have gone up, 

insurance rates have gone up.  And, Madam Minister, you have 

a surplus in every one of them.  You have a surplus in every 

one of them.  Why don't you give the diabetics a bit of a help? 

 

I never, ever realized, Madam Minister, until I had a diabetic in 

my own family what the costs of these really are.  And the 

diabetic in my own family is not a serious 



2108 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

one, although he has to take insulin every day.  But he only has 

to take it once.  His insulin costs have gone from $1 a month to 

$20 a month.  If he was a regular user, under normal care, he 

would have to have three of those per month which is $60 a 

month. 

 

Now on top of that, they need . . . every six months they need 

optometric care to see what's going on with their eyes because 

that is how the diabetic becomes.  I have a lady in my 

constituency who is a registered nurse and works in the O.R., 

operating room, in the Swift Current Union Hospital, and she 

has a machine that she has on her belt that provides insulin on a 

regular basis for her.  And her costs are going way up because 

of her need to deal with each one of the things that you have 

raised.  What about her optometric care?  You want to talk 

about wellness? 

 

I had reason to go to an ophthalmologist just recently because I 

was referred in Swift Current, and we're very fortunate to have 

one there.  And he said, you know what this whole wellness 

program means?  It means, Madam Minister -- and this is his 

words -- you keep the pressure on and pressure on and as you 

reach the conclusion of it, it balloons.  And then you have kept 

them well and kept them well and kept them well.  But some 

day, Madam Minister, you're going to have to deal with them.  

And that is exactly what we're talking about here. 

 

If you don't take the optometric care and allow the people to 

have access to it, you will have that -- as we've pointed out here 

over and over again -- you will have that accented by those 

people requiring extra care, way above and beyond what they 

will require as a cost in relating to the optometric services.  

And that's the point that we want to raise. 

 

Diabetics across this province have to have the opportunity to 

be a viable part of their community.  I have a gentleman I 

played hockey with that was a diabetic since he was five years 

old.  And his brother gave him a kidney, so that he could live, 

two years ago.  And the member from Swift Current probably 

taught school with his sister.  And that, Madam Minister, is the 

extent to which people go to maintain their health care in the 

province of Saskatchewan, making sacrifices, one right after 

the other.  And that, Madam Minister, is what we're trying to 

say to you.  If you cut those services, you reduce the 

opportunity for them to have the drive and the initiative to 

continue. 

 

I can give you another case of a diabetic, a young girl who's 21 

years old, and she has gone blind in the last three years. She's 

been to ophthalmologists, she's been to Vancouver four or five 

times.  And that, Madam Minister, is exactly what can happen 

in every one of these optometric cares. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Wasn't she insured? 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- She was . . . right, she was insured.  But the 

process was shortened in that young lady's life.  The process 

was shortened.  That's exactly the problem that we've got with 

allowing the optometric care to be 

de-insured.  And that, Madam Minister, is exactly what we're 

talking about.  And we think these optometrists are right.  

You're going to increase the costs. 

 

Now the other point I want to make is this.  A lady called me 

and said she had migraine headaches.  The doctor said to her, 

come and see me.  She went to see the doctor . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I could talk about the member from Humboldt 

and how a fellow tore up his NDP card because of his attitude, 

but I won't do it at this point, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I will point that out probably next week when you, sir . . . I'll 

tell the member from Humboldt that next week you should be 

at the meeting that the hog board is having at Humboldt, 

Saskatchewan in the Bella Vista hotel at 10 o'clock.  And that, 

Mr. Member, is where you should be. 

 

Now going back to health care, Mr. Minister, Mr. Member.  

Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, this lady was told by her 

doctor to come see her.  She went to see her doctor and he said, 

you go to the optometrist and see whether it is your eyes that 

are causing the problem for the migraine headaches.  Is that, 

Madam Minister, covered by medicare? 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member for Humboldt on his feet? 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- With leave, Mr. Chairman, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It's with pleasure 

and pride today that I introduce to this Assembly and the 

members, my three children who are seated in the Speaker's 

gallery -- one who just ducked behind the centre podium.  My 

daughter always tells me a father's role is to embarrass you, and 

I'm probably succeeding again.  I'd just like all members to 

welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 71 (continued) 

 

Clause 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you.  If the individual is going to 

an optometrist to get a routine eye exam, perhaps she needs 

glasses.  Maybe that will correct her headaches.  If she's going 

for a routine eye exam, it is not covered. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, if she is going there on the 

doctor's recommendation and transfer, is the care covered? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- If she's going for a routine eye exam, it is 

not covered.  If she has . . . if the physician detects that she has 

an eye disease and refers her to an ophthalmologist, it is 

covered. 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2109 

Mr. Martens: -- You didn't answer my question.  If she's 

referred by a doctor to an optometrist . . . 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- For a routine eye exam, it's not covered. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Madam Minister, this is where the 

problem is coming in and this is where the people are starting 

to ask the questions.  The referral is by a doctor to an 

optometrist for an eye examination because of a headache.  Is 

that covered? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- No, it's not covered.  Many people go to 

optometrists with headaches to see whether or not they need 

eye wear. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What I'm asking, Madam Minister . . . 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I said no.  The answer is, it's not covered.  

No. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- If she's referred by a doctor? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- For the sixth time, no. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Actually, it was the fifth time.  One of the 

things that I wanted to ask you about, Madam Minister, is why 

the optometrists and why the dentists and why the chiropractors 

got the hit when in the pre-election budget or pre-budget 

survey that you did, the question was asked this way: 

 

 Saskatchewan Government is currently preparing its '92 

budget in which it will outline its economic plans for the 

coming year.  Using a scale from one to five, where one 

means somewhat important, five means extremely important, 

please tell me how important it is that the budget includes 

each of the following measures. 

 

Maintaining health care was a question.  And if you go from 

one to five and you take three, and go to extremely important, 

Madam Minister, it comes out at 95.8 per cent of the people 

said maintaining health care was extremely important -- 95.8 

per cent.  It's in fact, Madam Minister, the highest in that 

volume, in that whole questioning, it's the highest volume of 

any presentation made.  It is higher than increasing economic 

opportunity for jobs.  That's the only one that's close to it. 

 

Madam Minister, what we're asking you, Madam Minister, is 

how you rationalized . . . because of all of the history that I 

have heard you and the member from Saskatoon Broadway 

over the years tell us over and over again, you're not doing 

enough in health care.  In fact, Madam Minister, you stood in 

your place in this Assembly and said, put more beds into 

Saskatoon, Madam Minister, over and over and over again. 

 

I can recall a waiting-list of 9,000 people, or 11,000 people, 

and you said, put more nurses to work.  Madam Minister, do 

you know what we did?  Two million, five hundred thousand 

dollars went into more nurses in Saskatoon, Madam Minister.  

That's what went into nursing care to get rid of the bulge in 

those referrals to those hospitals in health care.  That, Madam 

Minister, is 

exactly what happened. 

 

You talk about deficit.  Would you explain what $460 million 

of that deficit, in the deficit that you wrote off this year, was a 

part of?  It was in health care facilities in my constituency, 

Madam Minister, and constituencies around this province. 

 

That's what we're here to talk about.  You want to maintain 

health care.  People think it's important.  That's why, Madam 

Minister, the people in the province of Saskatchewan are 

letting you know through petitions, both through the optometric 

care and through chiropractic care and, Madam Minister, I 

suspect that when we get to the dentists, which are also 

included in this Bill, that we will hear from them too.  And 

that, Madam Minister, is what we're here to ask about. 

 

The health care issue in another question that you asked: each 

year the Saskatchewan government must determine how much 

money to spend on many different programs and services.  Can 

you tell whether you believe that the Government of 

Saskatchewan should spend a lot more, about the same, or a lot 

less in the following areas?  Madam Minister, if you take and 

include the lot more or about the same in health care, it's 92.8 

per cent said that you should maintain or do more in health 

care. 

 

And, Madam Minister, that is what we're here to talk about.  

The people of the province -- we're just conveying the message 

to you -- the people of the province of Saskatchewan said, do 

more in health care.  They want efficiency, Madam Minister, in 

health care, and that's in here too.  And it's strong there too. 

 

But, Madam Minister, tell me, tell me in the diabetics who 

need optometric care and your chiropractic care, whether that 

isn't the cheapest way to defer or to exclude the real health care 

costs that are going to be incurred and the costs on society for 

this young lady who is blind now and can't do anything and 

other diabetics who have that same problem.  You tell me 

whether you don't think that this care given here isn't better 

than in two years or three years or four years, giving them 

every care they need for eye transplants or anything . . . retina 

transplants or whatever they do with eyes.  That, Madam 

Minister, is exactly what we're referring to here. 

 

The member from Rosthern read you a list of all of those things 

that happened to the eyes.  Madam Minister, we're here to ask 

you, not why you don't care, but why you didn't put the money 

in there where it belonged, to defer on the basis of wellness.  

Wellness is what we're talking about here, maintaining what 

they've got, not trying to cure what they should have been 

cured with before they were determined that they had serious 

eye diseases. 

 

Madam Minister, can you explain that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We have explained this on numerous 

occasions.  The exaggeration the member opposite has engaged 

in is not substantiated by any evidence, no evidence at all.  And 

they've de-insured optometric services in Newfoundland and 

other places, and that evidence doesn't exist.  It is speculation 

on your part. And I said that we would be monitoring and 



2110 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

reviewing that whole situation to determine whether or not any 

of the exaggeration you've engaged in has truth to it. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is, if you in government had not 

blown some $5.5 million on GigaText we could have paid for 

$110,000 worth of eye examinations in this province.  The fact 

of the matter is, is we paid this year $760 in interest on your 

deficit.  The annual deficit in this province is only 517 million 

this year.  There would have been a $243 million surplus, but 

for your interest on your debt.  We would not have had to 

engage in any budgetary reductions at all, but for the interest 

on your debt, but for the interest on your debt. 

 

And at election time, we campaigned on getting a handle on the 

deficit.  That was our major thrust in the campaign -- to balance 

the books and try and get a handle on the deficit.  And that's 

what people wanted to see done. 

 

Now with respect to health care, we believe in maintaining 

quality health care services for Saskatchewan people, and we're 

going to do that.  In fact in this budget there were a number of 

initiatives that improved health care services for people, such 

as almost a 20 per cent increase for home-based services in 

Saskatchewan to provide safety nets for people who will be 

taken out of hospitals sooner, for example. 

 

Because right across this country, people know that by moving 

people through the hospital system more quickly, there is a 

saving.  So there will be a repriorization of expenditures in 

health care.  That is taking place.  And we will attempt to put 

our money in places where we get higher-quality health care at 

a cheaper cost for the taxpayers.  That is what we are 

attempting to do. 

 

There were a number of initiatives in this budget that tried to 

reduce some of the inequities that were out there.  So health 

care is extremely important to our government.  We are 

attempting to do what we can to save medicare by eliminating 

the annual deficit that is created as a result of your $15 billion 

deficit that you've left as a legacy to the people of this 

province. 

 

The seniors of this province built it up with sweat and toil.  

They built a future for their grandchildren which you destroyed 

in nine and a half years.  And now everybody in this province 

has to pay a share of your debt to try and preserve medicare for 

future generations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Madam Minister, that was fairly 

pompous, I do declare . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Madam 

Minister, I didn't say anything when you were up. 

 

One of the things that I would like to ask you about, is you said 

you're going to do all of these things in spite of the debt.  Well 

fine.  But I know that in spite of the debt, I got five new 

schools in my constituency.  I got a new health care facility that 

you want to shut down.  That, Madam Minister, is a fact.  

Another one that you want to close down, where people have 

been begging, Madam Minister, seriously begging, to have a 

level 4 care facility, you turn around and you unload respite 

care on that 

facility.  Madam Minister, I have another facility that you want 

to shut down that's a level 2 care facility. 

 

And that, Madam Minister, is exactly what we're talking about.  

I want to tell you what wellness means to the optometrists, to 

the people who need eye care.  I want to tell you what wellness 

means to the chiropractic care and the dental care.  And, 

Madam Minister, those are all three identified in this Bill. 

 

And I want to raise with you the fact that if you protect it at the 

beginning, the health care, that's what I perceive your wellness 

to be.  I perceive your wellness program to be where we look 

after it so we can get through life as well as we can, so that we 

reach an age when we need maximum care that we can have it 

at that time.  I accept that. 

 

But, Madam Minister, the services that are provided on the trip 

to that end are not being adequately met.  We have petitions by 

the thousands, Madam Minister, on chiropractic care.  It is the 

least-cost service that you could ever hope to get. 

 

(1600) 

 

And I'm talking from experience, Madam Minister, on 

chiropractic care.  My mother had to deal with that for 25 years 

because of arthritis.  And she lived by herself, containing 

herself all her life, and was never a burden to the society of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan.  That, Madam 

Minister, is a fact because wellness was a part of the process 

that she got old in. 

 

And that, Madam Minister, is not what I see in this.  You're 

contradicting absolutely, totally contradicting what you're 

talking about.  Wellness is not a part of this.  How can you say 

that wellness is reducing optometric care when you're saying 

seniors can't have it; diabetics can't have it.  It's a necessity for 

them, absolutely a necessity. 

 

Chiropractic care . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You're exaggerating. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, I'm not exaggerating at all.  

Why do you think they send in petitions, Madam Minister?  

Why do you think they send in petitions?  And, Madam 

Minister, Madam Minister, they're getting service, but they're 

having to pay for it, Madam Minister.  And that is the problem 

that these people are seeing over and over and over again. 

 

And, Madam Minister, as the member from Rosthern said, 

there are 91 per cent of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan are not getting that care; 90,000 people in the 

province get it for nothing.  And what's the matter with the 

taxpayers getting it? 

 

Madam Minister, why don't you take 150 million out of the 

Liquor Board, that is a surplus in the Liquor Board, and why 

don't you put it into this health care process right here?  And 

why don't you take the 118 million surplus, plus the 115 

million retained earnings in Sask Power and use it right here?  

Madam Minister, why don't you take SaskTel, the $50 million 

profit in SaskTel, and use it right here, or the surplus in 

SaskTel and use it right here? 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2111 

Madam Minister, what you are doing, what you are doing is 

doing what the Finance minister told you to do.  And you are 

not basing this on wellness; you're only basing it on the one 

single item that you think is going to be the one that's going to 

solve the problem.  And, Madam Minister, that is exactly the 

wrong thing to do.  You've got to have a balance between what 

people can pay and what people can receive for service.  And 

that, Madam Minister, we think you're out of balance.  And that 

is where we draw the line. 

 

People have come in over and over again and said to us, they're 

wrong -- they're wrong on a number of areas.  They don't 

provide the service as it was; number two, they didn't even 

consult about what it was that they were doing. 

 

And that, Madam Minister, we've heard over and over and over 

again from optometric people, from chiropractic people.  And 

that, Madam Minister, is where this whole thing is at. 

 

We want to know, Madam Minister -- I think it's been asked 

four or five times -- we would like to have a list of the people 

you consulted with to give you this reason to change this 

program in this way. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I've answered that question this morning.  

The answer is, is that there were consultations going on of a 

very general nature from some time back in February by the 

Department of Health.  There were consultations going on as 

we moved up to the budget.  There are continuing to be 

consultations.  I tabled in this House a document with a whole 

list of names of people that we have met with. 

 

We will continue to consult as we develop budgetary measures.  

There has been a lot of consultation by this government. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Madam Minister, that doesn't hold true.  

Because when we discovered prior to the budget, through the 

optometrists, that they were not getting any results from you, 

they came to us and told us that we weren't . . . we started 

asking questions in this Assembly.  And that was just prior to 

the budget, Madam Minister.  They hadn't been consulted with 

at all.  They heard rumours.  And so they came to us and they 

said, what's going on? 

 

And, Madam Minister, I'd like to have a list, because it 

wouldn't be long. Because you haven't had the consultation that 

you said you had.  And we would like to have a list of those 

people in optometric care and chiropractic care that you have 

consulted with. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I told the member on several occasions, 

we do not consult on budget items.  There is a budget secrecy 

policy and we don't consult on budget items.  We have 

however consulted even on the issue of optometric and 

chiropractic services several days before the budget was 

released and subsequently.  We've also consulted in a general 

manner with many, many people.  And we've provided that list 

to you, if you would take the time to read it. 

We do not consult on specific budget items because it goes 

against the policy with respect to budget secrecy.  I've said it . . 

. if I've said it once, I've said it a hundred times. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Madam Minister, the guys who smoke 

got an extra notice that they were going to have 88 cents on a 

pack of cigarettes.  And that, Madam Minister, was not 

delivered by this opposition; that was delivered by probably the 

Minister of Finance himself. 

 

So you had an opportunity for the smokers of the province of 

Saskatchewan to have them be able to go to the tobacco shop 

and pick up some extra cigarettes before they had an 

opportunity to know what optometric care was and chiropractic 

care.  That, Madam Minister, is what we're talking about. 

 

So the people who sell tobacco can bolster up their supplies . . . 

people can go and get tobacco.  But when it comes to care and 

wellness, Madam Minister, you say, well we've got the budget 

to deal with -- can't do it.  I was a minister once too, and that, 

Madam Minister, that, Madam Minister, that, Madam Minister, 

is not necessarily so.  You do not have to deal with that. 

 

You didn't want to.  You didn't want to deal with that any 

sooner.  As a matter of fact, Madam Minister, the reason the 

House Leader is so snappy about getting out of here quickly is 

you want to introduce your wellness program, and you don't 

want to do it in the House.  And you don't want to do it when 

the House is sitting because you haven't the courage to do it in 

the House.  And that, Madam Minister, is the truth. 

 

Now why can't you give me a list of the names of the people 

who you consulted with about optometric and chiropractic 

care? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We'll provide you with that information. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  How long will 

it take for us to get it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- You can have it on Monday. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I beg your pardon, ma'am. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Monday. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a couple of 

questions to the Minister of Health with respect to the overall 

budget.  Could you just summarize what the growth in your 

overall budget is from 1991 to 1992?  In the overall health care 

budget, could you give us the size of the increase in the budget 

from last year? 

 

The Chair: -- Before the minister answers, I'd like the member 

from Prince Albert Northcote to restrain himself, and other 

members as well, and pay attention to those who are asking the 

questions and those who are providing the answers.  Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- You will have to ask that question of 



2112 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

the Minister of Finance when you're into Finance Estimates. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'm just asking what 

you plan to spend in health care in this budget, and could you 

give us some indication of whether it's more or less than last 

year? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Okay, I don't have the specific figures 

here.  There's a decrease of 3.6 per cent overall. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- A decrease of 3.6 per cent, 3.6 per cent, 3.6 per 

cent on your budget.  Your budget would be about 1.5 to $1.6 

billion, and you've decreased it 3.6 per cent.  So that's a 50 to 

$60 million decrease in your budget. 

 

The reason that I ask that is that I was reviewing some of the 

observations of the NDP leader and the now Premier of the 

province of Saskatchewan prior to the election.  And on a radio 

talk show on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) on 

October 9, 1991, Mr. Romanow says: there will always be a 

growth in health care just by virtue of inflation. 

 

Now we've had modest inflation, I would acknowledge.  It's 1 

to 2 to 3 per cent.  But let's say it's 2 to 3 per cent -- it has been 

in the last year -- and yet we find in the province of 

Saskatchewan that you have decreased the budget by 3.6 per 

cent.  So essentially for the poorer people, those on the lower 

income scale in the province of Saskatchewan, they've 

experienced a 5 -- modestly a 5 -- maybe 6, maybe 7 per cent 

decrease in health care services or an increase in health care 

costs.  Would you say that's an accurate reflection of the health 

care situation in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- An accurate reflection of the health care 

situation in the province is this, is that the former government 

had tried not once but twice unsuccessfully to amalgamate 

hospitals in Saskatoon and spent millions and millions of 

dollars in changing their plans with respect to renovation, and 

your former Health minister was not able to achieve that.  

Within three or four months of being in office this government 

achieved amalgamations of hospitals in Regina and Saskatoon 

that have produced substantial savings to the taxpayers and that 

are producing more efficient services for the taxpayers of this 

province. 

 

The fact of the matter is the reality in health care is this: that 

this government is taking measures to introduce efficiencies 

that will contain health care costs.  And it will be a transitional 

period where we will move towards more community-based 

services.  We will contain costs, and in the end we will be 

providing a higher quality of health care costs. 

 

As a result of a number of those measures that have been taken, 

we have been able to contain health care costs in this province 

to date. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Madam Minister, you have just 

acknowledged that you have cut the budget in health care by 

3.6 per cent.  And if we add to that 2 to 3 per cent rate of 

inflation for 1991-92, or '92-93, we see people who are on 

fixed income, like low income families, single parents.  Seniors 

are looking at a 6 per cent cut in health care services or, turn it 

around, a 6 per cent increase in costs. 

 

Now my colleagues in here have been itemizing those costs.  

And you said it's efficiency.  And the problem we're running 

into is that you are asking people to pay, say the working poor, 

to pay very large increases for their services.  Not only have 

you cut the total budget by 50 or $60 million and you add 

inflation on to that which is another 50 or $60 million, the 

equivalent of $100 million cut in services, but for low income 

people and individuals who have children, on top of that we 

look at the deductible. 

 

Could you tell us what the family deductible is in the 

prescription drug . . . what kind of increases that you have in 

dollars and percentages.  If you are a man, a wife, and you have 

three children, what your deductible used to be and what it is 

under your new budget. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The fact of the matter is, is there have 

been a number of services introduced in this province to help 

the working poor.  We see increases in northern Saskatchewan 

-- I forget what the figure is; I think it's 9.6 per cent -- which 

we never saw under your government.  Why?  Because there 

are health inequities in the North, and this government has 

made a commitment to try and reduce those inequities.  This 

government has made a commitment to that. 

 

There have been increases under the social services department 

to help the working poor, for example.  There have been a 

number . . . The safety net has been broadened and has been 

brought to the attention of the public through correspondence 

with respect to the drug plan, which never occurred under your 

government. 

 

There has been an attempt by this government to deal with the 

problems of the working poor.  People under FIP are covered 

fully for chiropractic and optometric services.  With respect to 

the drug plan, we have an extensive safety net that I've spoken 

about at some length in this legislature and to the public. 

 

And today the deductible is $380 per family under the drug 

plan, $100 for single seniors, and $150 for senior families.  

And the deductible is to be calculated on a semi-annual basis at 

January 1 and July 1. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Madam Minister, just so we confirm, you're 

saying that the deductible for a family is $380 per year for 

prescription drugs?  Is that accurate? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Yes, but it's done on a semi-annual basis 

-- 190 every six months. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- And, Madam Minister, is it true that it used to 

be $125 for the same family? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- That is correct. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Madam Minister, could you get one 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2113 

of your officials to calculate the increase in the cost in going 

from 125 deductible for a family to $380 per family, so we 

have some indication of how that relates to the rate of inflation 

in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well I can get that calculation for you.  

But I'm also going to ask the Chair why we are giving estimate 

questions on the drug plan when we're dealing with Bill 71 that 

has nothing to do with the drug plan. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- What we're trying to find out . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I've listened to both the Leader of the 

Opposition and the Minister of Health, on the one case asking 

questions about prescription drug plan, and the other case 

answering questions about the prescription drug plan.  And 

although it's interesting and an interesting exchange, I'm having 

difficulty in relating it to the Bill that's before us. 

 

Although I don't have difficulty in members bringing attention 

to items outside the Bill, strictly speaking, they should begin to 

relate what it is that they're saying to the Bill that's before us 

and that pertains to both those who ask the questions and those 

who answer the questions. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The point is that we 

are dealing with a situation where this part of health care has 

obviously been subject to tax increases or severe cuts.  And 

people are being charged very large amounts of money and 

particularly the working poor or low income or single parents 

or seniors.  And they're being charged for eye examinations. 

 

And what we're finding out is that this is just the tip of the 

iceberg.  And I'm going to relate it to the kinds of increases in 

health care costs and the decrease in services in the entire 

health area because what we're going to find out is that there 

are serious and significant increases in the burden of living in 

the province of Saskatchewan under this health care minister 

and the NDP administration. 

 

And I point that out to the hon. member because in this Bill the 

Minister of Health has passed an awful lot of the burden of this 

cost of living onto those that can't pay or those that find it 

extremely difficult to pay. 

 

Now my calculations on some of these increases are in the 

neighbourhood of 2 or 300 per cent or maybe a thousand per 

cent increases.  Some things were never even charged before 

are now being charged, whether it's $50 and it used to be 

nothing, or it used to be $125 deductible.  It's up to 180 -- a 300 

per cent increase. 

 

So I'm asking the minister then if she would give me, in 

relation to this Bill, the specific service fee costs, the fees that 

she charges and the percentage increases in each of the 

categories so that we can go through them one at a time and 

find out how that relates to the cost of living, inflation, and to 

other parts of her health budget.  Because the Minister of 

Finance and obviously the Minister of Health is going to have 

to put all this together in their so-called wellness program, 

which is cutting pretty deeply into people's lives. 

 

So people are starting to add it up.  As we're on television 

now, they have their papers out and say, well I didn't know I 

had to pay for this or this or this, or the increase was 200 per 

cent or 300 per cent. 

 

We want all those numbers, and this Bill is a perfect place to 

get them, in the categories that we're discussing here now.  So 

if she could give us the fee increases and the percentage 

increases in each one of those associated with this Bill, we'll go 

on with the others when we get to Health Estimates. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The burden that people are facing, Mr. 

Chair, is a burden of nine and a half years of Tory government.  

That's the burden that people are facing in this province.  And 

that's what they're having to deal with. 

 

With respect to this particular Bill, chiropractic services, there 

will be a co-payment by the consumer -- $7.50 per visit will be 

paid by the government.  The fact of the matter is, is 

chiropractic services were not even insured before 1973. 

 

With respect to optometric services, under 18 will be covered.  

People on Family Income Plan supplement, supplementary 

health benefits, senior income supplements, will be covered 

fully.  Other people are de-insured with respect to optometric 

services. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I just asked the minister, and 

through you, Mr. Chairman, if we can talk about . . . and she's 

raised it several times here, she has to do these things.  The 

minister is saying, she has to charge and de-insure all these 

people because she says there's a deficit.  Now she's talked 

about this on several occasions, because when we've asked 

about why are you doing this, she says, well there's a deficit. 

 

And when I ask the minister, that obviously you have choices 

on how you deal with the deficit, I'm asking you, why are you 

picking on the sick?  I'm asking the minister, if you have to 

address the deficit, you can increase taxes and you can do some 

other things.  And Lord knows, you've done enough of that.  

Why are you picking on the sick to address the deficit? 

 

And she's raised this point, Mr. Chairman, I'll bet you at least a 

dozen times since this morning or last night.  She has to do this 

because there was a deficit.  Well if there's a deficit, she has 

choices.  And my argument and the people's argument is, why 

would you pick on the sick?  Why would you charge the sick 

more?  It's not their fault if they've got headaches or eye 

problems or dental problems, and you've de-insured them and 

you're charging them.  Why would you do that to address a 

deficit?  Why wouldn't you look at some other ways to get at it, 

rather than tax the sick? 

 

Because I was under the impression that when you campaigned 

for the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) or the 

NDP, you wouldn't tax the sick.  There would never be user 

fees.  And these are user fees.  And the minister says, well I 

have to charge user fees on the sick if they've got poor teeth or 

bad eyes, because there's a deficit problem.  I didn't think the 

NDP campaigned that way. 



2114 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

In fact I'm going to read you quotes where your leader said he 

would never have user fees even though he just finished saying 

there was a $14 billion deficit in the fall of 1991.  He says, you 

can count on us not doing user fees. 

 

Well if that's the case, how does the minister square this circle 

where she is charging the sick user fees and significant 

increases, as we all know, significant increases because she's 

de-insured those that were sick to compensate for the fact that 

she's got a deficit.  How does she justify taxing the sick and 

applying user fees because she's got a deficit? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite engages in gross 

exaggeration -- de-insuring the sick.  That's ridiculous.  People 

can go and see their doctors and they're covered, and there's no 

co-payment.  They can go into the hospital; they don't pay 

anything to go into the hospital. 

 

User fees in the health care system have been there for years 

and years and years.  The drug plan was a form of user fee 

under your jurisdiction.  And the member opposite knows that, 

but he's involved in a gross exaggeration here.  There's no 

question about it -- de-insuring the sick -- that's a gross 

exaggeration. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is when you move to require a 

co-payment with respect to chiropractors, when you de-insure 

optometric services for those people who can afford it who are 

over 18, you are not de-insuring the sick.  What you are doing 

is there's certain routine exams that are not covered.  With 

respect to chiropractic services, you're asking for a co-payment.  

It's not nearly in the category that you're talking about. 

 

We still maintain in this province a high quality health care 

system, very high quality health care system where access to 

doctors and hospitals are available to people and are covered 

under our health care plan. 

 

Now with respect to the deficit situation, the member opposite 

knows that in order to get a handle on a $15 billion debt . . . 

mind you he probably doesn't know; he probably doesn't 

understand the magnitude of the damage that he's done to this 

province.  He probably doesn't understand that this province is 

on the verge of bankruptcy because of his misjudgement in the 

last nine and a half years.  Because he just continued to do it. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is we have to get a handle on that and 

there's only one way to do it.  And that means that everything 

in government has to be examined, including health and 

education and other programs, social programs.  Everything 

has to be examined.  And the only way we can get a handle on 

the Tory government deficit is through program reductions, 

increased taxes, and some control on the spending, the 

absolutely crazy spending that the government opposite 

engaged in in such an irresponsible fashion over nine and a half 

years. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to quote the NDP leader 

in early October of '91.  And he was on a radio station, CBC, 

and he says, on the question of user fees, the answer is no user 

fees.  Period.  User fee for medicare has been tried.  Thatcher 

and the Liberals tried it; didn't 

change utilization rate at all -- utilization rate.  Now the 

Minister of Health is chirping from her seat because she doesn't 

like to hear the fact that she's charging people and raising their 

fees several hundred per cent. 

 

And if you have a headache, if you have got dental problems, 

and if you've got health problems related to your eyes, she is 

now going to charge you if you're sick because she's going to 

de-insure you.  And it's a user fee, any way you want to look at 

it.  And she's using that for low income people, single parents, 

seniors, because she has a deficit. 

 

And in the same interview, the Leader of the NDP 

acknowledges there's a $14.2 billion deficit in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  This is prior to the election.  And he says, well 

I'll tell you what we're going to do.  We're going to cut taxes 

and we'll balance the budget and we'll increase health care 

money, and at the same time there'll never be increases in fees.  

And he's on the radio saying this 10 days prior to the election.  

He's talking about the fact that they have to deal with the 

deficit, but he is going to cut taxes by 2 or 3 or $400 million, 

and he is not going to increase user fees. 

 

And here's what we have, Mr. Chairman.  We've been in here 

asking the minister, why are you de-insuring people that are 

sick.  Why are you taxing the sick to address the deficit when 

the deficit is the same size as it was in October, acknowledged 

by the Leader of the NDP -- 14-something billion dollars. 

 

And now we find out the truth is the NDP plan to tax the sick 

and have user fees to address the deficit, because the only way 

they can find the money is they said, well let's see, what'll we 

do to get elected?  We'll promise to cut taxes and increase 

health care.  And the people will believe us because we're NDP 

and we always stick up for those that are sick. 

 

And guess what an education they're getting today, Mr. 

Chairman.  Guess what an education they're getting today.  

They have increased taxes on the low income people.  They 

have now increased user fees for people who are sick.  They 

are taxing those that are sick to pay for their campaign 

promises that were hollow, hollow, hollow. 

 

And they've left the minister here out to dry, like the 

Agriculture minister, to say, well, Madam Minister, you'll have 

to take it on the chin because we got elected making these 

promises, but we can't afford them.  Therefore we're going to 

have to tax the sick, close hospitals, close level 1 and 2 nursing 

homes.  We're going to have to break contracts.  We're going to 

have to be as miserable and mean as we can to save some 

money. 

 

And do you know what, Madam Minister?  After all your 

rhetoric about the deficit, you still have a $500 million deficit.  

You had an $800 million deficit last year.  You're over 1.3 

billion in the hole.  Your credit rating is falling through the 

floor.  And you're taxing the sick at the same time, thinking the 

50 bucks out of some poor senior or $50 out of a poor family is 

going to balance your budget and is going to fix the deficit 

you've got here.  What a pathetic excuse for economic 

planning, let alone 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2115 

wellness. 

 

Is this a wellness model?  This is a joke.  This is a sham.  You 

did whatever you had to to get elected.  You promised 

whatever you had to do.  You said you were going to have the 

cost of production for farmers.  You were going to balance the 

budget; 4.5 billion in a budget was enough.  You've increased it 

to 5.1.  You've increased taxes over and over and over again.  

And now you're taxing people and charging them if they've got 

bad eyes, if they've got bad teeth, if they've got headaches.  

Even if they need prescription drugs it's up 300 per cent. 

 

(1630) 

 

And, Madam Minister, I can remember when we had a 

deductible of up to 125, you said the working poor, Madam 

Minister, would have to sacrifice food and have to sacrifice 

Christmas presents to pay the deductible.  Well what in the 

world do you think they're going to have to sacrifice if it's gone 

from 125 to $380?  What hypocrisy, Madam Minister -- what 

hypocrisy. 

 

How can they let you hang out to dry like this when you have 

to eat all of those campaign words and fly in the face of 

Tommy Douglas, fly in the face of all those brilliant arguments 

there was for medicare.  You don't seem to care.  You are 

taxing the people who voted for you because they believed in 

you.  And you are charging them when you said you wouldn't.  

And they said, at least an NDP member of the legislature as 

Minister of Health wouldn't do this. 

 

So, Madam Minister, you have choices, and the problem that 

you've run into is you've chosen the wrong things to address 

your deficit.  You've decided to go back to the people who can't 

afford it and to hit them the hardest.  Because $50 on a low 

income family is a lot more than $50 on a lawyer or a business 

person or somebody else.  But you've gone to the working poor 

to address your deficit. 

 

And every time we address these problems in this Bill, you say, 

but I have a deficit.  I'm saying, Madam Minister, if that's your 

excuse, it's not valid.  You don't have to tax the sick and the 

poor to address the deficit.  And your leader said he wouldn't 

do it, and you campaigned and said you wouldn't do it -- that 

you'd increase the money for health care, you'd make it more 

accessible, you'd open it up. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I'm asking you, given all the choices that 

you have, would you stand in here and justify why these low 

income people have to pay more and more and you've 

de-insured all these services in the face of all the alternatives 

you could have to provide money for your deficit?  Can you 

justify to these people that have to pay why their $50 or their 

$25 is absolutely necessary? 

 

Your leader has said it never deters the use.  Utilization doesn't 

go down.  So if utilization doesn't go down and they have to 

pay, you're getting more money from them.  You're getting 

more and more and more money because he says utilization 

doesn't go down, you're charging them more. Therefore, 

Madam Minister, you are using your power now, once in 

power, to help address your deficit 

problem on the backs of the poor. 

 

Would you just again justify to the poor, the low income, the 

seniors, the single parents, why you think this is a good idea. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I've told this Assembly on numerous 

occasions, all morning and this afternoon, that low income 

people are provided with a safety net program.  If they have 

difficulty paying for their drugs, or if they need chiropractic or 

optometric services, there's a safety net there.  I've explained it 

in detail on a couple of occasions at least this morning.  If you 

had . . . Well never mind. 

 

The other fact of the matter is, is that high income people have 

also received fairly substantial tax increases in this budget.  At 

the same time, we are attempting in the budget to protect low 

income people. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Madam Minister, see, we're right into it, 

and I'm sure that you can appreciate this.  You keep going back 

that you're protecting low income people and that you've taxed 

higher income people.  You have choices.  And what my point 

will be, on this Bill you don't need to de-insure people and to 

tax them when in fact you have alternatives. 

 

Let me give you a couple or three examples.  You have taken 

low income people and you have charged them up to 30 per 

cent increases in utilities.  What in the world choice do they 

have?  They have to pay their power bill; they have to pay their 

telephone bill; they have to pay their insurance bill.  They have 

no choice.  It's like when you're sick, you have to pay. 

 

Now that's not a CCF way; that's not an NDP way; that's not a 

socialist way.  That isn't a caring way regardless of your 

politics.  People who are poor and up against it know that if 

you don't pay your power bill, it's cut off.  If you don't pay your 

telephone bill, they take it out.  And if you don't pay your bill 

now, if you've got bad eyes, you can't get them checked. 

 

Now you have choices, you've had choices and you have hit the 

low income people. 

 

Right now you said, well you're going to protect the poor.  If 

you go to Canadian Tire, you'll find that the taxes are up 15 per 

cent on every item in there.  And you've raised it 15 per cent.  

Low income person goes in to buy something from Canadian 

Tire, you've raised the sales tax 15 per cent.  What protection 

for low income? 

 

You have raised sales taxes, you have raised utilities, you have 

raised fees, and you have raised the taxes on low income 

people, so that in fact they are worse off in the province of 

Saskatchewan compared to any other jurisdiction that we find 

or certainly the comparisons in Saskatchewan year after year 

after year -- a 15 per cent increase in taxes on every goods.  

You go to a furniture store, go to a furniture store and you will 

find that you will pay 15 per cent more under an NDP 

administration because it's 15 per cent more on tables, 15 per 

cent more on chairs.  And low income people pay that. 

 

So, Madam Minister, you said you have choices.  You 



2116 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

have decided that you are going to pick on the poor.  And we're 

just making this point -- the poor don't like that.  The poor 

thought they were campaigning for a socialist CCF government 

that would protect them. 

 

And do you know what you did?  And again I can go back to 

your leader who was quoted in the radio station.  You decided 

you would rather not participate in harmonization because you 

figured you could tax the sick, or tax the poor, or tax the low 

incomes, and see if you could make it up.  Because by not 

doing the PST, whoops, you could get elected and you'd say, 

well folks we can just manage our way through this. We'll give 

you more money. We'll cut your taxes.  And you gave up 

several hundred million dollars that you knew were there, 5 

million a year in administration -- which is a GigaText a year 

that you just gave up.  Imagine what 5 million would do in this 

Bill alone.  Just put the two together. 

 

And people had choices.  They could cook their hamburger at 

home or they could go to the restaurant.  But not under your 

system.  They have to pay their bills.  They have to pay the 

user fees.  They have to pay the taxes at Canadian Tire.  You've 

got them because they have no choice. 

 

That's why they're upset.  That's why they're so darned 

disappointed in a Minister of Health that says she's NDP, says 

she's CCF, says she's a socialist, says she cares, and you're 

taxing them and giving them no choice.  And the hypocrisy of 

it is when you were standing on this side of the House -- and 

we would increase the budget 5 per cent, 6 per cent, 7 per cent 

-- you'd say, it's no where close to inflation.  It's not enough.  

You haven't helped the poor. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, look at what you've done and the 

choices that you have made in your caucus and your cabinet.  

Well, Madam Minister, they've left you out to dry.  You're 

hanging out to dry.  You're going to take it on the chin as 

perhaps one of the most disappointing ministers of Health in 

the history of Saskatchewan because you went back on your 

party's legacy, your party's history.  You went back on your 

word politically. 

 

And it's not just this Bill; it's all the other things that are going 

to be associated with health that we can get into in your 

Estimates.  And you keep coming back to it.  You have no 

choice because there's a deficit. 

 

Madam Minister, you have choices.  You have choices, and 

you have decided to tax low income people and to tax them 

here in this Bill.  And they haven't had that happen before.  

When you had other alternatives that you could get into, you 

decided to tax them here. 

 

And, Madam Minister, these increases are not going to be 

forgotten by people who are up against it, who go to the food 

bank, and the line-ups are increasing, who are approaching 

going on welfare and the line-ups are increasing.  The numbers 

on welfare are increasing under your administration because of 

the lack of an economic plan. 

 

And the lack of an economic plan isn't helping the deficit that 

you're so worried about.  So you're taxing the poor. 

You have no economic plan to stimulate the general economic 

activity in the province.  Your deficit is growing.  Your credit 

rating is going down.  And you're saying, well here in the 

legislature on this Bill I have to raise taxes on the poor because 

we don't know what else to do. 

 

Well, well, well.  And the opposition members say, well it all 

happened in nine months.  Well, Mr. Chairman, the NDP 

promised that they would have the same budget.  They 

promised to increase expenditures in health care and lower 

taxes.  All we're calling them on, Mr. Chairman, is this Bill 

isn't consistent with what they promised and it isn't consistent 

with balancing the budget.  It isn't consistent with looking after 

the poor and it isn't consistent with the campaign that they had 

nine or ten months ago, because they never got elected on this.  

And they know it. 

 

It's a disgrace to the history of the CCF.  The CCF clearly are 

gone, Mr. Chairman.  The CCF are gone.  And this new bunch 

of non-democrats are in here now, non-democrats who . . . 

They'll bring closure on this Bill probably, Mr. Chairman -- 

closure so the minister can't even reply.  Because if she did get 

up, then she would have to take her seat permanently then.  

And we've seen that already in one of the Bills in here.  Bring 

in the officials.  Don't answer any questions, and they just walk 

out.  The Minister of Finance was the first in the history of 

Canada to do that.  And he seems to be proud of it. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, this Bill charges people who are low 

income and it charges people who are in difficult situations.  

And we want the public to know how you justify, how you 

justify charging those who are sick on the argument that you 

have a deficit.  We want to hear from you the amount of money 

. . . I want you to tell these people the amount of money you 

think that you will generate from this Bill in one fiscal year. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks 

about food banks.  Food banks didn't exist in this province 

before he came to power.  Not one single food bank. 

 

The member opposite talks as though all this has just happened 

in nine months.  What he doesn't tell the people of 

Saskatchewan is the fact that his government went from $140 

million surplus to a $15 billion deficit.  They bankrupted the 

province.  That's what the member there did. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There is no money.  There's no money for 

many of our social programs.  And no future for the people of 

this province, unless we get a handle on that deficit and it is 

directly credited to the man who just sat down in his seat. 

 

And if we want to talk about disappointment, let's talk about 

disappointment.  The great private sector managers, the great 

business people over there, who took a prosperous province, a 

province that was in terms of a financial situation, in the best 

position of any province in this country in 1982. 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2117 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- And they took this province and they led 

it from number one down to virtually number ten.  That's what 

they did.  And that man over there is responsible for it.  And if 

we want to talk about disappointments, let's talk about the 

disappointment the public has with that party and that 

ex-premier, because he bankrupted the future of our children in 

this province. 

 

And he sits and he smiles about it and thinks it's funny.  I'm 

telling you, it's not funny, because the people of Saskatchewan 

have to pay the price for your mismanagement and your 

incompetence and the fact that you're . . . 

 

And even your ex-Conservative supporters say that they have 

never seen a government that was so incompetent.  Let's talk 

about their disappointment and the fact they abandoned you by 

the tens of thousands in the last election because of their 

disappointment.  Because you who held yourself out as a 

private sector individual that knew something about managing 

businesses, chalked up failure after failure after failure -- $15 

billion worth of failure in this province.  So let's just talk about 

that, Mr. Chair, for a bit here.  And let's just talk about some of 

those -- the GigaText.  I pointed out that GigaText could have 

paid for a 110,000 eye exams in this province. 

 

Now I'm telling you this, that if we can get a handle on this 

deficit, we can preserve these programs and improve on them 

for the future.  And that is absolutely crucial. 

 

And the member opposite is going to . . . it's time for the 

member opposite to repent.  He has not stood up once to the 

public and said, I'm sorry for bankrupting this province.  I'm 

sorry for destroying the future of your children and your 

grandchildren.  It's time for the member from Estevan to stand 

up and tell the public of Saskatchewan he's sorry, and to repent. 

 

And if he could repent, just maybe we'd have a more open 

mind and a co-operative approach to how we deal with this 

huge deficit, this enormous debt legacy that his province and 

the people of Saskatchewan have been left with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, all I asked the minister is if she 

would provide me an estimate of the amount of money, extra 

money she's going to make as a result of the implementation of 

this Bill.  She's got user fees and she's charging people.  How 

much money do you plan to make from this Bill once it's 

implemented, on an annual basis? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The Bill does not make any money.  But 

of course I don't expect the member opposite to understand that 

because he doesn't understand arithmetic.  Going from $140 

million surplus to a 15 billion, he obviously doesn't, and 

continue to spend. 

 

The Bill does not make money.  What the Bill does is it 

prevents the expenditure of money by the government, of 

money the government doesn't have.  But then I don't expect 

the member opposite to understand that.  But I'll say it again to 

make it a little more simple.  We will not be spending $13.6 

million annually on certain health care services as a result of 

this Bill; 13.6 million that is not being spent -- not being spent.  

It's not money that we're making, it's money we're not 

spending. 

 

And we're not spending it because this year we have a $760 

million interest to pay on your debt -- 760 million.  The credit 

rating goes down in the province as a result of your measures.  

The access to financing becomes extremely difficult.  There's 

one thing the people of this province understand:  you can't 

spend money you don't have. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I'm glad, Mr. Chairman, that the minister has 

acknowledged now -- it took about seven hours -- but she's 

acknowledged that people who have got problems with their 

eyes and their teeth and their back, associated with chiropractic 

care, are going to fork up $13.6 million a year out of their 

pockets so this Minister of Health can deal with the choices 

that she has in managing the economy. 

 

Well, well, well.  Madam Minister, how do you feel?  You are 

getting $13.6 million out of people who are sick and ill.  This is 

the wellness model.  This is the brand-new, NDP wellness 

model.  In one small category, Mr. Chairman, one small 

category in this Bill alone, we find the sick are going to pay 

$13.6 million for eye examinations, teeth care, dental care, and 

chiropractic care -- $13.6 million.  And that, Madam Minister, 

as you are probably aware, is a bigger hit proportionately to 

low income people. 

 

How about . . . You mentioned northern Saskatchewan, Madam 

Minister.  How about people in northern Saskatchewan who are 

working poor, and families with two or three kids, or seniors, 

or others?  They're going to have to pay for their eyes, they 

have to pay for dental care, chiropractic care -- $13.6 million, 

and you're proud of this?  You're proud of this?  And you said 

you had no choice because there was a deficit. 

 

I'm going to go back and say, Madam Minister, last fall the 

NDP leader -- now Premier -- said, we've got $14.2 billion debt 

in Saskatchewan, on a radio station.  And then -- the same 

radio station -- he says, we've got to look at fair taxation, that 

means doing away with the question of the PST. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We did and we got rid of you. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, and one of the hon. members says, we did 

and we got rid of me.  Wasn't that the whole point?  Wasn't that 

it?  Wasn't that it?  They said that they would reduce taxes just 

to win the election.  And they knew the debt was 14.2 billion.  

He said so on the radio.  And now what we see after that -- and 

we've got it here in quotes -- CBC, the NDP leader says, yes, 

the debt's 14.2 billion but we can do better, we can increase 

funding, and we'll reduce the PST, we'll reduce it, in fact we'll 

eliminate it, 



2118 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

give away 2 or $300 million. 

 

And now they're charging people who have got eye problems 

and teeth problems and back problems $13.6 million because 

they got elected on a sham.  You didn't tell the truth, and you 

knew it.  You went out and you were not up front with the 

people.  You said, there's a $14.2 billion debt but we don't need 

the PST.  And then you come in and you increase the PST on 

everything in Saskatchewan, from Canadian Tire, to Eaton's, to 

you name it.  And now you're increasing it on taxing the sick. 

 

And you've just admitted to me and to the public here that 

people who have got problems with their eyes and their teeth 

and their back and chiropractic care are going to spend another 

$13.6 million because you got elected on a sham.  And that is 

the truth.  You got elected saying that you weren't going to do 

this. 

 

And you had choices, and now you're making them suffer.  

And on top of that you are supposed to be the defenders of 

medicare and the defenders of health care and the defenders of 

the poor and the defenders of the downtrodden and the sick and 

those that are disadvantaged.  And you admit in this legislature 

as an NDP Minister of Health that you're going to squeeze 

$13.6 million out of these poor people.  Well no wonder they're 

watching television in the afternoon and in the evening -- 

unbelievable, absolutely unbelievable. 

 

Madam Minister, you've just admitted that this is going to save 

you $13.6 million because the public is going to spend that 

kind of money for the services.  Could you break that down, 

Madam Minister, so we know how much is for eyes, how much 

is for teeth, and how much is for chiropractic care? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There's nothing with respect to teeth in 

this Bill.  With respect to chiros, it's 7.7; with respect to optos, 

it's 5.9 million. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- So you break that down, 13.6 million is the 

total.  You were saying for dentists it's 5.6 . . . Would you 

break it down for eyes, dental, and chiropractic care? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I did.  I said there is nothing with respect 

to dental.  I don't know where you keep getting this dental 

thing.  It's not in this Bill.  There's nothing with respect to 

dentists.  It's coming out of chiropractic services, 7.7 million; 

optometric services, 5.9 million. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, so now we know that the chiropractors as 

an industry and as a service and a professional service are 

going to be billing their patients $7.7 million a year more for 

the services that used to be covered.  Because you are going to 

have a net saving of 13.6 million -- 7.7 chiropractic care and 

5.9 with respect to ophthalmologists.  So you're saying that any 

patients that go to a chiropractor, that total bill now will be 

$7.7 million. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The province will cover $7.30 of each 

chiropractic visit.  There will then be a co-payment after that.  

The province is presently paying 13.10 -- $13.10 for every 

chiropractic visit.  In the future the province will pay $7.30 for 

every chiropractic visit. 

Mr. Devine: -- All right.  Well maybe you're just getting $7.7 

million out of the public that have back problems and other 

chiropractic problems and 5.9 million out of people who have 

eye problems. 

 

I notice here on section 4(2) of the Bill, you've got:  services of 

an optometrist; services of a dentist; services of a chiropractor; 

and other services that are prescribed in the regulations.  Why 

have you got the dentist in there? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There are dental services, for example, 

that may result as a result of an accident or something like this 

that are insured under medicare.  Those are continued to be 

insured.  They were there before in the legislation, and that as 

we re-enact the section we have to carry it through.  So it's a 

technical thing and it's got nothing to do with any substantive 

changes. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Madam Minister, I'm just a little bit sceptical 

and so is the public.  Because they see that you've included 

optometrists, and you're getting 7.7 million out of the public.  

You've included chiropractic care in here, and you're picking 

up 5.9 million from the public.  Now all of a sudden you've got 

dentists in here. 

 

Are you saying, Madam Minister, you don't plan to de-insure 

anything with respect to dentists -- children or anything else?  

What you have in here in dentists is not consistent then with 

what you're doing with optometrists and chiropractors.  It's just, 

I mean, you should . . . maybe, Madam Minister, if you don't 

plan to do in dentistry what you've done in these other two 

areas, maybe you should take that part of it out and put it in 

some place else in the Bill.  Because to be consistent, you're 

going to de-insure something. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, the school-based children's 

dental plan, which is no longer school-based -- and the member 

is familiar with that and the reasons for that, which I'm not 

going to go into but I'd like to, but I won't in the sake of trying 

to get through this Bill -- they're looked after under another 

piece of legislation. 

 

What the dental services are that are referred to in here are the 

surgery services that may be required, and they're covered by 

medicare.  The older section, the former section, said, "dental 

services where provided by a dentist in conjunction with 

maxillo-facial surgery."  That's what it said before.  Okay, we 

have just carried that through in here.  There is no intention to 

change medical care coverage for that.  It's simply a question of 

when we replace a section we've got to carry through what was 

there before. 

 

Dental services, other than these surgery services, have never 

been covered by medicare, as you know.  You pay for your 

own dentist.  You, yourself, benefit from a dental plan in this 

Assembly.  It's not paid for under medicare.  So dental services 

aren't covered under medicare.  The services that are being 

referred to here are certain surgical services that have to be 

covered as the result of accidents or some other situation.  

We're not changing the status quo with respect to dentists.  

There's no change.  It's simply of a housekeeping nature. 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2119 

Mr. Devine: -- But, Madam Minister, couldn't you imagine 

that this would allow you to do the same thing in dental 

services as you've done in optometrists or chiropractors, just in 

regulation?  You have got in this Bill now the power to, with 

regulation as you've changed the fee for service and charged 

people for optometrists and for chiropractors, you could now 

do it with dentists because it's in the same area. 

 

And you've just got . . . item (d) says: "other services that are 

prescribed in the regulations."  So you've put it in a category 

that gives you the regulatory power to disinsure.  And 

obviously we have people who are insured.  And you can say, 

well it's maybe some place else.  But you've now got it in here, 

right with these others . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, 

Madam Minister, we didn't have these kinds of changes that 

you've just made, before.  And that's what we're worried about 

and the public is worried about. 

 

They look at this Bill and they say, I've got to spend $7.7 

million more to get my eyes checked, I've got to spend 5.9 

million if I go to a chiropractor, and in the same Bill they can 

adjust the cost of services for dentists.  Well they don't trust 

you.  I mean, how could they?  You're charging them $13.6 

million more for the first two services.  Why would they 

believe that you've stuck this in here without . . . well it's there.  

You don't say you haven't; it's in there. 

 

So can you, Madam Minister, assure the public that despite the 

fact that under these services where you've got optometrists, 

chiropractors, there's dentists, that you're not going to do the 

same thing for dental services as you've done for optometrists 

and chiropractors. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: --  First of all, the power to de-insure under 

regulations was there under the Act that you administered for 

nine and a half years.  It could be done under regulation.  This 

does not change it at all.  It is simply housekeeping.  Okay?  So 

there's no change in the substantive legislation -- absolutely no 

change.  Okay?  I want to make that perfectly clear. 

 

There is no intention by the government to de-insure 

maxillo-facial surgery which is what was covered under the 

legislation, which is what medicare covers.  There's no 

intention to do that.  This is simply a housekeeping thing that 

results in dentists being put in this category in the section that 

you read.  The power to de-insure is there by regulation today 

under the present Bill, the one that exists now. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Madam Minister, if you don't plan to do 

anything with this, why don't we just consider taking it out of 

there?  Because you have done some very significant changes 

there.  And it's like your Minister of Agriculture said, when you 

give them a little bit of power, well we'll get around it 

somehow. 

 

Well you might get around a lot of changes.  You mentioned 

facial surgery.  Are you telling us that with this Bill and with 

your intention, there are no intentions and no thought of 

de-insuring dental services for children in the province of 

Saskatchewan under any category, any income category, any 

sort of service at all, because of the 

fact that you've got this in the Bill? 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  It being 5 o'clock, this committee stands 

recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


