




















































Hansard: July 28, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1791 

 July 28, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to present 

two petitions today on behalf of the people in my constituency 

and across the province.  The one deals with the feed grain 

assistance program and it says that it's an essential tool in the 

preservation of a competitive livestock and feeding, slaughter 

and packing industry in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to present that to the Assembly today.  And there is 

a great deal of concern, Mr. Speaker. And this petition says that 

the livestock cash advance program was vital in putting the 

Saskatchewan livestock sector on an equal footing with the 

national grain sector. 

 

And that is supported by these people and they want to see that 

program put back in.  So I make the presentation of these 

petitions here today. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed pursuant to rule 11(7), and are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to restore the livestock cash advance program; 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to restore the FeedGAP program; 

 

 And of farmers and citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 

humbly praying that your Assembly may be pleased to allow 

the 1991 GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) to stand 

for this year. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to the members of the House, I'd like to 

introduce some of my family members that are seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker.  Vi and Joe Muhle from Calgary, along 

with their family, Kelsey and Jolene are down here visiting in 

Saskatchewan.  Vi and Joe are my sister-in-law and 

brother-in-law, and they're spending some of their summer 

holidays here in Saskatchewan visiting with friends and family 

as well as taking in a family wedding this weekend in Norquay. 

 

They're here in Regina today, Mr. Speaker, to tour the 

legislature and to take in question period, as well as visit Vi's 

sister, my wife, who presently is a patient in the Plains Hospital 

here in Regina.  And, Mr. Speaker, today is Vi's birthday, and 

she wants me to assure all the members in 

the House here that she's 29 and holding.  And I'm going to ask 

all the members to extend a warm welcome to them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Federal Funding for Agriculture 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, in light of the fact that 

there is evidence of drought in Saskatchewan in the northern 

part of the province particularly, and in light of the fact that 

there's a late crop in a good part of the eastern part of the 

province which could suffer damage from frost, which is 

clearly an equally dangerous threat, and given the fact that the 

federal government has offered a post-harvest opportunity for 

farmers to collect more money, would the Premier now 

reconsider accepting the federal offer that allows farmers after 

harvest to make an application for more money? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  First of all I 

want to say to the first half of the question, the preamble of the 

Leader of the Opposition, that it is correct to say there are some 

areas of the province of Saskatchewan where the crop is under 

some stress.  But I would say that there are many, many areas 

of the province of Saskatchewan where the crop is looking 

quite good, certainly moderate and maybe even moderate-plus. 

 

I happened to be in the Tisdale-Nipawin area after a very 

extensive rain there this last week.  In some areas the crop is a 

little bit too late to benefit from that rain, but in other areas it 

will benefit.  So I think that time is required for us to get a 

better assessment of this, and I'm a little more hopeful than 

perhaps the Leader of the Opposition might be. 

 

None the less, having said that, on the second aspect of his 

question we take the position that the letter from Mr. McKnight 

to us and the producers is the basis for discussions and 

negotiations between the two governments.  We think that the 

negotiations need to be carried out as quickly as possible.  We 

are going to approach those negotiations in an optimistic point 

of view. 

 

But also I must tell the Leader of the Opposition, mindful of 

the very, very precarious financial picture that the province of 

Saskatchewan currently faces and has, we have to look after the 

interests of all the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan, 

and be mindful of the fact that the federal government over the 

last couple of years has off-loaded considerable hundreds of 

millions of dollars onto the taxpayers at a time when we can ill 

afford it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is again to the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, I just want to make sure that we 



1792 Saskatchewan Hansard July 28, 1992 

know that you understand that the offer coming from the 

federal government to the farmers is such that the farmer can 

go through harvest and then, after that, decide whether they 

need more protection. 

 

In other words, if there's a drought or if there's a frost or if 

there's severe damage to his crop, after harvest he could apply 

to get more money.  Now you know what that means in terms 

of insurance.  It's like having a fire in your house and saying, 

after and only when I have a fire will I be able to get insurance.  

So it's a very unique opportunity. 

 

Won't you ask your Minister of Agriculture and your cabinet 

colleagues to seriously consider this generous offer from the 

federal government to let the farmers respond after harvest?  

And they've never had that opportunity before. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, again I want to take the 

position and reiterate the position that we are viewing the letter 

as a letter which is an invitation to negotiate without accepting 

the conditions.  And we're going to do this.  I want to stress 

that, because what I'm going to say hereafter should not be 

viewed as mitigating against the earlier statement.  And what 

I'm going to say hereafter is that I do not share the Leader of 

the Opposition's characterization of this as a generous offer. 

 

At a time when the federal government is actually trying to 

recapture money from farmers under the stabilization program 

-- $51 million there -- at a time when the federal government 

on the GRIP changes has at least saved 40 million -- I would 

say more than that -- at a time when the federal government 

promised the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan $500 

million more on the '90-91 third line of defence, it's hardly 

generous.  In fact I would say it is not adequate enough. 

 

And we're going to go down to Ottawa to fight for more, to 

fight for more federal money for the farmers, to be truly a 

generous program for crop disaster, as my letter to the Prime 

Minister requests. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Premier, I 

just want to make sure that you understand, so that you don't 

contradict your Minister of Agriculture or indeed yourself. 

 

You know that a third line of defence is for all farmers.  It 

applies to everybody.  But in the situation in Saskatchewan, 

where you alone have changed the crop insurance program and 

the GRIP program, and where we suffer the potential 

consequences of drought and frost, and you have an offer 

where farmers after harvest can not only get third line of 

defence but can actually get more insurance money, don't you 

think it would be a good idea for your administration to pick up 

that opportunity so farmers can not only get third line of 

defence like everybody else in the country but can actually 

protect themselves against a serious situation in the province of 

Saskatchewan alone? 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I again repeat to the 

Leader of the Opposition the position of the Government of 

Saskatchewan.  We think that -- and I don't mean this in any 

political, partisan sense -- but finally at long last the federal 

government has acknowledged the nature of the crisis.  And if 

nothing else, I'm not sure it's my letter but at least certainly 

after my letter to the Prime Minister, Mr. McKnight has made 

this offer. 

 

I think that's a positive thing.  I cannot accept what the letter 

indicates in totality other than as a basis for negotiations.  As 

the member knows himself, because he was party to the 

development of the third line of defence, the committee in 1990 

talked about events which require additional income 

supplements over that provided by second-line programs and 

identified as Canadian crop drought assistance in 1988. 

 

And we're saying that this is exactly a kind of a situation which 

involves the federal government's contribution in the amount in 

recognition of what might be special circumstances.  We have 

to see how the crop actually unfolds, whether there is harvest, 

whether there is a frost this fall, whether or not the rains are too 

late or not. 

 

We have argued for a permanent crop disaster program which 

is the responsibility of the federal government.  We think that's 

where the responsibility is, both in law and economically.  Mr. 

McKnight's letter acknowledges that there is a responsibility.  

Now we want to sit down and negotiate with him to get the best 

deal for the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- My question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Premier, you're running the risk of having the federal 

government finally say, well look, if you're not going to accept 

this generous offer to farmers post-harvest, then there's no 

offer. 

 

You would end up, Mr. Premier, thumbing your nose at this 

offer.  You remind me of a national politician, Pierre Trudeau, 

who came out to Saskatchewan, thumbed his nose, and says, 

why should I sell your wheat?  And you're saying, why should I 

take the federal money?  Mr. Premier, you're running a 

situation . . . the risk of a situation here where you have an 

offer from the federal government to give you not only a third 

line of defence for all Canadians that are going to receive, but a 

special line of defence for Saskatchewan farmers.  And you're 

saying no, I don't think we're going to receive that. 

 

Don't you think that you might run the risk, Mr. Premier, of 

losing a great deal of money -- maybe $100 million -- for the 

Saskatchewan farmers if you pass this opportunity up? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the position of the 

Government of Saskatchewan is -- I repeat again for the Leader 

of the Opposition -- that the letter from Mr. McKnight to us is 

the basis of negotiations.  If the Leader of the Opposition wants 

me to say that we adhere with every condition set out in that 

letter by Mr. McKnight, I have to 



July 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1793 

tell the Leader of the Opposition we view those as suggestions 

or as bases for negotiation.  And we're going to negotiate. 

 

I don't know how the Leader of the Opposition gets the $100 

million figure.  I read the offer to be in the neighbourhood of 

39 or $40 million. 

 

But on the first part of the question that the Leader of the 

Opposition talks about, is frankly a little bit disconcerting 

because he argues that we run the risk of Ottawa withdrawing.  

And I say to the Leader of the Opposition, why would Ottawa 

do that?  Why would any federal government genuinely 

concerned with the concerns of the farmers in the province of 

Saskatchewan, or for that matter the concerns of other 

Canadians -- why would they withdraw? 

 

They didn't withdraw when it came to the cod fishermen in 

Newfoundland.  They haven't withdrawn with respect to the 

purchase of $4.4 billion of helicopters in Quebec, with respect 

to the regional and national interest there.  I don't see why they 

would draw if there's a legitimate need for the province of 

Saskatchewan and the treasury of the province of 

Saskatchewan for the farmers in this circumstance. 

 

Surely the Leader of the Opposition is not suggesting that 

there's some form of blackmail being suggested here, because 

we reject that.  We don't buy it.  We think we can negotiate, 

thanks to Mr. McKnight's initiative and opening a proper 

settlement which carries the responsibility by Ottawa, and the 

farmers and the taxpayers of this province benefit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, we get to the nub of the question.  

The Premier says, well why would the federal government 

even think about withdrawing.  Well the reason is, number one, 

your track record -- you're now going down in popular support 

all across the province, and you see that in all your polling and 

all the editorials and everything else that's coming out. 

 

And secondly, you've withdrawn from every program that was 

there before the Government of Saskatchewan and the 

Government of Canada.  You've got a comparative 

disadvantage now for all kinds of Saskatchewan people -- the 

livestock people, the agricultural people, AECL (Atomic 

Energy of Canada Ltd.), native people.  You look at economic 

development, you look at taxation, and you're putting 

Saskatchewan people behind the eight ball, deal after deal after 

deal.  You've withdrawn. 

 

Now the federal government in the light of that has come in 

and said, after harvest, even with your record, we will offer you 

a special arrangement, only in Saskatchewan, where you can 

take the crop off and then decide.  And you're saying no, I 

guess we'll turn that down as well. 

 

I'm saying to you, your track record is putting hundreds of 

millions of dollars in a vulnerable position in the province of 

Saskatchewan . . . 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the Leader of the 

Opposition have a question?  I'd like him to put it. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Premier, your record speaks for itself.  The 

federal government wonders if you will eventually co-operate 

to help farmers and tens of thousands of families who need 

your help.  Don't you realize that you run the risk of losing this 

kind of special offer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I say through you, sir, to 

the Leader of the Opposition, that we will be talking to the 

federal government.  I think, with the greatest of respect to the 

Leader of the Opposition, when he couches his question in the 

context of: the federal government wants to know; with the 

greatest of respect, maybe the Leader of the Opposition wants 

to know. 

 

Our relationships with the federal government, while not 

perfect -- to put it mildly -- none the less have been quite 

productive in a number of areas, quite productive in a number 

of areas. 

 

The fundamental assumption behind the Leader of the 

Opposition's question, I don't accept.  The fundamental 

assumption behind the Leader of the Opposition's question is 

that the proposal in Mr. McKnight's letter, the deal that he 

offers to the farmers, is the deal that the farmers of 

Saskatchewan want.  And I don't accept that.  I think the 

farmers of the province of Saskatchewan want a better deal, 

and they want their provincial government to negotiate it.  And 

they want you, sir, to join us in that cause, and I'm asking you 

to do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Consultations on Wildlife Habitat Legislation 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, the former administration was 

in the process of setting up a process that would have brought 

in critical wildlife habitat which was recognized as important 

for the preservation of Saskatchewan's precious environment.  

Nothing was to be done until the public had ample opportunity 

to voice their concerns, to provide suggestions, and to have 

active part in designing the program. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, we see how things change when a 

government that thinks it can do anything to anybody gets a 

hold of such an initiative.  My question is to the minister 

responsible for the critical wildlife habitat legislation.  Mr. 

Minister, no meaningful consultation has taken place on this 

legislation, which affects the lives of hundreds of 

Saskatchewan residents and thousands of acres of pasture land. 

 

Mr. Minister, is your government intending to force your will 

on these people without their input, as you have been doing 

with every other piece of legislation in this session? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, if there's been 

consultation messed up on this particular program, I think the 

blame rests with the former administration.  This program was 

brought in in 1984, which is a fair number of years ago.  And if 

the negotiations have been not properly 



1794 Saskatchewan Hansard July 28, 1992 

conducted, it was certainly not the fault of this administration.  

We have been talking to farmers and to ranchers.  And we sent 

a letter to every, every, every producer out . . . every lessee 

whose land was picked. 

 

We are not picking any new land, Mr. Speaker.  This land was 

all picked by the previous administration.  We are only 

carrying out the program as it was presented by the former 

administration.  And I commend the former administration on a 

very good program, and I hope they will continue to co-operate 

with us in implementing it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, this is 

your legislation, nobody else's.  And the reality of life is that 

you have misled ranchers when you say that there is no 

difference in this legislation than the previous plan.  The fact of 

the matter is that you have extended this program by 1.5 

millions of acres more than was previously planned. 

 

Mr. Minister, ranchers fear your legislation will keep livestock 

producers from feeding their cattle on the land that they now 

lease.  Similar laws in the U.S. (United States) use the critical 

wildlife angle to prohibit cattle from their traditional grazing 

areas.  Where do you suppose Saskatchewan livestock 

producers will take their cattle to feed them if they are no 

longer allowed to continue to use this land?  I suspect it'll be 

into Alberta, Mr. Minister. 

 

Would you consider changing the name in this Bill to alleviate 

some of the fears that these people have and some of their 

concerns? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I see in 

the gallery, Colin Maxwell, who was the minister at the time.  

And maybe some of the questions from the opposition may be 

directed to him.  I think he could help fill them in on it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, in 1984 the land that 

was chosen for critical wildlife habitat was picked out as land 

that was necessary, was picked out by biologists, and it was 

approved in 1984.  The process of consulting and putting the 

land under the Act began.  About 2.5 million acres was put 

under the Act.  We have had, since I've been in government, 

very few or no complaints from people who have had the land 

under the Act since '84.  We assure them that they continue to 

use it for livestock, for grazing, for haying.  We have not 

interfered with their use.  And the people whose land has not 

been under the Act have been treated in exactly the same way 

and have not had a problem with it since 1984, will continue to 

be treated in the same way in the future. 

 

And I assure you that there will be no adverse implications to 

the ranchers and livestock producers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, I would remind the minister that 

in light of their past performance that's been shown in the last 

eight or so months, it might very well do them well to go up 

into the galleries and find anybody they can to help them 

because the way they bungle things, they need all the help they 

can get. 

 

Mr. Minister, your legislation will also prohibit land that has 

been in the possession of one family for years from being 

transferred to the next generation, effectively removing the 

land from production.  Surely, Mr. Minister, you have heard 

these and other concerns over your legislation. 

 

Many ranchers in the Maple Creek area are threatening to close 

their leased land down to hunting in protest.  This would be a 

great blow to the provincial economy and to the government's 

revenue.  In fact most of the ranchers have already ordered no 

hunting signs, affecting thousands of acres. 

 

The tourist and service industry will be destroyed this fall in 

our area.  Mr. Minister, will you at least listen to the concerns 

of the people that your government so often ignores?  Will you 

listen and react to the problems you are causing the people that 

this legislation most affects? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, this legislation will in 

no way affect the ranchers' ability to transfer their land to the 

next generation or to other people who buy their land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation is not harmful to ranchers.  It will 

not be a problem.  And we have consulted with them.  It makes 

it very difficult to consult with people and give them 

reasonable information when members of the opposition are 

running around spreading falsehoods and scaremongering.  

And if it was not for that, I think our job would be much easier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

regret that I wasn't able to hear your last part of your comments 

because of all the noise of your colleagues, but I will read it in 

Hansard tomorrow and try to figure out what you're talking 

about. 

 

I want to comment just quickly though, that legal advice has 

advised the ranchers that in fact they do have much to be 

worried about, that the next generation will not necessarily get 

the land that they have, and that there are many harmful effects 

for producers. 

 

Mr. Minister, the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I also have a lot of difficulty 

hearing the member, but I would appreciate it if the member 

asks his next question. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the 

former administration conducted extensive public consultation 

when it came to developing a land-use strategy for The Great 

Sandhills in the province's 



July 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1795 

south-west.  In fact two rounds of public hearings were held 

where at least 2,000 people were heard and 175 written 

submissions were presented.  The result was a plan that was 

widely supported by all of those involved.  That is consultation, 

Mr. Minister -- something your government has yet to grasp. 

 

Will you endeavour to conduct similar consultations with the 

public on critical wildlife habitat, or are you bent on forcing 

your will regardless of who you hurt or what you destroy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I again submit, if they 

were so good at consultation that in eight years they would 

have had it done. 

 

We will continue to consult and we have consulted and will.  

And again I ask the members opposite to . . . not to fearmonger 

and spread rumours and innuendo about things that are not true, 

and it will help us in our process of consultation.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Regional College Board Appointments 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In what was 

perhaps the greatest tongue-in-cheek answer of the decade 

from the Minister of Labour here a few weeks ago in this 

House, he said that there was no political patronage in the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) administration.  No political 

patronage is what the minister said, despite the fact that the 

opposite is true:  Jack Messer, Carole Bryant, Don Cody, and 

on and on. 

 

The minister also pledged that there would be no political 

patronage hirings or firings in the future.  He gave his word, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

With that in mind, my question is to the Minister of Education.  

Madam Minister, will you tell us whether or not you fired, 

discharged, the entire board of the North West Regional 

College in North Battleford, including the chairman, for no 

apparent reason other than the fact that he was appointed by the 

former administration? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to 

answer this question.  I'm glad that the hon. member opposite 

raised it.  When our administration took office, one of the areas 

that had been sadly neglected was the membership on regional 

college boards, of which we are responsible to appoint nine 

boards throughout the province of up to eight members each. 

 

There were a large number of vacancies, a large number of 

expired appointments where there had been failure to 

reappoint.  And in the situation of the North West we are also 

having a review of the regional colleges that we're 

contemplating as part of our review of post-secondary and we 

wanted to make sure that all the regional college boards were 

fully in place in order to assist in the review. 

 

We have appointed, and reappointed in a number of cases, 

sitting members that were appointed by the 

previous administration.  And in the case of the North West 

college board, there were seven new members appointed.  

Three terms had expired long ago.  There was only one eligible 

for reappointment.  Three terms had expired.  There had been 

three resignations.  In other words, there were six vacancies out 

of a board of seven. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you state that there 

were eight people on the boards.  Three of the terms had 

expired; three people resigned.  That should leave two.  What 

happened to those two? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I wish the government members 

would allow their colleague to answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, constitutionally there is 

provision for up to eight members on each regional college 

board, and in this case, there were only seven; the other would 

be represented by a vacancy. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, then there 

should have been one person left.  What happened to that 

individual?  Was he indeed fired?  And why was he fired? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure whether this 

is a mathematics test or a question on the administration of the 

regional college board.  I think this is seven. 

 

But it's necessary, as the regional colleges represent a large 

geographical area, to take into account also regional 

representation to make sure that there's a balance of 

representation of men and women who are interested in 

education from throughout the region. 

 

And in this case, it turned out that in order to achieve a balance 

it was necessary to fill all of those vacancies which had been 

there, inherited from the previous administration, and to 

balance the membership.  We replaced the one person, the one 

valid, constitutionally valid, member who was existing on the 

board, who had served two out of three years.  There was no 

problem with his contribution.  We appreciate it.  We 

communicated that to him.  But we felt that in order to have the 

regional representation, we needed to appoint a new board -- 

the seven. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you fired the only 

person on the board who had any continuity, that understood 

what was going on in the light of the fact that you cut that 

regional colleges by $128,000 in the previous budget.  You talk 

of regional representation.  Yet I would assume that person 

lived somewhere within that area and would have represented 

that area.  Now why did you fire him? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I have tried to 

make it clear that we did not fire anyone, that we appointed six 

new members to replace vacancies and members who had 

resigned, and that in order to achieve a 



1796 Saskatchewan Hansard July 28, 1992 

regional balance, that it was necessary to appoint someone 

from another area than the one member who had served two 

out of three years. 

 

Secondly, the member referred to funding.  And I think you're . 

. . I know the press article that you're responding to.  There was 

a subsequent correction in that same publication which 

clarified the funding issue.  And the regional colleges received, 

in third-party funding all over the province, a reduction of only 

1 per cent, as compared to 2 per cent in the K to 12.  The 

regional colleges received, we think, very fair treatment.  And 

the North West Regional College received treatment on a par 

with the others in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Before the ministerial statements, could I ask 

for leave to introduce a guest? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 

and through you and to the members of the House, a person 

from my constituency from Pelican Narrows, Albert Ratt over 

there in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce him in 

our language from that area. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, please welcome Mr. Ratt 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, one Colin 

Maxwell who is the president or CEO (chief executive officer) 

of Canadian Wildlife Federation.  And I hope that he continues.  

He's doing a good job and we're glad to see him in town.  I 

hope the Assembly will welcome him here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 80 -- An Act to amend The Interprovincial 

Subpoena Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Interprovincial Subpoena Act be now introduced 

and read the first time. 
 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 

ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Non-controversial Bills. 

 

Bill No. 81 -- An Act respecting the repeal of The Criminal 

Injuries Compensation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 

respecting the repeal of The Criminal Injuries Compensation 

Act be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 82 -- An Act to amend The Victims of Crime Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Victims of Crime Act be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 39 -- Agriculture Organizations' Input on 

GRIP Bill 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At the conclusion 

of my remarks, I'm going to move a motion that deals with 

providing an opportunity by this government to provide to rural 

Saskatchewan some of the same benefits that have accrued to 

the individuals who are what we would call, so-called friends 

of the government. 

 

And what we're trying to encourage members opposite to do is 

to deal with the people in agriculture in the same manner that 

they would deal with those people where they have provided 

information.  And I outline two of . . . one of them in my 

resolution here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The one that deals with providing to the unions in the province 

of Saskatchewan a preview or an overview of what their 

legislation will entail.  I understand also that the construction 

association received copies of the Bill that deals with the 

changes in the labour Bill.  And I want to point out to this 

Assembly that I believe the Minister of Agriculture should 

provide that same opportunity in dealing with the problems that 

have occurred as it relates to the GRIP legislation. 

 

The unions have received an opportunity to have input into the 

Bill.  They have received an opportunity to study it.  I want to 

point out that the Minister of Agriculture has seriously 

neglected his responsibility to agriculture, to farm leaders 

across the province.  I want to point out in a few minutes here, 

Mr. Speaker, the seriousness of it. 

 

Through the past winter the province and the government 

decided that they were going to implement the GRIP program, 

and implemented serious adjustments and alternatives that 

altered the farm safety net program.  And in that process a 

number of farm organizations were involved in that discussion.  

And what they did, Mr. 



July 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1797 

Speaker, is they made a presentation to the Minister of 

Agriculture.  And that presentation, Mr. Minister, was on the 

part of a number of those farm leaders, a submission that dealt 

with not what I would call whole-hearted support.  And that 

came from the farmers union, number one, and SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), number 

two.  Those two organizations did not in fact support the 

Minister of Agriculture in dealing with the functions of the 

changes to GRIP. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that SARM wrote the 

Minister of Agriculture a letter, and I have a copy of that in my 

hand.  And that, Mr. Minister, says that there are at least five 

areas that they qualified their decision to lend their support in a 

signature to that brief that they presented to them. 

 

And subsequent to that, Mr. Minister, they have gone across 

the province and dealt with the implications of the new GRIP 

legislation.  And they have visited farms, and farm groups have 

told them that we need to have an opportunity to view the 

GRIP Bill. 

 

And what we're proposing here, Mr. Speaker, is to present a 

resolution that would inform this Assembly and inform the 

farmers across the province that they should do that.  There 

were limitations that SARM sent to the Minister of Agriculture 

on February 10.  They said that they wanted to be involved in 

deferring some of those opportunities. 

 

Now I just want to read for the record some of the things that 

they presented.  On April 27, after the farm rally at the 

Agridome where the director from the south-east part of the 

province came to the meeting and said, we do not agree with 

the Minister of Agriculture, and told him that pointedly and 

specifically, this is the response that SARM said that they 

wanted registered. 

 

After the committee report had been drafted, the SARM voiced 

five major concerns with recommendations of the report and by 

written letter as well as a meeting with the minister on 

February 13, 1992.  At that point, the five concerns the SARM 

had were added to the GRIP review committee report.  Mr. 

Speaker, those concerns are these:  time limitations, bankability 

of the program, federal and provincial agreement, lack of a 

broad-based producer input, and significant changes violates 

contract. 

 

The report was then signed by SARM as a participant, not as a 

supporter, as a participant in the discussion.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is clearly in my view a significant difference from 

what the Minister of Agriculture has presented. 
 

What we are asking now, Mr. Speaker, is to have an 

opportunity for the legislation to be sent across this province.  

And I'm going to make some recommendations that I believe 

are important.  You need to have, Mr. Minister, the farm 

leaders take a look at your Bill.  You had a review process in 

labour.  Labour took and said, this is what we want to have.  

You gave them back the Bill that dealt with those issues.  Now 

what we're asking, Mr. Speaker, is where would this minister 

have a precedent to hold the Bill back and say, I want to go 

consult?  It would be politically expedient; it would be the right 

thing to do.  But no, he's hidebound to stay right inside this 

Assembly and not deal with any of those opportunities at all. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have had representation from across this 

province saying that we want '91 GRIP.  And I believe that the 

minister is acting irresponsible in not allowing farm leaders 

across this province to be able to review the Bill.  I believe that 

he needs to do that.  SARM meetings across the province in 

late June asked the minister to come and review.  Next year, 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government is going to do a review. 

 

And what we see happening, I believe, fundamentally, is 

coming to this point: last year because of the election there was 

no opportunity to do an extensive review.  The Minister 

unilaterally made a decision that he was going to completely 

upset all of the process that had been followed up to that point, 

which he did when he introduced the changes that he made at 

the end of March.  That completely upset the kinds of things 

that farmers were expecting. 

 

The next point that I want to raise is that he made the 

observations that this was better.  When farmers realized what 

they were signing up to, they said, oh no, this is a whole lot 

worse, this is worse than we had ever expected.  As a matter of 

fact, people have made representation to us from the Battleford 

area, from Tisdale, throughout the north-west and the 

north-east where there's serious, serious drought problems.  

And they have begun to recognize what the chairman of that 

committee said, that when you have a drought you're going to 

have serious problems in relating this kind of a Bill that's going 

to benefit anyone.  And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly what 

we're telling you. 

 

So what we're asking you to do: would you please, would you 

please take out to rural Saskatchewan your Bill and say, now 

here it is.  What do you think?  Would you have the courage to 

do that?  Take it out there and say to the farm leaders, what do 

you think?  Say to the Sask Wheat Pool, what do you think?  

Say to SARM, what do you think?  Canadian Wheat Growers, 

to the farmers' union, to all of them -- would you have the 

courage, Mr. Minister, to take that Bill out into the country and 

let them look at it and then just tell you what changes they 

really are prepared to accept?  Would you be prepared to do 

that? 

 

That's the question that we raise and we have raised in this 

session over and over again, and it's fundamental to the 

discussion because producers in the province of Saskatchewan 

really want to do it.  They want to do it but they also want to do 

it right, Mr. Minister, and you are not allowing them the 

opportunity to do it right.  They have told me over and over, 

there are some things that we didn't like in '91 GRIP but there 

are a whole lot more we didn't like in '92.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is the reason why we are presenting this motion 

before this Assembly here today. 

 

I want to indicate that I have a whole lot that could be said, but, 

Mr. Speaker, we are dealing here within a short time frame so I 

am going to read this into the record that this is the motion that 

we are going to present, seconded by the member from 

Thunder Creek: 

 

 That this Assembly demands that the government give all 

Saskatchewan groups the same preferred 



1798 Saskatchewan Hansard July 28, 1992 

treatment as unions who have been able to view legislation 

that will affect them before it is introduced in the House, and 

in particular demands the government not introduce the GRIP 

legislation before agriculture organizations have had equal 

time to examine the contents of the proposed GRIP Bill as 

unions have and are having to examine proposed labour Bills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

(1445) 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, for the introduction of 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and 

through you to the Assembly three people who were -- were -- 

in the Speaker's gallery a moment ago, from the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan.  I guess they must have left just momentarily for 

some business.  The general manager of the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan, Doug Matthies; Kathy Strutt, the manager of 

client services; and Bonnie Meier, the manager of marketing.  I 

understand they're going to be here a little bit later this 

afternoon for a few minutes so we'll maybe introduce them 

again at that time if they're here, Mr. Speaker.  Please welcome 

these folks though. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 39 (continued) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's a 

pleasure for me to stand in the House today and second the 

motion of the member from Morse.  This motion allows the 

government, I think, an ideal opportunity to actually live up to 

some of the campaign rhetoric that we were subjected to in this 

province for so long by the New Democratic Party.  This was 

the party that was going to be so open and accountable to 

Saskatchewan people.  And in fact, Mr. Speaker, as we've seen 

unfortunately in the past eight months, that that is far from the 

truth. 

 

As the debate on the limits to bell-ringing I think proved to 

everyone in this province and certainly everyone in the 

Chamber, Mr. Speaker, is that New Democrats say one thing in 

opposition and say another thing when they're in government.  I 

mean the most passionate defenders of democracy that the 

province has ever seen were sitting in the opposition benches in 

1989, and now that they're in government they quite willingly 

will use their majority to trod over the opposition in any way 

that they can. 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that's been the history of the 

entire GRIP issue.  We've had a Minister of Agriculture who 

simply had his mind made up about change to the system 

before ever talking to anyone, into a hurry-up 

offence; was warned over and over again that there was 

potential problems, there was legal problems, there was moral 

problems, there was all sorts of problems attached to this type 

of process.  But the choice was, well we'll use our very large 

majority and we'll simply steamroll the opposition and it will 

be a done deal. 

 

The result, Mr. Speaker, as you've seen, has very large 

ramifications for the province of Saskatchewan.  We have 

producers now suffering extreme drought in some areas of our 

province, producers that have very little coverage underneath 

the proposed changes.  We see disharmony between provincial 

and federal levels of government. 

 

Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, we've seen the rules of this 

Assembly changed in a way that perhaps is irrevocable in the 

future because of this whole GRIP issue, and I think, Mr. 

Speaker, speaks to poor management on behalf of the 

government on this issue. 

 

It's obviously time that this thing be resolved in a way that has 

some long-term and lasting effect.  There have been multiple 

suggestions put forward as to how that could be achieved. 

 

The one I think that made a lot of sense, Mr. Speaker, was the 

Standing Committee on Agriculture of this legislature which 

has not gone out and done anything constructive, so I'm told, 

since the 1920's, could have had an ideal opportunity.  I mean 

the government has structured all sorts of commissions and 

bodies of this legislature and sent them out on various missions 

since the election. 

 

Our most important industry -- a 4 billion-plus dollar industry 

-- they don't see fit to have the standing committee of this 

House do what it would normally do in most other 

jurisdictions.  Take a piece of controversial agricultural 

legislation, take it out to the public and discuss with their 

stakeholders the process that should be followed. 

 

And it's evident, Mr. Speaker, from the way the government 

operates, that they accept that as the de facto way of operation 

in other areas.  And I guess that's what really upsets people in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  The construction industry, 

which I'm told is a $1.7 billion industry in the province of 

Saskatchewan -- the unionized contractors and the construction 

unions are given a copy of the proposed changes to an Act 

representing labour relations in the construction industry. 

 

It has "draft" marked on it, and the minister responsible has no 

problem in giving it to his friends in the union leadership.  He 

has no problem in giving it to the unionized contractors in the 

province.  I don't think he quite expected the reaction from the 

non-union sector that he got.  But the fact is, Mr. Speaker, that 

he saw it quite proper to put that draft legislation out there. 

 

The minister stands on the steps of the legislature, tells the 600 

people assembled outside -- the members of the construction 

unions -- that this is the package, this is what you're going to 

get, that he will pass it through this legislature.  And it is out 

there for the world to see. 

 

Now I know a $1.7 billion construction industry isn't 



July 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1799 

quite as important to the province as agriculture is, which is 

about three times the size, but I would think, Mr. Speaker, that 

an industry as large as agriculture should have the same 

opportunities as the construction industry. 

 

I mean if anyone doesn't think that this particular piece of 

legislation isn't going to have cost implications for this 

province, they're dreaming.  People in the construction industry 

tell us that anywhere from 20 to 40 per cent increase in costs 

will occur by adopting this piece of legislation.  That means 

that every project that the taxpayers of this province are 

involved in -- every last project -- if this legislation goes 

through, will have a 20 to 40 per cent cost increase attached to 

it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Labour says it's in the best 

interests of the public, in the best interest of industrial and 

labour harmony in this province for the taxpayer to suck that 20 

to 40 per cent up and proceed accordingly.  And when we're 

going to suck up that 20 to 40 per cent as taxpayers in this 

province, we're going to do it with the Bill being public. 

 

Now one of the fundamental arguments of the Minister of 

Agriculture and the Minister of Finance through this whole 

GRIP debate is that because it's a financially driven Bill -- has 

nothing to do with the well-being of farmers; it's driven by 

finance -- therefore we can't put it out to the public to have a 

look at.  And there's where the basic flaw is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It's all right for the construction industry; we'll have tens of 

thousands of dollars of costs added to taxpayers in this 

province.  It's all right in the environmental area.  The minister 

can come into this House with very stringent measures which I 

submit to you, Mr. Speaker, will add to the cost of every 

taxpayer in this province.  No hesitation to take draft legislation 

and put it out amongst the stakeholders.  But here we have a 

government hiding behind the fact that this GRIP legislation 

will have cost implications and therefore the stakeholder, the 

50,000 farm families that were signed up, don't have an 

opportunity to look at. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that there is a certain amount of 

hypocrisy attached to a stand like that.  There's a certain 

amount of hypocrisy attached to a political party that stood on 

its feet year after year in this Assembly and out in the streets 

and byways of Saskatchewan, saying that they would never do 

anything like that.  And now in fact that's what we see. 

 

So obviously we've got a problem here, Mr. Speaker.  And the 

right way to solve the problem, the right way for this 

government to regain credibility, the right way for the New 

Democratic Party, I say, to regain some credibility with farm 

people in this province, would be to have the Standing 

Committee on Agriculture take this Bill out before it is forced 

into this Assembly, before the government is going to use their 

majority to ram it through here; that the contract holders, the 

people most affected, should have an opportunity to review and 

look at this piece of draft legislation. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, if it isn't good enough for the 

farm families of this province to have the same 

opportunity as the union leaders, then this government should 

never, ever again allow a piece of draft legislation to go 

forward in the public for purview before passage in this 

legislature. 

 

And I don't think that process is right, Mr. Speaker.  I think the 

public should have access to draft legislation, that they should 

pass comment on it, that the changes should be made before it 

ever hits the floor of this Chamber.  And by doing so we won't 

get in the awful situation that the Minister of Agriculture and 

the Premier of this province have put us in with this whole 

GRIP fiasco. 

 

And that's why the motion, as put forward by the member from 

Morse, gives this Assembly, gives this government, an 

opportunity to regroup and gain some credibility back with the 

people that it has been saddled the task of governing and 

governing properly.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, at the 

end of my remarks I will be moving an amendment that goes 

along the following lines: 

 

 That the words following "Assembly" be deleted and 

substituting: 

 

 commends the government's continuing efforts to ensure 

public consultations with all sectors of society and 

encourages the government's promotion of unity, 

co-operation, and understanding among all Saskatchewan 

people -- rural and urban, farmers, workers, and business 

people -- in order to heal the division and disharmony 

promoted by the previous government of Saskatchewan.* 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would just like to start by reminding the 

members opposite that they suffered tremendous humiliation 

and defeat by giving arguments exactly along the lines the two 

members gave the arguments today -- trying to divide the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The second point I want to make right off the start is that it's 

ironic that the GRIP legislation was attempted to be introduced 

on June 10.  It's now July 28; we could have had two months 

for discussion and consultations.  The members opposite know 

that but they don't want to accept the fact that they made a 

democratic mistake.  In fact I think as of last Friday the 229 

names on petitions they submitted admits that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite tried in the past to divide 

union and non-union workers.  In fact during the era of their 

government they drove this province from 80 per cent 

unionized workers to 20 per cent -- trying to destroy people, 

organizations, who have a right to organize.  They tried to drive 

a wedge between rural and urban Saskatchewan on every 

agriculture program they attempted to put forward on the basis 

of their political agenda. 

 

They were dividing the people of the province who elected 

them to govern them as one body.  They tried to 



1800 Saskatchewan Hansard July 28, 1992 

divide the poor and the wealthy.  I recall in the administration 

previous they were cutting back social services payments.  At 

the same time they introduced a flat tax that allowed people to 

invest in MURBs (multiple unit residential building) before 

they paid their flat tax. 

 

Now that kind of division in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

doesn't work, and obviously it doesn't work because the 

members opposite who sit there with 10 learned the hard way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the members opposite and the 

people of Saskatchewan that this is a new era, the new era 

based on fairness, based on consultation.  And the people of 

Saskatchewan understand that.  Certainly there are people out 

in Saskatchewan who do not agree with everything any 

government does, including ours.  That's their right and that's 

the democratic system, the way it works. 

 

(1500) 

 

But people in Saskatchewan understand that there were 

decisions that we had to make as government in order to 

promote this province and to sustain the economic activity and 

build on it in the future.  So they understand why we made 

those decisions. 

 

Even the federal government knows that we are serious.  Mr. 

Speaker, just a few days ago the Premier of our province wrote 

the Prime Minister asking him to come here or we'd go there 

and discuss the need for third-line programming for agriculture.  

The Prime Minister, through his Minister of Agriculture, 

responded.  We made public statements to say that although we 

did not accept every detail of the letter -- which is common in 

every negotiation -- that we were willing to consider and meet 

with them. 

 

And what did the members opposite say?  What did the Leader 

of the Opposition say today?  You're rejecting it.  He went on 

to say, you're doing the farmers out of $40 an acre.  He went 

further on to say, you're losing hundreds of millions of dollars.  

And check the record, Mr. Speaker, because that's exactly what 

he said.  That type of exaggerating the truth -- and there are 

many more better names to describe that -- is the reason that 

that member opposite is now the Leader of the Opposition and 

not the Premier of this province -- dividing people, 

manipulating people and telling half-truths. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a new era, and this government will turn 

that around. 

 

The federal government has responded, so now we will be 

discussing matters with them to make sure that Saskatchewan 

gets the best deal for the farmers and the taxpayers of this 

province.  No middle-of-the-night phone calls in the wee hours 

of the morning before an election like the previous government 

operated because we understand and the federal government 

understands.  The federal government understands, Mr. 

Speaker, because they know they're dealing with a government 

they can trust.  Even the Tory government in Ottawa knows 

they're dealing with a government they can trust.  And in the 

past -- and the members opposite laugh and smile -- they 

know the trust that was instilled upon the last premier of this 

province by the federal government.  There was none. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite the opposition to come forward, put their 

political desires and ambitions on the back burner just for a 

while.  I mean we have a situation, Mr. Speaker, where we 

have a federal government offering up a proposal to help out 

farmers.  We have a provincial government who is ready to 

consult and negotiate with the federal government in order that 

we get the best deal for farmers and all the people of 

Saskatchewan.  We have 10 tiny Tories in opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, who are sitting there saying, well they're going to 

back out if you don't take this deal as it is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what kind of an effective opposition is that?  

What responsibility do the people of Saskatchewan put on the 

opposition?  Was it for them to protect themselves politically?  

Was it for them to sit there and say and make threats to the 

province and the people of Saskatchewan saying, well you 

better do this or else the feds are going to withdraw? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there's been no indication from the federal 

government that they're going to withdraw.  They've put the 

offer forward.  Only the Tories in Saskatchewan in opposition, 

who will never seem to learn the error of their ways in the past, 

who continue to try to put their political agenda -- and their 

political agenda of course is trying to destroy the New 

Democrats -- ahead of the responsible position that people 

elected them to, and that is if something is worth considering, 

to consider it and negotiate and bargain through it, instead of 

taking the negative position, absolutely saying no, you better 

do this or else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they were not elected to do that.  And I think that 

the people of Saskatchewan made a very wise choice in the last 

October election. 

 

I want to say a couple of other things, Mr. Speaker.  I will 

predict that Alberta and Manitoba, in the years to come, will 

follow Saskatchewan's lead.  And Saskatchewan's lead being 

working for all the people of this province by negotiating deals 

with the federal government that stops the tremendous 

off-loading that has been forced upon the three prairie 

provinces over the last number of years. 

 

I can see Alberta, with their $1.2 billion deficit, being forced 

back into the free-enterprise system and accepting the lead that 

Saskatchewan's taking, and Manitoba as well.  We understand.  

We have nothing to lose by standing up for the people against 

the Tory opposition in Ottawa.  And I predict, Mr. Speaker, 

that the provincial Tory governments in Alberta and Manitoba 

will see that this is the right way to go, and Saskatchewan 

setting an example, follow it in order that they protect their 

people as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bottom line here is we have federal 

off-loading and we're going to do all we can to protect the 

farmers and the people of this province.  We have a federal 

government who knows, because they're coming into an 

election period, who knows because Saskatchewan . . . we well 

represented the position of our province in Ottawa, who knows 

the economic state of 



July 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1801 

affairs.  We have an opposition who denies that there can be 

anything done, who rely on threats and trying to divide people 

of this province. 

 

But most important, Mr. Speaker, we have a government now 

in Saskatchewan that is sincere and honest, and people know 

that.  And a government that will -- has in the past and will in 

the future -- continue to ensure that we treat all people fairly, 

and that means the federal government fairly, but toughly, to 

ensure that the province of Saskatchewan gets its fair due. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I would like to move, seconded by 

the member from Moose Jaw Palliser: 

 

 That all the words following "Assembly" be deleted and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

 Commends the government's continuing efforts to ensure 

public consultation with all sectors of society and encourages 

the government's promotion of unity, co-operation, 

understanding among all Saskatchewan people, rural and 

urban, farmers, workers, business people, in order to heal the 

division and the disharmony promoted by the previous 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is with 

great pleasure that I enter into debate and in support of the fine 

amendment moved by my good friend and colleague, the 

member for Humboldt. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, just to put this into context a couple of 

weeks ago I was watching a Blue Jays game on TV and in the 

late innings, Alomar, in a close ball game, led off with a single 

with Carter and Winfield coming up to bat, Mr. Speaker.  Now 

it never dawned, I think, for a second on any faithful Jays fan 

or the manager of the team that either Carter or Winfield 

should go up and bunt Alomar to second so that somebody can 

bat him home. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, simply put, that when the going gets 

tough and when you're in the late innings, what you do is you 

put your best foot forward.  You go with your strength. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to say that I am a 

Saskatchewanian by choice.  I'm pleased to say that I'm a 

Saskatchewanian by choice.  I grew up in a rural community in 

Alberta, spent my university years and started my career in 

Manitoba, and then in 1973, Mr. Speaker, chose to make my 

home the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Having lived in all three prairie provinces, it is clear to me that 

there is no province of the three that comes close to the quality 

of life that we enjoy here in Saskatchewan.  But why is that, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

Simply put, it's not the natural advantages that we enjoy.  Here 

we are, land-locked in the middle of the prairies, a harsh 

climate, a small population, a long way from 

populations . . . from markets for production of goods. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but what we have in this province that we enjoy 

here more than anywhere else in the nation -- in this nation 

which the United Nations has designated as the most desirable 

in which to live in the world -- here in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, we have something that is stronger than any other 

province in the nation, and that is a spirit of co-operation. 

 

You see, it's the spirit of co-operation that has made our 

province and our people strong.  It is that spirit of co-operation, 

it is in this province, that were born things like credit unions: 

when there were problems in funding the needs that people 

couldn't have met through the funding of banks and 

institutions, Mr. Speaker, credit unions. 

 

Wheat pools and unions were born here in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, in this province, as a way of bringing together people 

to solve our problems because we know in Saskatchewan 

intuitively that when the going gets tough, the tough get going 

by pulling together. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, I want to stand in support of this amendment 

proposed by the member from Humboldt because . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- When are you going to drag Tommy's 

bones out here one more time? 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well now the member from Thunder Creek, he 

doesn't support this kind of approach to problem solving in 

Saskatchewan.  You know, Mr. Speaker, when I sat -- well in 

fact just a little less than a year ago - 

_ on that side of the House where the member from Thunder 

Creek parks his seat these days, Mr. Speaker, I would watch 

across the side, and I would see something, Mr. Speaker, that 

saddened me.  And as I went around the province of 

Saskatchewan, I heard people say over and over again, it is 

despicable that any government of the province of 

Saskatchewan should make as its political agenda the desire to 

drive a wedge between rural and urban Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the people spoke strongly on 

October 21.  They said no more wedge; it's time for the 

Government of Saskatchewan to be as good as the people that 

elect it and to start working together in the interest of the future 

of our people and our children and our children's children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- And so, Mr. Speaker, it has been with that in 

mind -- understanding the strength and the history of our 

province -- that a new government has made as part of its style 

of governing to work to bring people together, to remove 

wedges, to tear down fences, to build bridges, to find common 

bonds between people.  And that involves the process of 

consultation so that at the end of the day it may be that every 

opinion you had is not what is decided upon and enacted by the 

government of the day, but at least your government respected 

in this democratic society that you had an opinion worth 

hearing and was willing to listen. 



1802 Saskatchewan Hansard July 28, 1992 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is with that in mind and this style of 

government that I support this amendment.  And I know that 

this is a topic that is of concern to a large number of members 

in this Assembly and that there are other items of business that 

the Assembly wishes to deal with today.  And so as to provide 

that opportunity at a future date, Mr. Speaker, I move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to go to 

government business. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you.  I just wanted to indicate 

that it was our understanding that we would grant leave and 

move to government business and ask for adjournment at 5 

o'clock and with that we give leave. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1515) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Education 

Vote 5 

 

Item 1 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister please introduce her 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'm 

pleased to introduce, on my left, the deputy minister of the 

Department of Education, Arleen Hynd; and seated directly 

behind her is Mr. Robin Johnson. 

 

Mr. Chairman, prior to beginning, I would be pleased to table 

answers to a number of written questions which were 

transmitted to us prior.  And I believe this represents answers 

to the entire set of questions, if I could have the assistance of a 

Clerk. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I apologize that the letter of . . . I have not had 

time to prepare a letter of transmittal to my official critic, the 

Hon. Mr. D'Autremont.  The covering letter is in the form of a 

memorandum from the deputy minister to myself.  So with my 

apologies for the lack of a formal transmittal letter, I hope that 

this will provide the answers that the member seeks. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like 

to welcome the minister and her officials here today, and I 

would like to thank her for her information, the replies to our 

global questions.  And I look forward to reading through it and 

reviewing all the information.  And the transmittal letter is fine, 

thank you, Madam Minister. 
 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, the 

other day we were dealing with some questions with respect to 

the priorities for the Department of Education with respect to 

funding of new construction as well as renovations.  I'd like to 

pursue that a little bit 

with you, just a few questions that I had about it. 

 

What is the total volume of dollars allocated for this year for 

new construction? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

member, there is no allocation in this year's budget for new 

construction.  There is $65 million for payments of past 

commitments to new construction that has already been built -- 

mortgage payments, if you like; and there is $14 million, of 

which $11 million is designated for the K to 12 system, the 

other 3 million being to post-secondary system. 

 

And that is designated to be for renovations and maintenance 

of emergent nature.  And it does include in some cases the 

construction of portable . . . relocateable units falls into that 

class.  And it could be perceived to be new construction, but it 

would be to correct an emergency situation.  So there's no new 

construction per se allowed for, or funds allocated for in the 

current budget. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, I wonder if we could deal 

specifically then with a couple . . . three different schools in my 

constituency.  The Kindersley Composite School, the Dodsland 

School in Dodsland, and the school in Eston.  I wanted to know 

on the list . . . You explained the other day that you have, I 

believe, arrived at a new way of priorizing the different schools 

with respect to renovations as well as new construction.  And I 

wanted to know what priority the Kindersley Composite 

School has for new construction or renovation as well as the 

Dodsland and Eston School. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the new process for 

allocating capital for school construction that I referred to the 

other day that the member from Kindersley I think is 

referencing, is at this stage still a proposal.  And we have 

almost completed our consultations with the community that 

will be affected, the education community and the construction 

community on this, but it has not yet been adopted as a policy, 

the new way of allocating and the new way of priorizing 

projects.  So I wouldn't be able to comment on exactly where 

the project specifically that he refers to will line up in the order 

of . . . in the new allocation procedures. 

 

As the member from Kindersley will be aware, there are 

emergency construction or renovations going on with respect to 

the air quality in the Eston School right now.  But in terms of 

replacement or new capital, I wouldn't be able to comment on 

where any project or proposed project in the province will 

exactly line up on the new schedule because we haven't 

finalized the new process yet. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, you mean to tell me in this 

province currently we have no idea of what any new school in 

the province is going to be built?  Absolutely no idea of what 

priority a different town has or a different school has in a town 

or city in this province?  We have no indication whatsoever 

that I can tell the folks, the goods folks of Kindersley, 

Dodsland or Eston where their school rates? 



July 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1803 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

member from Kindersley, I would like to say that that's 

certainly not the case.  What we did inherit from the previous 

administration was a backlog of construction projects that were 

being proposed in the K to 12 system that amounted to some 

$350 million.  And obviously no administration in 

Saskatchewan would have been able to address all those 

requests and proposals in any one year. 

 

But I assume . . . well I can say with certainty that the same 

criteria that were important in the previous facilities priority 

index, if you like, will prevail in the new one.  So that if there 

is a project proposed where there is a need because of 

increasing enrolment or the capacity of the facility, if there are 

health, fire, structural safety issues to be addressed in an 

existing building, if there is to be proposed the joint use of a 

facility so that it will be used more hours and for more time 

during the year than just as an elementary school building will 

be, there are a number of factors that would serve to increase 

the rating and bring a project, if you like, closer to the top. 

 

So the criteria certainly will be reasonable and won't be 

changed that much from what the old . . . the previous criteria.  

What will change is that there will be a numbering system and 

there will be no jumping the queue, if you like.  And it's 

proposed that once a number or priority is allocated to a 

project, under the proposed scheme, when it's adopted, that a 

facility or a school board will be able to predict with even more 

accuracy than in the past when their project will actually be 

realized and when they should go into the planning stages that 

start to cost money, like the architectural and so on. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, so now we're in the situation 

where if we accept your figure of $300 million of new 

construction needed in this province . . . So you currently have 

absolutely not one penny allocated for new construction and 

yet you have $300 million worth of schools, if we accept your 

figure, that need to be built.  That's the situation as I understand 

what you're saying.  So it's a tremendously great start to dealing 

with that problem, by not allocating one penny towards it. 

 

Madam Minister, in these three communities there are 

identifiable problems with the schools, and you're well aware 

of it.  The school in Eston with the radon concern is being dealt 

with, but that doesn't deal with the problem that's going to be 

associated with the moving of the lower grade students up to 

that school.  It doesn't deal with that problem.  In Dodsland it 

doesn't deal with the problem of the leaking roof.  In 

Kindersley it doesn't deal with the problem of the leaking roof 

as well as the heaving of the floors and the grade beams under 

the building cracking up. 

 

None of what you've said deals with those concerns, Madam 

Minister.  And I'm asking on behalf of these three 

communities, when will these three communities be given 

some indication of when their school will be up for either a 

major renovation or a new construction? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all I would like 

to say that the $350 million is not my figure.  It is the figure 

that we . . . it is a number of projects that were 

proposed, that we inherited at the time after the election last 

October 21.  This is what we found the situation to be, is that 

there was in the facilities branch a backlog of 

$350-some-million of construction requests. 

 

Now with the changing demographics in Saskatchewan it is 

difficult for school boards to predict and to rationalize their 

needs for space.  And the most I can say about when funds will 

become available is that in light of the fiscal situation that we 

inherited, the hon. member opposite should realize that every 

dollar we would spend would be a borrowed dollar.  So you 

would have to use the incremental amount of interest which 

would increase that $350 million considerably over the 10-year 

term of paying for that school. 

 

So the most I can say in terms of when, is as soon as funds 

become available.  And we were, in this year's budget, going to 

take the time to do emergency repairs only, to re-evaluate how 

capital is allocated to make sure that we do make the very best 

use of scarce dollars and allocate those scarce dollars to the 

very highest priorities in terms of the facilities that are 

required.  So that is when.  And schools will be able to predict 

as soon as funds become available. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, I wonder if you could give us 

some indication then of when your method of categorizing the 

schools will be available. 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as I indicated earlier, 

the consultation process is nearly complete, and I expect that 

the proposal as revised through the consultative process -- 

because we did receive some good suggestions -- will likely go 

to the cabinet in August or early September for finalization and 

approval. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, I wanted to deal now 

specifically with the Eston School, the Eston south campus, 

with respect to the radon gas situation there that we're all aware 

of. 

 

The levels, as I understand it, were extremely high -- very, very 

high.  There were temporary measures that were put in place 

that dealt with it fairly adequately, I understand.  Now there is . 

. . the tender has been let and I believe construction has even 

started on the renovations necessary to improve the air quality 

in that school. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I'm wondering in light of the fact that 

the, I understand, the long-term plan is to move the students 

from the north campus down to the south campus and 

amalgamate them into one school -- was there any 

consideration given to complete new construction rather than 

spending something in the order of $300,000 on a school that 

may not be adequate to serve the needs of both of those 

campuses when they join together? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the amount that was 

tendered and spent in the most recent renovation to address the 

radon problem at Eston location was $188,000.  And these 

decisions are within the purview of the local school . . . of the 

school division, and those 



1804 Saskatchewan Hansard July 28, 1992 

members of the school board are elected to represent the 

interests of the people in the school division and the people that 

they serve. 

 

And while we attempt to support their requests and their 

decisions to the extent that we can -- and we certainly did work 

closely for a long period of time with the division board over 

the situation at Eston because the health and safety of the 

students and teachers is of paramount importance to us -- but 

how they accommodate the needs of their students and the 

configuration of their class-rooms is entirely within the 

authority of the duly-elected local board and the division board. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Madam Minister, that isn't what they've 

told me.  They have suggested to me that department officials 

told them that construction of a new school was out, might as 

well forget that idea completely.  And renovation was the only 

thing that was going to be done, even in light of the fact that 

the board suggested to them that when the two campuses 

amalgamate into one, they were going to have some space 

problems accommodating all of the students. 

 

Madam Minister, I would ask again: was there consideration 

given for new construction of that school? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, a request for a 

new school, as I indicated earlier, there were no allocations for 

construction of new schools in the 1992-93 budget for obvious 

reasons.  The cupboard was bare; there was no money. 

 

This is the reason that we allocated whatever dollars that we 

could find for emergent repairs, and a significant amount of 

that was allocated to the project in Eston to repair the 

difficulties there. 

 

So my remarks with respect to new construction are the same 

as before.  And if the need is urgent at Eston, and if in fact a 

request comes formally forward to the facilities branch, it will 

be ranked according to the forthcoming criteria.  And then the 

Eston . . . the division board can plan accordingly. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, Mr. Chairman, I wanted to deal 

now specifically with a situation with respect to a busing 

concern.  Mr. Ryan Hennes of Kindersley, he had asked me if I 

would ask a few questions on his behalf. 

 

What is the department's policy with regard to busing of 

students to Christian schools in the province? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the hon. 

member's question, transportation is the responsibility again of 

the division board.  There is assistance for transportation.  A 

factor is contained in the foundation formula, so there is 

assistance from the province in funding transportation. 

 

The configuration of the transportation system is entirely the 

responsibility of the division board, and the policy has been 

that transportation to private schools of any kind is a matter for 

negotiation, I guess, between the parent, the student, and the 

board.  But in most cases, boards have 

adopted policies of having people who opt to sent their children 

to private schools be responsible for their own transportation.  

That is generally uniform throughout the province.  And again 

it's an area where the department or the government does not 

interfere with the autonomy and the decision-making powers 

and authority of the division board which is duly elected to 

serve the people of the area. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, I would like to just relate the 

situation to you for the record.  Mr. Hennes, he lives in the 

rural part of the Kindersley school division; he's about 18 miles 

from town.  His children, he would like them to go to the 

Christian academy in Kindersley.  The school bus drives right 

by the yard, right in front of his house on the farm.  He would . 

. . then when it goes into Kindersley, the elementary school 

where his children would be attending is one block removed 

from the Christian academy. 

 

Now it seems to me that it would be a fairly reasonable request 

on his behalf, in light of the fact that he's a taxpayer the same 

as the rest of us in this province that . . . it would seem to me 

that it's a reasonable request to ask if his children can't ride that 

bus that passes right by his door and goes into Kindersley and 

drops the kids off at the elementary school, and then have them 

walk down there. 

 

Now he suggested he understands the arguments about concern 

about liability and of that kind of consideration.  He has made 

representation to the board as well as your office, I believe, that 

he is willing to provide for liability insurance on his children.  

He's willing to provide a waiver with respect to the discipline 

of his children on the school bus.  He seems to me to have 

covered off all of the concerns that anyone would have about 

this type of thing. 

 

And I'm wondering, Madam Minister . . . I know that you've 

received a number of letters from him and in them he's 

appealed to you as the Minister of Education for the province 

of Saskatchewan to support him in his concern to have his 

children ride that school bus.  And I'm wondering, Madam 

Minister, what your thoughts on that are.  Do you believe that 

he should be given some consideration . . . his children be 

given some consideration to ride the school bus to that school? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I guess I can only 

repeat . . . and I do recall the correspondence with the 

constituent of the member opposite that he refers to, but I still 

believe that it is the responsibility of the division board, the 

school board that's elected at the local level, to provide for 

transportation and to decide how they will . . . what the 

configuration of their system will be. 

 

And it may be a different case.  May seem entirely reasonable 

in this case.  May seem reasonable, but as a . . .  And I know 

this may be an exaggerated case because we were close to an 

urban centre, but I was the driver of a school bus for a 

considerable length of time.  And we lived in an area close to 

Saskatoon where there was a fairly large rural population, was 

fairly dense for a rural area, and the policy of the school board 

at the time . . . or the school unit was to provide transportation 

only to those schools which they operated or with which they 

had a tuition agreement.  And if they had departed from that, 

we would have been making numerous . . . over half a dozen 



July 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1805 

stops to different kinds of schools of the parents' choices. 

 

So that may be a situation on the other end of the spectrum, but 

I think in most cases -- in all cases that I'm aware of -- the 

position of the local board is taken with due regard to the 

well-being of all of the people that seek access to education in 

their jurisdiction. 

 

And when parents opt or students opt to have arrangements for 

themselves that differ from the majority or that differ from the 

policy of the school board, if they can't work out arrangements, 

private arrangements with the school board, then I think and I 

support that the decision of the unit board, the elected unit 

board, should prevail and that the Department of Education or 

the government should not intervene. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, just so we can understand this.  

His children live 18 miles from town.  The school bus passes 

right past his yard.  Now they don't want to be delivered to the 

front door of the Christian academy in Kindersley.  They are 

willing to walk that one block down the street from the 

elementary school to the Christian academy.  That's not a 

problem.  They're not being asked to deliver them all over 

Kindersley.  They're being asked to deliver them right to where 

they would be delivered if they belonged . . . if they were going 

to the public school system.  That's where they're asking to go 

to.  They're not asking to be delivered anywhere else. 

 

He is simply saying that he would appreciate, appreciate your 

support in his concern.  And he would also appreciate the 

opportunity to speak to you about it, Madam Minister. 

 

So far, Madam Minister, we have a situation now where a 

gentleman with a concern . . . a family with a concern about the 

delivery, the busing of their students to a Christian school 

cannot even get an opportunity to speak to you about it.  He has 

requested it no less -- if memory serves -- three occasions a 

meeting with you.  Five minutes of your time, at your 

convenience, in Regina. 

 

He's not asking you to drive out or fly out to Kindersley to 

meet with him.  He's asking for a few minutes of your time to 

speak to you about this situation.  And I think it's a completely 

reasonable request that the Minister of Education should be 

able to take a few minutes of her schedule to address a concern 

about the busing of his children to school. 

 

Madam Minister, I think it's incumbent upon you as the 

Minister of Education to make that kind of commitment to 

people like Mr. Hennes and his family, to give them a few 

minutes of your time. 

 

Madam Minister, I would wonder if you would like to 

comment on that. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I do meet with many, 

many people from all over the province that have various 

concerns with respect to the education of themselves or their 

children.  And I have taken the time to reply to the 

correspondence of the constituent that the hon. member 

opposite refers to. 

And I think it would be misleading and unkind of me to 

suggest that he should take his time and his expenses to drive 

to Regina to discuss this problem that he feels he's having with 

the school board when he could talk to the local school board at 

home.  I cannot change the answer that he gets from the school 

board.  I support the school unit's position on the transportation 

question. 

 

And it is not as simple as it seems.  When a person opts for a 

different style of education or a different opportunity for his 

children than what the unit is providing, then when that student 

is a passenger on the bus, they're not a student of the unit; 

they're not covered by the liability insurance.  I can't imagine 

why a unit board would want to set up different sets of 

circumstances for all of the people that they serve. 

 

So I think that when a person opts for something different than 

what is being offered, that they should be prepared to pay the 

difference or to make accommodations to avail themselves of 

that different opportunity.  If free transportation is available to 

the school that the unit board operates, if someone voluntarily 

opts for different arrangements, then if there's a differential in 

cost or convenience, that should be incumbent on the 

individual. 

 

And I support the board's position in that and I don't want to 

mislead anyone by giving them an appointment and asking 

them to drive all the way to Regina to visit me about it when I 

know that I cannot change the answer that I have given in the 

correspondence. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, I don't think you need to be 

concerned about Mr. Hennes.  Mr. Hennes has made the offer.  

He has suggested that he is willing to come and see you for five 

minutes if you will give him five minutes of your time.  But so 

far you've denied his request for a few minutes of your time.  

Surely there's five minutes within your schedule somewhere 

within the next month that you can fit him in for a brief 

consultation about this concern of his. 

 

And I'm wondering, Madam Minister, is it not a fact that there 

are other locations within Saskatchewan that this is done? 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the transportation 

arrangements are the responsibility of the unit board.  It may be 

true that in some cases that arrangements have been able to be 

worked out between individuals and the board that vary from 

the norm.  It seems that in this case such an arrangement has 

not been able to be concluded. 

 

I have no problem whatsoever with giving a few minutes of my 

time, but a few minutes of my time in Regina represents to this 

constituent probably a day of travel from Kindersley to Regina 

and back.  And if the outcome is not going to change, I feel that 

I'm imposing upon him.  The five minutes of my time is not the 

issue.  I'd certainly be glad to offer it as long as there was no 

hope that the outcome was going to change, because I will 

continue to support the unit board.  And I suggest that his time 

would be better spent really, talking to the unit board.  And if 

no 



1806 Saskatchewan Hansard July 28, 1992 

arrangement can be made there, I would not be amenable to 

supporting a decision other than what the board makes. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  Now we're 

getting somewhere.  We've at least got an appointment 

established for Mr. Hennes.  I'm sure he'll be taking you up on 

that offer.  He's not concerned about the cost of it.  He's already 

invested $75,000 of his tax money into the school system over 

the last number of years, so a trip to Regina is pretty incidental 

as far as he's concerned, Madam Minister. 

 

All he is asking for, to suggest to the board that in other areas 

that there is some consideration been given to this type of 

thing; that the Act sets out or suggests that perhaps negotiated 

settlements in other areas have been done.  And perhaps they 

should look at maybe a negotiated settlement in this area as 

well. 

 

He's willing to pay to have his children ride that school bus as 

well as his tax dollars go into it.  He's also willing, as I said 

earlier -- you brought up the question of the liability insurance 

-- he's willing to provide liability insurance.  He's willing to 

provide that, Madam Minister. 

 

So at your earliest convenience I would suggest, Madam 

Minister, that your officials take the opportunity to call Mr. 

Hennes and set up an appointment with him to discuss his 

concerns.  I don't know whether or not he's going to be able to 

persuade you to change your mind, but that's not my 

judgement.  I don't think it should be your judgement either. 

 

I think you should just take the opportunity to hear what he has 

to say first of all, and then tell him what your position is going 

to be.  I think he wants to get it right to the top, and you're the 

Minister of Education in this province.  He wants to hear it 

from your lips that you do not support his concern about busing 

his children to school even though the bus drives right past his 

yard. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, as I indicated, I 

would certainly be glad to take the time.  There is a couple of 

things I would like to make clear though, that I wouldn't want 

to raise any expectations because I have indicated my position 

in writing.  I would certainly be pleased, as I am always, to 

listen to people.  I'd be glad to listen to his concerns, but in no 

way am I prepared to negotiate. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, as I said, I don't think he's 

wanting to negotiate with you.  He's asking for your support.  

He's not asking for you to instruct the board.  He's not asking 

for you to instruct the board to bus his children.  He's asking 

you to simply sit down in your capacity as Minister of 

Education in this province and write a letter to the Kindersley 

school board and say to them that there are areas in this 

province that have done this type of thing; maybe you could 

give consideration to negotiating with Mr. Hennes.  That's all 

he's asking. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- We're getting a bit off Estimates here, 

I think, and we're also getting . . . leading down this path here.  

I said that I would meet with Mr. Hennes and listen to him.  I 

did not undertake to use any suasion or 

write any letters to the school board.  I said I would meet and 

listen to him and I'll be happy to do that.  Beyond that I will not 

make any commitments. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, we have just started to review your answers that you 

have supplied, and we still need some time to review them a 

little further because I think that we're going to have some 

more questions dealing with those written questions and 

answers that we had asked for. 

 

I'd like to go back to some questions dealing with another day 

earlier that you did supply some responses to, but there was 

three questions to which the responses were not part of the 

package that you had sent over.  These questions were from 

June 8, page no. 956 from Hansard, and it was dealing with 

questions on the capital budget.  You supplied most of the 

answers, Madam Minister, but I wonder if we could have a list 

of all of the schools that were receiving the renovation funding 

-- the capital funding for renovations -- and what those 

renovations were for. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe that the 

information . . . For clarification, is this the 1992 amounts?  

The member is indicating yes. 

 

I do have a copy of the news release that's dated June 2 and an 

attached list of all the projects which totalled $8.8 million -- the 

approved emergency repairs.  If that's the information that the 

member wishes, with the assistance of the page, I'd like to 

provide him with a copy. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, on that list does that 

also include what repairs are being done, the reason why those 

emergency funds were needed? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- The list -- I don't have it now, I just 

gave it away -- but it has the location, the amount, and 

generally the nature of the repairs; like roof repairs, foundation 

repairs, that kind of thing. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The other 

day you stated that this was just the preliminary set of repairs 

or numbers.  You had, I believe it was, $11 million to allocate 

to this and you had already spent 8.8.  Has there been any new 

schools added to that list since the June news release? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not quite sure.  I'll 

undertake to get the specific answer to that question.  I know 

that as the projects have been tendered, that letters have gone 

out confirming the province's contribution to the whole project 

and so on.  But whether there are any in addition to that list, I 

will undertake to provide that answer. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, thank you, Madam Minister.  Also 

on June 8, page 967 of Hansard, I asked for some documents 

dealing with the Oxbow School Division.  You were quoting 

from a large group of numbers dealing with the Oxbow School 

Division.  I also asked for the same information for the Arcola 

School Division.  Can you supply that, please? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, for clarification, 



July 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1807 

I'm wondering if that was on construction or on grants.  

Because I think in the package of replies that we provided, we 

provided a page on the grant structure for every school in the 

province.  So the Oxbow one would have been covered there, 

unless it's construction that the hon. member is referring to. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- What I was referring to, Madam 

Minister, was the grant structure.  And you were explaining 

how transportation had gone up and down, how student 

populations had gone up or down, and how the different 

numbers had changed to affect the final grant figures received 

by the Oxbow School Division.  And it was all that complete 

set of numbers, those changes that I had asked for, and you had 

agreed to supply that then, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, to the best of my 

knowledge, that information for the Oxbow School Division 

would have been included in the package of replies that we 

provided. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you mean the 

package you supplied today? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- No, Mr. Chairman, whatever day it 

was that we got back into Estimates for a few minutes.  Last 

Thursday, I think it would have been, Thursday about 4:30 in 

the afternoon.  And we provided a package at that time and it 

should have been included there. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'll check again 

but I'm afraid I didn't find it in there. 

 

I have another question from that day, page 969 from Hansard, 

and this was dealing with the breakdown of all the changes 

involved in the Estevan School Division that caused their 

funding grants to drop so dramatically.  I wonder if you could 

provide that information, please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm checking our copy 

of the package that we tendered in reply because I do believe 

that the information that the member is referring to would have 

been included in that.  But we'll check our package to confirm 

that.  But we did reply with what we thought to be, what we 

interpreted to be, the response to the questions on a separate 

page for each school division in the province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Yes, Madam Minister, you did supply 

information for the separate school divisions, but in the case of 

the three school divisions I have mentioned, my intention, 

when I asked those questions, was for a more detailed . . . In 

the case of the Arcola School Division, you talked of tuition 

fees being paid to the school division or by the school division 

paying out.  And it was all that type of information that I was 

asking for because those were the kind of numbers you quoted 

dealing with the Oxbow School Division. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I have located the copy 

that we referred to in our own material.  And this would have 

been the same material that would have been submitted in 

response.  For the Oxbow School Division, what this 

information gives is the comparison, all the results of the 

adjustments in 1992 -- a complete summary 

and a comparison to 1991.  And I think that would be the 

answer to the member's question.  If he's unable to locate it, I 

can certainly give him a copy of this one.  But this is part of the 

package that has a separate analysis for every school division 

in the province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  We will 

check and just make sure that we don't have it, and then we'll 

contact you to get another copy of it, if necessary. 

 

Madam Minister, on July 24 in Hansard you talked of the 

vocational rehabilitation disabled persons program that's in 

place to aid people at $3.2 million.  I'm just wondering, what 

are the requirements to access these funds, and who is 

qualified? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question about the VRDP (vocational rehabilitation for 

disabled persons program), this is a program that the hon. 

member is probably aware started a number of years ago to 

provide funding to disabled persons to post-secondary 

education.  And the situation is this, that when the program first 

started, for some of the years it was not completely subscribed.  

Then as the program became better known and as some of the 

groups, advocacy groups for disabled . . . people with various 

types of disabilities became aware of the program, the demand 

for the dollars became much greater. 

 

Now in '91-92 the budget was $3.257 million, and I believe at 

the time that our administration began at the November 1 or the 

end of October, the program was already fully subscribed.  

There weren't any more funds left for the balance of the year.  

The amount that we allocated in this year's budget is 

approximately the same, and I believe the situation is that it is 

already completely subscribed. 

 

So we are looking at the whole range of student aid and how 

we increase accessibility to the post-secondary system to all 

students, and the VRDP is a very important part of that whole 

question of access.  But the situation is now that for every 

dollar that we take out of the student aid fund to direct into 

VRDP, there's another student somewhere else then that has to 

be denied. 

 

So while we're addressing the whole question of accessibility 

by all people on a global basis, we have left the allocation for 

VRDP at the same level.  We hope to have a new policy in 

place for the next budgeting cycle. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'm sorry to hear 

that the program is out of money because there are still a large 

number of people out there who need access to this type of a 

program.  The priorities that you have allocated throughout 

your whole budgetary process, this is one example of what's 

happening.  People who are in need are losing out on 

opportunities. 

 

And the reason I brought this particular program up is because 

just this week I received a letter.  And I'll read it to you, 

Madam Minister, and then I'll send you a copy of it. 



1808 Saskatchewan Hansard July 28, 1992 

I am a single parent trying to raise 4 children.  My 

husband left me 1 year ago and I have been on social 

assistance.  I would like to upgrade my school and try to 

get some work.  I am in a wheelchair and not just any kind 

of work will do.  I applied to VRDP for the help and was 

informed they are out of funding.  They would like to see 

people get off welfare but are very unwilling to help.  

Could you please look into this matter further (for me) . . . 

 

So not only, Madam Minister, is this woman in a wheelchair 

but her daughter is in a wheelchair also.  And these are the kind 

of people that should be your priorities, should be the priorities 

when you're setting your budgets for funding.  And, Madam 

Minister, I would ask you to please take a look at this particular 

case and see if there is not some assistance that you could 

provide for them.  I believe that there should be some place in 

your budget to help out with people like this. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I would be happy to 

receive a copy of the letter and to reply to the writer.  I should 

add that the VRDP funds are cost shared; they're 50/50 federal 

and provincial dollars. 

 

And there was a change made last year by the province in the 

previous administration in the criteria which increased the 

demand on the program and reduced the number of people that 

would be able to be eligible for it if the amounts stayed the 

same because it's totally not repayable.  And the way the 

situation was, was if you could meet the medical criteria, you 

just got the money.  And it included a living allowance. 

 

Now those people who cannot access VRDP because the funds 

are depleted this year are certainly still eligible for the regular 

student aid . . . depending on the circumstances, is not 100 per 

cent repayable for disabled people.  It's not quite the same as 

VRDP funding, but it isn't quite accurate to say that there is no 

assistance available. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I look forward to 

your reply in this case and for whatever assistance you can 

provide for this lady. 

 

Madam Minister, I'd like to go back to our original debate in 

Estimates concerning the transportation for students attending 

French schooling.  At the time you said that there was no 

federal funds being provided to the transportation of students; 

also that there was no additional costs for students travelling to 

attend French schools. 

 

What happens, Madam Minister, when a student is residing in 

school division A and is transported to school division B to 

attend a French school?  Who picks up the additional costs? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, as far as I'm 

aware, the situation would be exactly the same if they're going 

from one school division to another for any reason. And there 

is a variety of reasons where there are tuition arrangements, 

transportation arrangements made between school boards for 

access to students to programs 

that one division doesn't provide and the other one does. 

 

So this would be a matter of negotiation between the respective 

school boards. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I talked to the 

person who was actually taking his children from the one 

school to another school in another division and he told me the 

rates that he was being paid.  It is significantly further as 

compared to living across the street from the school to driving 

about 25 miles in this particular case. 

 

I talked to the school division and asked them, well who pays 

for this; who pays this extra amount of fee to take these 

children to the French school?  And the school board told me 

that it's funded by the federal government through the 

provincial programs. 

 

Now who's paying this, Madam Minister?  You say there's no 

change, no additional cost, but somebody's putting up the 

money. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not aware of the 

specific example that the member raises, and there is federal 

funding for provincial . . . for the delivery of French language 

programs.  That's acknowledged.  We spend it . . . the school 

board spends it and it's fully reimburseable by the federal 

government. 

 

But normally that's program funds, and how the transportation 

is arranged for is the responsibility of the school board and 

couldn't be said to be directly a transportation subsidy by the 

federal government -- never. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, that's a little 

strange.  The person is getting approximately 24 cents a 

kilometre to take his children from one town in a division to 

another town in a different division.  That's a subsidy. If he is 

being paid to take his children to a different school -- a school 

of his choice, which he's entitled to attend -- somebody is 

paying the cost.  His children could walk across the street, and 

that's where the school is from his home. 

 

So he is being subsidized to transport those children to the 

school of his choice, whereas the other people in the 

community do not have that choice.  Some of them would like 

to send their children to other schools, but they are restricted 

from doing so.  So I don't know how you could not call that a 

subsidy. 

 

The federal government may indeed be paying it, or they may 

be paying it into the provincial government, who in turn pays it 

back out -- I'm not sure how the program works and perhaps 

you can elaborate on how this funding is moved around within 

the system -- but there is a subsidy there and somebody is 

paying it, so who is it? 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I can't comment or 

elaborate on the arrangements that school boards make with 

each other.  And there are a lot of instances . . . Well let's face 

it, I mean every school bus mile that's travelled is a subsidized 

mile because there's no mileage charged.  It doesn't matter what 

kind of a school it's to or from.  And the arrangements for 

transportation are entirely 



July 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1809 

the responsibility of the local boards.  And I'm sure that they 

try to work out the arrangements to serve the people and the 

students within their various jurisdictions in the most 

economical way. 

 

And I can't comment on any of those arrangements, but I do 

know that in the funding . . . for the federal funding for the 

francophone component, or the French immersion, that there is 

not a component for transportation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, if there isn't a 

component -- federal money for transportation -- then the 

provincial government must be supplying this subsidy.  

Because that is an additional cost to those school divisions that 

have students being transported from one division to another 

division. 

 

When I talk to the school division, they tell me they're being 

compensated for that.  So if the federal government isn't 

compensating them, then the provincial government must be 

compensating them.  So what's the answer? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there is a component in 

the foundation formula -- the third-party funding that's 

provided by the provincial government to each respective 

school division in the province -- there is a component for 

transportation that is based on the formula and would have 

been shown in the answers that we provided with respect to 

every school division. 

 

And how the school division arranges its transportation system 

within those parameters is their responsibility.  As long as they 

meet the criteria and we are aware of the factors that go into the 

funding formula, the portion that is for transportation, every 

school division gets that.  Then they make their own 

arrangements.  If they have sharing agreements with other 

divisions to increase the access to programs or schools, that is 

entirely the responsibility and within the purview of the unit 

boards and not the responsibility of the federal government or 

the province.  It's part of the global funding. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So what you're saying, Madam Minister, 

is that when the school division applies for their grants, the 

transportation is all part of that.  If they ask for or they submit, 

within their grant applications, that they are transporting 

students from division A to division B for the French programs 

then the provincial government includes that in their 

foundation grants, in their grant structure, and so then the 

provincial government pays that.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, in response to 

the question, it's based upon mileage, and as I said, the unit 

board is responsible for the configuration of the system.  And it 

wouldn't matter whether it's students from within the division 

or whether they're going from one division to another for 

perhaps . . . whether it's French or whether it's industrial arts or 

whether it's home economics or some other program that's not 

available within one division, they go to another division.  And 

it's all part of the system.  And it's throughout the province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay.  Thank you, Madam Minister.  In 

our discussion on June 8 when we were talking about school 

governance, the French school 

governance, you stated then that there would be no additional 

costs to the province by implementing these schools or the 

third school system. 

 

And yet now you're admitting that because of the differences in 

the transportation, when those school divisions implement . . . 

or request that funding from you, they will include that 

additional transportation cost.  And therefore there is actually 

additional transportation costs to the school divisions, therefore 

to the government, for the implementation of the third school 

boards.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I can't agree with this 

interpretation.  All of the students that are in Saskatchewan 

now without a francophone governance school component, 

which legislation has not been passed to accommodate and 

which has not been set up, all the students of school age in 

Saskatchewan are attending school now and being transported 

somewhere now. 

 

What we did say with respect to the francophone governance 

component, if it were to be legislated and implemented, is that 

if there were any incremental costs, any costs over and above 

those that are in the system now, that the federal government 

would pick that up -- in terms of the setting up of the schools, 

the requirement for a different type of teacher training, 

different kinds of class-room resources for a different style of 

language instruction, that that would be picked up by the 

federal government. 

 

And that is what I meant by incremental costs -- any costs, per 

pupil costs for that component that are over and above what is 

being experienced now. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I believe that 

was all part of the agreement that was signed by the previous 

government and the federal government concerning the French 

chapter 13 students . . . charter 23, sorry.  But those 

incremental costs are one-time costs.  But with this 

transportation, those are not going to be simply incremental 

costs.  They're going to be ongoing costs. 

 

When you train a teacher, I would hope that you would only 

have to train that teacher once to be able to function properly in 

a French school.  There may be upgrading, but that's normal 

with all the teacher training.  But those transportation costs, 

those additional transportation costs are going to be ongoing.  

And the current program that you've mentioned, the federal 

agreement is only good for another five years. 

 

If you can negotiate longer, well then that will increase.  But at 

the present time it's only five years.  So after that five-year term 

runs out, Madam Minister, then the province will indeed be 

bearing those additional costs.  And I'm not disagreeing with 

the idea of having the third school board.  It's just who is going 

to pay.  And that's the question here. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as I said before, that 

incremental costs are those that are described as 



1810 Saskatchewan Hansard July 28, 1992 

being over and above those that are taking place now.  And the 

member is referring to costs that are already in the system.  

Those are not incremental, they're already there. 

 

Then what we're saying is that it's not a five-year agreement.  It 

was a 10-year agreement starting in 1988 which was reached 

and which was reneged upon by the then provincial 

administration, so that their richest years, the more heavily 

loaded to the federal contribution years, are gone.  And we're in 

the position where we're trying to renegotiate that.  There's not 

five years left in the current agreement; there's six years left. 

 

And we believe that once the system is in place and all those 

teachers are trained and all those one-time costs are done, that 

there will not be any further incremental costs.  That all of 

those students that are in the system are there now or would be 

there anyway and would be 100 per cent provincial 

responsibility. 

 

However if it's seen that there is a need or there is a possibility 

that there could be a continuing federal contribution, we would 

certainly try to renegotiate that. 

 

It's one component of really not just an agreement between 

Saskatchewan and the federal government, but a protocol 

between the federal government and all of the provinces in the 

country with respect to language instruction. 

 

So this is the basis that we're committed to move on it, is that 

the federal government has to have a commitment to pick up 

the incremental costs. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I'm a farmer.  I live on 

. . . my section of land next to town has a railroad track running 

through it.  I haul my grain to town; it's three miles.  So I have 

a cost of transporting my grain.  But what happened was they 

took the rail line out.  I now have to transport my grain 17 

miles rather than three to get it to the rail line. 

 

Using that analogy with your students, if I'm transporting the 

students three miles and for some reason it changes and I'm 

now transporting them 17 miles, there's an additional cost.  

You can say that you were paying to transport the students the 

three miles, but it costs more to transport those students 17 

miles than it does three miles.  So there is an additional cost 

there.  You just can't say, well we're already carrying it or 

carrying those students. 

 

Well I was already loading that grain on my truck, but it cost 

me a lot more to haul it 17 miles than it does to haul it three 

miles.  So there's an additional cost there.  That additional cost 

has to be picked up by somebody.  If it's the province, there's 

an additional cost to the province.  If it's the federal 

government, then it's not a cost to the province. 

 

But that agreement you say is six years.  Fine.  So that 

additional cost may be picked up for six years.  But what 

happens after that point?  The province, in other words, has to 

pick up that additional cost.  So there will indeed be an 

additional cost to the province. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the number 

of students and the number of school locations will be very 

small.  There are a number of students that are being 

transported now that might not have to be transported under the 

new scheme.  So I think that the net result, if the federal 

government picks up the incremental costs . . . and it's hard to 

predict because we don't know.  A rural school division right 

now, looking at the demographics in their school division, is 

finding it very hard to predict. 

 

And as the population changes, I think that the uncertainty with 

respect to the transportation of students to the francophone 

component is probably much, much smaller than the 

uncertainty in the transportation of students in the public school 

system in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, while there may 

be schools closing in rural Saskatchewan, that will indeed put 

an additional cost on transporting those students to some other 

location.  But I look at my own constituency.  I fully expect the 

school at Bellegarde will continue to operate as a totally French 

school, as it should.  But as the opportunities become available, 

more and more students from around the entire area now wish 

to participate in that school.  And that's fine.  They should have 

that opportunity.  But there will indeed be a greater cost 

involved in that.  And I wish you would admit that. 

 

I already have talked to parents . . . I haven't talked to them, but 

I have talked to the school board who has been approached by 

the parents to transport students now 35, 40 miles to attend that 

school.  So they will be receiving the additional funding.  In 

this particular case, it just works out that they will still be 

within the same school division, but there will be an additional 

cost.  Somebody will be paid to transport those students from A 

to Bellegarde.  So the additional cost is there. 

 

And, Madam Minister, will you please admit that there will 

indeed be an additional cost under a third school division? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite is 

referring to the situation as it is right now and saying that there 

is additional cost because of the choices that parents and 

schools are making; that this is causing an additional cost in 

transportation. 

 

Well there is a limitation on the number of section 23 parents 

and students.  It will really be a very small amount.  And so I 

say that we may as well get the federal contribution.  We're not 

getting a federal contribution now. 

 

If we institute the French governance component we'll be 

getting twenty-seven and a half million dollars into the 

provincial education system that we're not getting now.  So 

people are exercising their choices now.  There's an additional 

cost now that the province and the local taxpayer is paying 

completely without a federal contribution. 

 

So I think that the members opposite should support us in 

adding that federal contribution into the Saskatchewan system 

that we otherwise wouldn't have access to. 



July 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1811 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, are you saying 

that the provincial government should be making an investment 

to access federal funds? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

member, I'm saying entirely the opposite.  I'm saying that we 

are making an investment now in terms of the per pupil cost of 

every student that is in every public system in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  I'm saying that if there is an opportunity to 

accommodate a different style for a small number of people 

and have the difference in what we're paying now and what it 

costs to deliver the other style totally picked up by the federal 

government, then we should do it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, if you 

implement a third school board, there won't necessarily be 

school buildings, facilities, plants available in those locations 

which would qualify.  So if an area was to apply and qualify to 

receive funding for a third . . . a plant for a third school board, 

additional funds would have to be provided by the Department 

of Education to build those facilities.  So that would be an 

investment, would it not, by the Department of Education into 

those plants to facilitate a third school board. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there is a component in 

the current agreement and in the one that we are trying to 

enhance or restore, the forfeit of the portion of for capital 

construction.  There will not be provincial dollars allocated to 

construction to capital costs for this component of education. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- If a third school board is implemented, 

will there be then any funds going into it from the province? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the way the proposal is 

designed and the way the agreement with the federal 

government is designed, is the province would continue to pay 

the per pupil costs as they do now for every school pupil in the 

province.  Any additional costs related to that particular style of 

education would be paid for by the federal government.  So 

there would not be an additional cost to the provincial taxpayer. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, we seem to be 

going in circles in this one and not going any place, so I will 

move on to another topic. 

 

Madam Minister, you stated that there were 41 permanent 

employees that were terminated or let go for whatever reasons 

within the department, and six of those were non-permanent 

people that were terminated.  One of those employees was 

terminated involuntarily.  Who was that person? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, just checking the list 

here because there were some elimination of positions as a 

result of the budget that were budget-driven.  Other than that, 

there was only one which probably couldn't be completely 

described as voluntary, and that was the separation of the 

deputy minister of the department. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- And who was that deputy minister, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- The deputy minister at the time that 

the administration changed was Dr. Eleanor Rourke. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, what were Ms. 

Rourke's qualifications and why was she terminated? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I certainly found no 

fault with Dr. Rourke's professional qualifications.  She had a 

doctorate and she was a very well-experienced educational 

professional with a long record of service in the education 

community. 

 

However it was a matter of not competence but philosophy.  As 

the member opposite is aware, we're doing a wide range of 

reviews within the education system.  We want to look at some 

new directions and a reorganization of the department.  And I 

felt that a new style of leadership was required in order to 

establish that new direction. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, was that position 

refilled? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the position was filled 

by the incumbent that sits at my left today, Arleen Hynd, who 

is now the deputy minister, and comes to the position very well 

qualified, with long and responsible experience in the public 

service provincially and in the public service for the federal 

government. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, what are Ms. Hynd's 

qualifications?  What fields has she experience in? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to respond.  

I don't have a written resum before me but Ms. Hynd comes to 

us with more than 20 years in the public service -- provincial 

and federal.  She has a Bachelor of Commerce degree from the 

University of Saskatchewan.  She has worked in finance at the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation, and came to us directly from 

a very responsible position with the federal department of 

Indian and northern affairs. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, does your deputy 

minister have any experience in the education field? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, she has extensive 

experience in the education field, having been a student herself 

and being the mother of three current students. 

 

But I think that it's very important, when you're trying to 

establish a new direction, that leadership is very important.  

And the Department of Education is staffed with many, many 

competent professional educators with specialities in a variety 

of fields.  So the competence in education and the professional 

credentials are very well covered-off in the department. 

 

And what was required for a new direction for the department 

and for a forward look into the changes that we're going to 

have to make in the education system, was a person with 

experience in working with people in the 



1812 Saskatchewan Hansard July 28, 1992 

public service, who could provide the leadership to the 

professional people in the department and to those leaders in 

the education community that the department has to interface 

with, like the trustees' association, the League of Educational 

Administrators, the business officials, and the Saskatchewan 

Teachers' Federation. 

 

So what we needed, in my estimation, was not so much 

professional credentials specific to the education field, which 

we already have a great deal of within the department, but a 

person with good communications skills, who could work with 

the department and with all of those people in the education 

community to chart a new direction for education in this 

province. 

 

And while I had complete confidence in the professional 

qualifications of the previous deputy minister and a reasonable 

relationship with her, I didn't see those qualities, and I certainly 

do see them in the current leadership in the department.  And 

we are moving and making considerable progress in those 

directions that we charted for ourselves at the beginning of the 

term. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I'm sure 

that Ms. Hynd will do a good job, has the proper qualifications 

in the areas that you have mentioned.  But I also . . . You talked 

of philosophy.  Well perhaps in the case of philosophy it's a 

matter of what membership card you hold. 

 

I'm surprised that there was no one in the Department of 

Education or in the education field who would not have also 

qualified for this type of a position.  What type of search did 

you do before hiring Ms. Hynd? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I certainly did an 

exhaustive search of rsums.  As the member might imagine, 

there's a huge number of rsums submitted for consideration 

by the government and in the public service for employment at 

all levels. 

 

And one of the criteria, as I said, that I used in my search for 

leadership for the Department of Education, was not 

professional credentials in the education field because the 

department is fully staffed with people with excellent 

professional credentials, and what we needed was leadership. 

 

For example, one of the projects that I wanted the department 

to be committed to very early on was the project that we were 

calling the integrated school model, where the Departments of 

Health, Social Services, Justice, and Education will work 

together to deliver an integrated service to children in the 

elementary and high school system of which there are so many 

now that arrive in the class-room with their physical and 

emotional needs not met.  And these can't necessarily be met -- 

nor should they be -- by the class-room teacher. 

 

Now in the traditional sense of the Department of Education, 

and those other line departments I might add, there hasn't been 

a tradition or a history of the departments working together.  

And so what we needed was not someone who would look at 

the department in a professional manner, but someone who 

would look at the department and help the people, the 

educational 

professionals there, to bridge those gaps between the 

Department of Education and the other departments to achieve 

an integrated delivery. 

 

And that's just one example of where there's more need for 

communication skills and administrative, straight 

administrative experience than professional expertise in a 

specialized field. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

I'm going to be referring to a number of questions that you 

were submitted in writing by the critic, but I would make an 

observation, seeing as we are discussing qualifications and that 

type of thing.  And I would say to you that my experience as 

the minister responsible for aboriginal affairs in this province 

over a number of months brought me in contact with a lot of 

people that had dealt with the federal Department of Indian and 

Native Affairs.  And I would say to you in all sincerity, Madam 

Minister, that a lot of our aboriginal people find that one of the 

most patronizing . . . Colonization was one of the words that 

they always used to me in describing the federal Department of 

Indian and Native Affairs. 

 

And I would hope that your deputy minister's experience in that 

department isn't in that area, because a lot of the aboriginal 

community in our province have a great deal of difficulty with 

the attitude of that federal department.  And I'm only passing 

on to you comments that were made to me over and over again 

about that. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, back to the questions that were 

provided.  And I remind you that the Associate Minister of 

Finance last night commended the opposition on developing 

this line of questioning.  It made it much easier for himself and 

his department to handle many of the questions.  In fact, SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation), PSC 

(Public Service Commission), and Justice have all gone 

through these and pretty well answered everything there was to 

answer. 

 

And yet, Madam Minister, your document comes back with 

most of the major areas, either information can't be provided or 

don't care.  It's not a kind of response that we had hoped for to 

wrap up your Estimates.  And I refer you to 1(b), and I think 

you have that there, which asks for lists of persons, whether 

they were fired, terminated, that type of thing, the categories.  

The minister beside you provided all of that information just 

tickety-boo and there was no problems.  Your response says 

information can't be provided. 

 

I then go to 2(c) where it talks about rental arrangements and 

operating costs administered by SPMC .  Well the minister told 

us last night in the House that SPMC expects each of the 

departments to do those responses on their own. 

 

Justice has already done it, and they've only been in here in 

Estimates for a few hours.  Justice already has provided that 

information.  And your response is that that should all come 

out of SPMC.  And that's not acceptable, Madam Minister. 

 

Another one is question 7 and that's about in-province 



July 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1813 

travel by your department.  Your response to us is: note that 

detailed information on in-province travel is not available. 

 

The other departments came forward with that no problem at 

all, Madam Minister.  And I don't know why your in-province 

travel would be a big issue. 

 

Another one that I found interesting, Madam Minister, it's on 

the business of travel agencies.  And your response to us is, the 

department does business with Travel directors . . . or 

Directions and Goliger's Travel.  We asked you the question of 

how you did your selections.  Other departments were very 

forthcoming about it.  Nothing from you. 

 

Another question, 27 to 28, asked about all the various 

commissions, groups, that the Department of Education is 

involved in and the costs associated with those.  I mean, are 

you to have us believe that you can't account for the costs of 

the various commissions dealing with Education in this 

province?  Your response to us: information on costs is not 

available.  Well, Madam Minister, that's simply not acceptable.  

That's the whole idea of Estimates, is to find out those types of 

things. 

 

On the question of manuals.  Now we know that in the 

Department of Education there are more manuals than the 

human resources one.  I mean there's probably two dozen at 

least.  And I can remember well the critic, former Education 

critic in the legislature prior to 1991, asking the minister about 

all the various manuals.  And the minister had to recite, go 

through the whole list of all the various manuals that the 

Department of Education had to satisfy the member from 

Broadway. 

 

And why you would come back to us and say that that's all 

there is, you know.  So, Madam Minister, seeing as your seat 

mate there has commended us on our approach and has seen fit 

to answer all of these questions in some detail, I would think 

it's incumbent, if we're going to pass your Estimates, that we 

have another look at this -- and particularly section 1, because 

that's the type of information that every department is expected 

to provide and does so.  And we've certainly received it from 

every department that's been in here prior to. 

 

So I want to bring it to your awareness, Madam Minister, get it 

on the record before 5 o'clock, because I understand there are 

more questions by the critic.  And I'm sure that we would be 

pleased to visit with you or your officials on solving some of 

these problems so we can get on with your Estimates. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

member from Thunder Creek, I do have to say that I will not 

accept . . . and I have to correct him on his, you know, sort of 

casual and offhand remark that we answered in such terms as 

"don't care."  You will not find that expression on these pages. 

 

It's what the situation really is, is that we received this list of 

questions, three, or a maximum of four working days, would be 

last Wednesday or Thursday.  And with respect to a colleague 

and the other departments that have come before, our 

department has many, many, many more 

employees and is much more complex than the departments 

that you've referred to that have given you the full information 

earlier. 

 

We certainly undertake to provide complete information, but 

we do have more employees, and where you're asking, for 

instance, on the past employment record of every one of our 

hundreds of employees, this is impossible to provide in three 

days. 

 

There is an in-province travel.  The departments with respect 

that you have the Estimates for so far may not have the kind of 

in-province travel.  We have people from our regional offices 

and our special education consultants and so forth in the shared 

services that travel constantly.  And so it will take more time 

than three days to give you an open, honest, definitive, correct 

answer in that respect.  We're not refusing to, but it will 

certainly take more time than that. 

 

But we certainly undertake to provide those things, the replies, 

in detail if you really . . . Actually the list that we were working 

off was the one that was originally prepared for the Public 

Service Commission.  And to be truthful, some of the questions 

as they relate to our department are not really in a very accurate 

context.  So we did the best we could within the context of the 

list, to respond in the detail that we thought that you would 

want.  But we'll be happy to elaborate on it, but it certainly will 

take more time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, the list of questions 

which you got last week, I personally brought into the House 

with a note to every minister so that they would all be the 

same, so that no one would feel that they were being treated 

differently.  They were all updated versions.  The Associate 

Minister of Finance worked off of that.  Justice has worked off 

of that, so there's no discrepancies. 

 

Madam Minister, the question -- and you know it well -- is only 

dealing with people since November 1 in that question, and I 

don't think anybody's terminated more people than the 

Associate Minister of Finance in SPMC and some other areas, 

and yet he had no problem coming up with that.  And we've 

given you the out on the employment history, Madam Minister.  

It's clearly outlined in the questions that if the employee refuses 

to give that, then we accept that.  That if the employee says, no 

I don't want that employment history put into the Estimates of 

the Department of Education, that's fine. 

 

(1645) 

 

But I think it is right and proper for you to ask.  And we give 

them the choice. We're not saying that you have to do that.  If 

the employee doesn't want it, fair ball, Madam Minister. 

 

So I don't think, especially covering all the parts of 1(b) that it 

is that onerous a task, unless you have dismissed a lot more 

people than what I think you have and hired a lot more.  And 

you tell us you that haven't hired any.  Then that should be a 

fairly straightforward question to answer along with the 

employment histories.  It's just a matter of saying yes or no to 

the employee.  The employee can 



1814 Saskatchewan Hansard July 28, 1992 

refuse. 

 

So I don't exactly accept your response, Madam Minister, that 

it is all that difficult to put together. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I can only repeat 

my undertaking to attempt to review the list again.  We 

certainly have no intent to be evasive; we just want to be 

realistic.  Perhaps we may have to communicate with the 

member opposite in terms of how some of the questions are 

framed to make sure that we understand exactly what it is they 

want, because we have tried to respond in as an accountable a 

way as possible. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- One other short question, Madam Minister.  

Question 8, we asked you to account for monies that were 

either left over in your previous budget or now spent.  And I'm 

wondering why the 4,267,684.10 that was in the '91-92 budget 

was not expended, given the extreme situation that certain 

schools have in this province.  And I've outlined my particular 

problem in Mortlach to you, and I know other members have 

raised similar concerns. 

 

You obviously had that amount of money that was not spent in 

your departmental Estimates for '91-92, and I'm wondering if 

your Estimates for '92-93 were reduced by a corresponding 

amount or if in effect there was some debt sort of off-loaded 

back into the previous budget year that didn't necessarily need 

to. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

indication that there was some $4 million of the budget 

remaining unspent, and some creative ways to use that 

so-called surplus in a fiscal situation where there's a $14 billion 

deficit, that amount was in the student aid area.  It was an 

estimate, a shortfall in the estimate that would have been 

required for student loans because of the change in the criteria.  

So that was the area it was in, rather than in some other line of 

the Estimates. 

 

And indeed an adjustment was made in the current budget.  It's 

not only a change in the criteria, but also as the program 

matures and a better ability to forecast what repayments will be 

and what the net draw on the student aid fund will have on the 

consolidated revenue fund and what the real requirement will 

be. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- What was that adjustment, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the student aid fund 

allocation has decreased in last year's budget from $36.257 

million; that was '91-92.  This year it's 30.566 million-odd.  So 

that represents about 6 million.  So that would be the 4 million 

that wasn't used in last year's budget -- 36 million was 

allocated; 32 million would have been used.  And so there was 

a decrease of approximately 2 million between the actual last 

year and the budgeted this year.  And again, that reflects not 

less money available, but a better forecast of what the 

repayments will be as the program matures. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, I have an individual who 

wrote me a letter asking me to raise a question with you.  And I 

won't use her last name, but she has written in 

correspondence with you.  She's had a great deal of difficulty in 

. . . Her first name is Anita and she's written you a letter asking 

you to look into why her marks were not supplied to have her 

qualify to go to nurses' training.  And what I would like you to 

do is to take a look at the correspondence she has sent to you 

and come back with a reply. 

 

I know you won't be able to do that for me today, but this lady 

is from Neidpath, and that's probably enough information that 

you have.  She wrote me a letter asking me about it and I'm 

inquiring of it on her behalf.  I could probably get this faxed 

and give it to you but I think that's sufficient evidence to give 

you an opportunity to take a look at it.  But if you need more, 

then I can get it for you too. 

 

I have a question that relates to the university.  This past year I 

had a lot of people in my constituency who were very 

concerned about the registration process at the University of 

Saskatchewan.  The university registration process caused a 

great deal of concern in the fact that there were some people 

that got an opportunity to qualify for classes, and in a very 

restrictive time and a very restrictive placement of seats in 

various classes there was a significant problem raised when 

people, for example, received an invitation to come and register 

-- I believe it was on a Wednesday -- and the majority of 

people even in Saskatoon only got notice of the registration 

process on Friday, and some even on the Monday after.  And I 

raised this with the president of the university.  I know that 

there were quite a few concerns. 

 

But I wanted to raise it with you, because what really happened 

and really concerned me is the further you got from Saskatoon 

in registering for these classes, the more you were excluded 

from an opportunity in some of them. 

 

And I had an individual who contacted me.  She's a student of 

education and she had a lot of difficulty.  In fact her classes 

may extend her time that she has to be in university to five 

years, rather than four, in order to complete the classes she 

needs to become a teacher. 

 

So I wonder if you will respond to that for us, please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we have been made 

aware of this problem since the registrations for the upcoming 

term began at the universities in Saskatchewan.  And it's 

unfortunate that all of the students are not able to have access -- 

and access to the courses of their choice. 

 

But funding restraints don't help any.  And the member from 

Morse will be aware of the reasons for that. 

 

But we also have in Saskatchewan the highest proportion of 

our population seeking access to post-secondary spaces in both 

the universities and the technical side of education.  We have 

the highest proportion of any province in Canada, which is very 

positive in one way -- that our citizens do want to increase their 

knowledge and their training and their skills.  But it is a real 

challenge for our institutions to respond to those needs in light 

of the fiscal problems that we face. 



July 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1815 

This year there were some particular problems with the 

procedures that were used for people that were able to actually 

physically attend versus those who applied for their courses by 

mail.  And we have become aware of that and we've asked the 

university administrations and the registrars' offices to try to 

refine those to make sure that there really is equal opportunity 

for students in Saskatchewan no matter where they live which, 

as the member knows, is the objective of our education system 

throughout not only from K to 12, but in the post-secondary 

system. 

 

And so we do want to make improvements at the level that he 

raises to improve that equality, because we acknowledge that 

deficiency this year. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I want to point that out, because I also raised 

with the president the role of the deputy minister of Education 

and I believe of Finance are going to be on the board of 

governors.  And I'm not sure that they were particularly happy 

with that move.  And I'm not sure that they're necessarily 

pleased with the looking-over-your-shoulder kind of an attitude 

I think that it is anticipated to be.  However being as it is that, 

the deputy minister is definitely going to have an opportunity 

to influence the decision on the registration. 

 

It's significant, I believe, in a number of other ways.  I want to 

point out one thing.  I'll ask the question first of all.  How many 

students are at the University of Saskatchewan and at Regina 

who are over 60 years old?  Have you got an idea or have you 

got a breakdown of the level of participation in universities by 

those who we would call at the top end of the age that would be 

participating in an education in university?  Have you got 

numbers on those? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I wouldn't have those 

numbers.  I'm not even sure what kind of demographical 

information on their student population the universities have, 

but I can certainly check with them and see whether I can 

provide that information. 

 

I would like to make a comment on the member's observation 

about the composition of the boards of governors.  And I'm 

quite aware of the reaction of the respective presidents.  And as 

I explained to them, that we are putting into place the 

universities review panel which has been announced and the 

terms of reference for which they're aware and that we wanted 

to have representation from Education and Finance on the 

boards of governors while those reviews were taking place. 

 

The other reason was that we're in a unique situation for the 

first time in history in Saskatchewan, that all of the positions 

on the board of governors that we're responsible to nominate or 

appoint, all expired at the same time because of appointments . 

. . because of some actions that were taken three years ago. 

 

And we want to re-establish a progression so that there is some 

continuity.  And you can't very well go out into the community 

and find nice, good citizens to put on the board and say, well 

I'm going to appoint you for a three-year term, which is what 

the universities Act specifies, but I'm going to ask you to resign 

in a year so that I can create a progression.  But with the people 

from 

the Finance and Education, the deputy ministers on the boards, 

if it's deemed that we want to have some different 

representation and we want to establish a progression again, we 

have the liberty of asking him to step down at any time. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 

 


