




















































Hansard: July 10, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1395 

 July 10, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 To the Honourable the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan in Legislature Assembled:  

 The Petition of the undersigned farmers and citizens of the 

Province of Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 The Government of Saskatchewan entered into legally 

binding contracts with them to provide a Gross Revenue 

Insurance Program explicitly guaranteeing that the provisions 

of the contract would not be changed without notice being 

given to farmers by March 15, 1992 and that the Government 

has announced its intentions before the Courts in Melville 

that it proposes to pass a law saying farmers received such 

notice when in actual fact they did not and concerned that the 

crisis on the farm is being made much worse by these actions. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to 

 

 1.) allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand for this year; 

 

 2.) start working with the federal government and farmers to 

design a program that will be a true "revenue insurance" 

program by the end of this calendar year, and 

 

 3.) ensure that the new revenue insurance program be set up 

on an individual cost-of-production to return ratio instead of 

a risk area formula. 

 

And I have here, Mr. Speaker, people from the districts of 

Bethune, Findlater, Chamberlain, Tuxford, and Moose Jaw, I 

present. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like 

to introduce through you, and to you, to the Assembly today a 

person sitting in the gallery opposite, His Worship Mayor 

Doug Still of Humboldt.  He's down on business today.  I 

would like all members to help me welcome the mayor of 

Humboldt. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to introduce 

to you, and through you, to members of the Assembly this 

morning a person sitting in your gallery, sir, someone I think 

that you probably know quite well.  He's a farmer from the 

Moose Jaw district, a constituent of 

mine.  His name is Mr. Art Crone. 

 

Mr. Crone and his family run one of the largest hog operations 

in the province, individual operations.  He and a number of 

members of his family have been in hog production for 

approximately 20 years.  Mr. Crone is in the building today 

soliciting support for the red meat industry in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- I wonder if the members would allow the 

Speaker to join the member from Thunder Creek to introduce a 

guest also? 

 

I would like to certainly take his pleasure to introduce Art 

Crone who's my first cousin.  And of course I've known Art for 

many, many, many years.  And although we've had our 

differences on many issues, we do appreciate seeing Art here 

today, and wish him well and his family well, and ask all 

members to join with me in welcoming Art to the gallery here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

very pleased to announce the release of the co-pilot's manual.  

Saskatchewan Government Insurance has designed this manual 

to help parents and other responsible individuals who 

accompany new drivers while they are practising their driving 

skills. 

 

The manual contains step-by-step procedures for the practising 

of basic driving manoeuvres as well as helpful suggestions that 

will make the learning process a positive experience for the 

new driver and the co-pilot.  The importance for new drivers of 

acquiring the required skills to be safe and competent behind 

the wheel cannot be overstressed.  By instilling good driving 

habits early on, we will be able to prevent many unnecessary 

accidents in the future. 

 

The co-pilot's manual, when used in conjunction with the 

Saskatchewan driver's handbook which details the rules of the 

road and basic driving instructions, will go a long way towards 

improving the safety of Saskatchewan road users and the 

general community.  As a parent of two teenagers, I personally 

congratulate SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), but I 

feel I can also speak for the parents and citizens of this 

province in commending SGI for this positive initiative. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Too often the news we 

hear, see, and read describes disasters, unemployment, and 

bankruptcies.  This morning, in need of a personal lift, I drove 

through Lakeridge in the north end of the constituency I'm 

blessed to represent. 

 

Since I last went door-to-door in Lakeridge last October, there 

have been more than 30 housing starts and lots of 



1396 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 1992 

buildings are being . . . or lots are being prepared for more 

buildings.  These houses are in varying stages of completion, 

from basement cement to the finishing touches outside and 

everything in between. 

 

Yesterday we heard news of the sensational Saskatchewan 

response to the Saskatchewan savings bond program where 

$560 million in bonds were bought by Saskatchewan residents 

in a very oversubscribed offering. 

 

Similarly, the people and the home builders are clearly 

enthusiastic about the future in Saskatchewan, and more 

directly, in Regina.  They know, as we all do, there will be 

better times ahead.  The houses are being built in the best 

Saskatchewan tradition of improving our lot in life.  The 

employment benefits are immediate and the results will be 

long-term assets.  There continues to be remarkable faith 

displayed by Saskatchewan people, a faith that when the going 

gets tough -- as it is in Saskatchewan right now -- the tough get 

going.  Call it Saskatchewan tough, call it a leap of 

Saskatchewan faith, call it what you want, but I call it good 

news. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.) 

 

This weekend in Prince Albert, Ukrainian descendants are 

inviting their friends and their neighbours to a celebration 

commemorating one hundred years since the first immigration 

of Ukrainians to Canada.  This celebration is one of several 

being held across Saskatchewan and other parts of Canada this 

year. 

 

Organizers have been working for over a year on this, Mr. 

Speaker, and are expecting more than a thousand people to join 

in the celebrations, to attend the concerts Sunday afternoon, 

visit the arts and crafts sales and displays, taste the bread baked 

in the clay oven, and attend the banquet.  It's Ukrainians' way 

of saying: we love our country, Canada; we're proud to 

acknowledge our heritage; and we're very pleased to be part of 

the great Canadian mosaic. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On July 31 to 

August 1 and 2, in my constituency, the second-biggest annual 

country and western music festival in Saskatchewan will take 

place again this year in the Cypress Hills.  Much like the 

Craven valley jamboree which is presently in effect, the 

Hootinanny in the Hills, as it is known, sponsored by Beefaroo 

Productions, presents country and western entertainment much 

the same as that which is on now. And a lot of the same folks 

that attend the Craven valley jamboree will end up going over 

to the Hootinanny just as sort of a finish-off for the season. 

 

With the help . . . and many thanks to the Department of 

Tourism and Economic Diversification for their financial 

assistance in advertising and other areas as before, and again 

this year. Many thanks go to them for their 

assistance in helping this production to continue. 

 

The production provides a fixed budget of $200,000-plus 

investment, and about 100 jobs that creates work for one to two 

weeks for a lot of folks in the summer out in our area. 

 

The Kinsmen from Maple Creek, Mr. Speaker, and Shaunavon 

and Eastend, run the beer gardens, making about $8,000 

annually for their charitable work.  The town of Consul, 

Saskatchewan's European club earns about $3,500 annually for 

clean 

_up and sewage disposal. 

 

Some of the acts this year will be Travis Tritt, Carlene Carter, 

Pirates of the Mississippi, the Johner Brothers, and four other 

Saskatchewan groups.  Six thousand people, Mr. Speaker, are 

expected to attend with 50 per cent from out of province.  And 

they invite you all to come. 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to talk today 

about a small Anglican church in the Punnichy area, this small 

church which was built of hand-hewn logs by volunteers in 

1892. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the years have gone by and the outside world has 

seen many changes, but St. George's Kutawa Church remains 

virtually unchanged.  The walls have been stuccoed and roof 

reshingled but time has not changed the setting of this little 

place of worship. 

 

The church is surrounded by about 40 acres of prairie and bush, 

and the road leading into the church is an original segment of 

the old telegraph trail. 

 

I said, Mr. Speaker, that the church is surrounded by bush, and 

that is where the name Kutawa came from.  It is the Cree word 

meaning small clearing in the bush. 

 

A cemetery is located behind the church with graves dating 

back to the turn of the century, and it is the final resting place 

for many early pioneers, and even today is favoured by many 

as their final resting place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on Sunday I will have the pleasure of attending 

the centennial service along with the Bishop of Qu'Appelle and 

the Primate of the Anglican Church of Canada.  And I want to 

take this opportunity now to congratulate the people of Kutawa 

on their centennial. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just want to take the 

opportunity today to share with the members of the legislature 

and pass on the observations to the members of the family of 

the passing of a great Canadian that was marked yesterday in 

the funeral services for Jake Brown, who was the dean of 

agriculture for the College of Agriculture for a number of 

years, worked as an agricultural economist, worked for the 

provincial government, received the Order of Canada, 

Saskatchewan Award of Merit, and generally was considered to 

be one of the most conscientious agricultural people that we've 

seen in Saskatchewan's history and contributed not only 

nationally but internationally. 



July 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1397 

And I want to say personally to his family and to the Minister 

of Energy who is here with us here today and to others that the 

respect, the genuine respect that we held and we all hold for 

Jake Brown and his family is extremely high and we are very, 

very proud of the fact that men and women of that calibre have 

decided to go into public life and serve and provide a 

significant difference and indeed inspiration to the young 

people in the province of Saskatchewan and across Canada. 

 

So we share in the loss but we recall with great fondness the 

memory of Jake Brown. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Changes to Health Care 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

going to be directed to the Minister of Health this morning, Mr. 

Speaker.  Madam Minister, on Wednesday we learned of your 

plan to close or to convert rural hospitals, which was in 

complete contradiction to the promise that you made while you 

were in opposition as critic for Health and certainly while you 

were . . . during the campaign. 

 

Yesterday, Madam Minister, we learned of your massive 

letter-writing campaign to cover your tracks.  Now we hear you 

frantically phoning board members and interest groups all 

around the province.  It seems that the only way that we can get 

you to consult with the people of this province is to embarrass 

you into it. 

 

Madam Minister, shouldn't you have directed your so-called 

wellness team to have engaged in major public consultation 

before putting your wellness plan into action?  Madam 

Minister, will you not admit to that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the fact is, is the wellness 

team has met with many, many, many, many people in the last 

few months over a course of a very short period of time since 

we've taken office.  They have consulted widely and met with 

many people.  And there's been a lot of input into this entire 

process. 

 

The members opposite, it's very easy for them to make blanket 

statements which they know nothing about.  And just to make 

blanket statements that have no truth to them and which they 

know nothing about, it's very simple to do that.  But I say it's 

also irresponsible, Mr. Speaker.  And what it doesn't do, what it 

doesn't do is help the people of Saskatchewan to move towards 

a system of health care that is in the final result going to 

provide a much higher quality of health care service, which 

will take taxpayers' dollars and use them in an efficient way, in 

a sensitive way, in a quality of health care way as we move 

through this reform.  Because that is what is happening here, 

Mr. Speaker.  And what they are trying to do is to attempt to 

prevent the improvement of the quality of health care in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Not so, Madam 

Minister, not so.  We are dealing with your report.  It's not our 

words; it's not our scare tactics. It is you, Madam Minister, as 

the queen of mediscare that is responsible for this situation. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I want you to react to this.  We know 

that you are sending thousands of letters to Saskatchewan 

citizens as we speak.  Can you tell this Assembly . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order!  You'll have your turn, 

I'm sure. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And I say to 

Madam Minister, we know that you are now sending out 

thousands of letters to Saskatchewan citizens in your attempt 

now to do damage control.  Can you tell this Assembly now, 

Madam Minister -- and this should not be a very difficult 

question for you -- can you tell this Assembly whether or not 

this letter assures these people that there will be public hearings 

on your closures or on your conversions?  Will you table that 

letter for us this afternoon so that becomes a public document? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that 

there will be public meetings as we go through this reform.  I 

said that yesterday, and I'll say it again.  And there will be 

widespread public consultation.  That is at the root of our 

health care reform. 

 

Now with respect to the specific issue of the correspondence, 

we will be writing to some people in the province to correct the 

king of exaggeration's comments.  The fact of the matter is 

there's been gross misrepresentation by the members opposite 

-- gross exaggeration. 

 

And yes, we will be communicating with the public of 

Saskatchewan to tell them what we are thinking about in terms 

of health care reform and to correct the comments from the 

member opposite that are designed to prevent, to prevent what 

this government wants to do.  And that is improve the quality 

of health care for the people of Saskatchewan and to take us 

into a new generation of medicare that has more emphasis on 

health promotion and wellness, that is better co-ordinated and 

integrated, Mr. Speaker, and that provides our people with 

good health care. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And, Madam 

Minister, I find your answer . . . And I'd like to laugh at the 

humour of it, but you see the question that we're dealing with is 

so serious that I cannot. 

 

Madam Minister, if you say I am the king of gross 

exaggeration, then you can put the people of the Saskatchewan 

mind at ease by simply saying that first of all, I will table the 

so-called new version that you have of your report -- you say 

there's is a newer version -- table that version so that people of 

Saskatchewan can have that 



1398 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 1992 

reassurance. 

 

Madam Minister, I asked you a very simple question here:  will 

you commit this morning to the people of Saskatchewan that 

yes, you will have public hearings, you will allow the people of 

this province to have input.  And if they tell you in rural 

Saskatchewan, don't close our hospitals, Madam Minister, will 

you admit now and confirm that you will listen to those people 

of rural Saskatchewan and not close their hospitals?  Or what's 

the point of having public consultations if you're not going to 

listen to them, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, we always listen to the 

people of this province, that's why we're here.  That's why there 

are 55 members on this side and 10 members over there.  We 

listen to the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- And the fact of the matter is, is there's 

been widespread consultation, and we will continue to consult 

with the people.  And that is our commitment and has always 

been our commitment.  There will be widespread consultation 

as we move through this reform, unlike the members opposite 

who for 10 years did absolutely nothing with respect to health 

care reform.  Instead, they just engaged in all sorts of activities 

that attempted to maintain the status quo, but would not move 

the system through the necessary reform. 

 

How much did they spend in the 10 years on capital 

construction, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question, Mr. 

Speaker, is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, it is a serious concern 

when there is the potential and the threat to close up to 66 . . . 

and convert and close up to 66 rural hospitals. 

 

And, Mr. Premier, you can recall where as leaders we 

campaigned in by-elections like Assiniboia-Gravelbourg where 

you were really concerned and, I would assume, genuinely 

concerned about the closure of rural hospitals, and you've 

certainly campaigned against the closure of rural hospitals.  We 

see in the paper today that rural people are worried, Mr. 

Premier, about the closure of rural hospitals.  We know that the 

wellness minister, Mr. Premier, is in many quarters being 

called the wolf in sheep's clothing, the rural terminator, as has 

been bantered around. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order!  We are well past 

a minute already and I still have not heard a question.  I would 

ask the Leader of the Opposition to direct his question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Premier, I ask you on behalf of rural 

people, rural health boards, rural people -- some in the paper 

today and those that will be calling in -- will you 

commit yourself and your minister to a process of extensive 

public hearings, public consultation, so that in fact the genuine 

fears that people have about rural health care closures can be 

addressed in full public attention? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank the 

Leader of the Opposition for that question.  I want to tell the 

Leader of the Opposition and the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan that we're embarked upon a new, exciting 

program for the next generation of medicare and health care in 

the province of Saskatchewan which will put the people of 

Saskatchewan once again at the forefront of health care.  

Health care in this country is under a lot of stress, a lot of 

strain.  Health care has served us very well.  We support the 

basic principles of medicare and hospitalization, but now's the 

time in the 1990s to build a scheme and a system which serves 

the people of rural Saskatchewan, the people of this province, 

indeed the people of Canada, the best way possible in a new, 

exciting generation.  This is going to be a difficult job.  It's not 

going to be an easy one.  Nothing worthwhile is going to be 

easy. 

 

Now the member asked specifically, are we committed to 

widespread consultation.  I can only repeat what the Minister of 

Health has been saying over and over again, there shall be 

widespread consultation beginning with the tabling of a 

blueprint document, an official document by the Department of 

Health in the next few weeks which we'd invite the positive 

contribution of the opposition parties and the public at large, 

including widespread public consultation with the public 

outside of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Premier, I ask you again, will you have 

public hearings in the communities where we have the list of 

66 hospitals that could be closed or converted?  Would you be 

prepared to do that as a sincere commitment to each 

community?  And I can think of two in my constituency like 

Bienfait or Lampman, for example, that would be very 

interested.  Assiniboia, Gravelbourg have hospitals. 

 

We all have hospitals and rural people would be extremely 

interested in coming to a town hall meeting, public meeting, 

and saying, this is why I believe that we should have this kind 

of facility or an integrated facility or whatever it might be.  

Would you commit yourself in a sincere way to public hearings 

and public town hall meetings in these communities where 

you're planning this dramatic change in rural life-style? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I am again pleased to 

repeat and respond to the Leader of the Opposition our 

commitment for widespread public consultation.  That is the 

commitment that we make.  And I think the form and the 

nature of the consultation obviously has to take into account 

the question of the local community's needs or the local 

community's directions. 

 

The Minister of Health forwards to me, for example, the 

question pertaining to Bienfait, which is a Department of 



July 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1399 

Health . . . at least the minister's notation here.  There was a 

community decision at Bienfait to close the Bienfait-Coalfields 

Union Hospital already.  And the decision was taken under the 

previous government's decision -- your government.  And I 

don't know whether there were any public hearings in Bienfait 

that were involved in that.  I think the answer to the question is 

that there was not. 

 

And I don't condemn the former premier for that, other than to 

say that we have to be consistent in our responses here.  I don't 

condemn him for it because it depends on the various 

communities. 

 

The communities in this province are farther ahead sometimes, 

of this legislature and of governments, than we've given them 

credit for.  They know the stress and the strain financially 

we've been placed under the last 10 years, as a result, if I may 

add, the economic policies and fiscal policies of your 

government.  They know full well what's required, and I think 

that they know how to respond. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Premier, all I'm asking is that you will 

commit to an open, public process so that in fact when you are 

going to involve deep changes in rural health structure because 

. . . I mean it's clear that the people are worried.  I don't have to 

quote you the people that are worried across the province 

today.  And instead of wellness, they're thinking of termination 

-- the termination of hospitals. 

 

So that all I'm asking is, would you commit to a public, open 

process if you are going to address rural health care like we've 

seen in the report prepared for your cabinet?  People are 

frightened.  They want to know that you would be prepared to 

send your minister or your ministers into public meetings in 

communities across the province.  Would you commit to that 

today so people can feel confident that the public will be 

involved in changes in health care? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to keep 

repeating to the Leader of the Opposition and to all the 

members of the House what I have been saying, what the 

Minister of Health has been saying for days now inside this 

legislature and outside this legislature.  We are committed to 

full public consultation because we want the stakeholders in 

health care in Saskatchewan to be a part of the decisions which 

are to be taken.  We believe in full community consultation and 

community participation. 

 

I remind again the former premier, the Leader of the 

Opposition, that when the Bienfait hospital was closed, it was 

closed without public hearings.  It was closed under his 

administration without public hearings or public consultations.  

Just like that.  Now the Leader of the Opposition argues that we 

should be committed to doing what he did not do. 

 

Well I can tell the Leader of the Opposition that unlike his 

administration -- and I don't want to overly politicize this 

because this is a serious matter -- we are on the path for new 

health care reform.  It is going to be exciting; it is going to 

improve the opportunities for rural people in Saskatchewan.  

We hope to be a beacon again in all of Canada, and we're 

committed to full public consultation, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Premier, the reason that we're asking for 

public town hall meetings is that your tune has changed a little 

bit.  You said you don't want to politicize this.  They want to 

know that they can trust you with their health care system 

because they're a little concerned about what's happening in 

agriculture with GRIP (gross revenue insurance program); 

they're a little concerned with respect to funding for rural 

municipalities; they're a little bit concerned about the tax 

increases, and all of the things that weren't supposed to happen.  

So what we're concerned about, on their behalf, is: will you 

agree to go to town hall public meetings and talk to them about 

their rural community and their rural health care?  That's very 

important. 

 

You raised the point about making it political.  Nobody wants 

to make it political.  But your record in rural Saskatchewan is 

being questioned.  So I just want you to commit to them, to 

saying your ministers will go into public halls and talk to the 

public in open meetings before you make changes like we've 

seen in GRIP, and taxation, rural affairs, SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities), municipal changes that 

are completely different than you campaigned on, Mr. Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the 

Leader of the Opposition and the members of the Legislative 

Assembly exactly what I campaigned on.  It's entitled "Let's do 

it . . . The Saskatchewan Way".  And I'm pleased to report 

that at least a half, perhaps the two-thirds, of this platform card 

is now well on the way to being finalized according to the 

mandate that we've given. 

 

The members opposite are preachers of doom and gloom.  

They are so in the face of facts to the contrary: $565 million of 

sales bonds, Saskatchewan savings bonds purchased by people, 

rural and in urban Saskatchewan, showing confidence in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I tell the Leader of the Opposition again.  This government 

wants the stakeholders, everybody -- we want the Liberal 

Party; we want the Conservative Party, anybody, the health 

care professionals, the providers, the users -- to have their input 

into how we can devise the best health care scheme for the 

1990s and beyond. 

 

That means full public consultation.  Join us.  We are going to 

build the best health care program in all of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is for the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, the Liberal leader, the member 



1400 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 1992 

from Saskatoon Greystone, stood in this legislature and argued 

for a grant for a one-day fair in Beechy, yet while on the 

election campaign she wanted to close the hospital in Beechy.  

Imagine, a hospital for a one-day fair.  Do you, Mr. Premier, 

support the Liberal leader's stand in closing rural hospitals like 

the one in Beechy, like the one in Eatonia, and like the one in 

Dodsland? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I am tempted to 

say that there is a new king of exaggeration and hyperbole, but 

instead I think he's really still the prince.  He's still the prince.  

The real king is sitting in the king's chair there, and he intends 

to sit for quite some time, contrary to all the princes. 

 

Look, Mr. Speaker, I can hardly believe the member from 

Kindersley is serious in the question.  The answer that we give 

is the answer which I have said to the Leader of the Opposition 

and that the Minister of Health has given to the Health critic.  

We are involved in a development of a health care program 

which I think any thoughtful person for the 1990s is going to 

also join us in developing. 

 

And we expect the Liberal Party and we expect the 

Conservative Party to put on a baseball glove and get into the 

game.  Join us in building this new, exciting health care plan.  

And we'll take good ideas wherever they come from, although I 

haven't heard too many, even from the Liberals or the PCs 

(Progressive Conservative).  If you can come up with a good 

idea, give it to us; we'll consider it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, in Arm River we have four 

hospitals: Outlook, Davidson, Imperial, and Craik.  These 

hospitals, Mr. Premier, have been in existence for over 50 

years.  Now, Mr. Premier, the board members want to meet 

with me.  Some of the board members have asked to meet with 

me this weekend to ask me if there is any danger in closing this 

hospital.  And also, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I just want to bring to the 

attention of the people on this side, the member from Arm 

River does have the floor.  It's very difficult for him to ask his 

questions.  Give him his opportunity. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And also, Mr. 

Premier, I agree with the member from Kindersley that the 

Leader of the Liberal Party has made statements at election 

time against the building and improvements of hospitals in 

Arm River.  And my question is twofold: do you agree with 

her, and what do I tell my board members this weekend, Mr. 

Premier?  Is there any danger in hospital closures in Arm 

River? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, again I always thought 

that question period was designed for the government to defend 

government policy and not to defend the Liberal or PC policy 

which is indefensible.  So please don't ask me to defend Liberal 

or PC policy -- it's simply not possible. 

And since the member from Kindersley and the Leader of the 

Opposition seem to be so attracted to the Liberal party's 

position, you ask her about her position and tell me how you 

believe about it and whether you support it or not. 

 

I'm here to defend the government policy.  And the government 

policy is a sensible one based on the future of health care. 

 

And I say to the member opposite, if he would sit down 

rationally and talk to the leaders, the hospital leaders and the 

community leaders in his constituency, he would find that 

many know exactly the truth of the direction that the Minister 

of Health is proceeding. 

 

The idea that you advance, that somehow people are not open 

or receptive to new change and new directions in health care, is 

as old as the hills.  You got to get into the 1990s, you know.  

The election's gone; you lost it.  The people rejected your old, 

old out-of-touch ideas.  I know you have no plan whatsoever.  

Please join us in the new plan of building a new health care 

direction for the 1990s. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- A new question to the Premier.  Yes, we did 

have a plan.  Our plan, Mr. Premier, was to build hospitals and 

we built hospitals in the '80s.  And your plan is to close 

hospitals. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I say to the Premier and I ask him . . . My 

question was twofold and you only answered the first question 

because you didn't want to answer my second one.  And I ask 

you again, Mr. Premier, very sincerely, very sincerely, Mr. 

Premier, I ask you:  what do I tell my board members this 

weekend when I meet with them?  Is there any danger 

whatsoever of having any of the hospitals in Arm River being 

closed?  Is there any danger whatsoever? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, what I suggest the hon. 

member tell his hospital board directors is the truth.  And the 

truth is, as we have said before in the legislature, that the 

government will present in due course a blueprint with respect 

to health care for the 1990s.  We will invite the members of the 

hospital board in your area to meet with the Minister of Health 

or her officials at the appropriate time in appropriate and full 

consultations. 

 

Tell them the truth that after 10 years you virtually bankrupted 

the province of Saskatchewan.  Tell them the truth that we have 

$14 billion of debt which has bankrupted the system of health 

care and social services in the province of Saskatchewan.  Tell 

them the truth that the amount of capital expenditure over 10 

years was less than $500 million.  Tell them the truth.  Tell 

them that we're on the way to building a new health care 

system and we want them to join with us, as I'm sure they will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, it looks to me like the 

Premier's just playing straight, pure politics.  That's all 



July 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1401 

he's doing.  That's all he wants to talk about is politics. 

 

I asked you a question, Mr. Premier, and I expect a direct 

answer from you.  Is there or is there not a danger of my 

hospitals in Arm River being closed?  Is there a danger or is 

there not? 

 

And if there is, Mr. Premier, my second twofold question is 

this: will you promise me that the Minister of Health will go 

and meet with those boards to get . . . and to consult with them 

and receive any information what they'd want, and listen to 

them, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- You know, Mr. Speaker, I sometimes 

think that the members of the official opposition are like the 

Bourbons of old.  They remember nothing and they learn 

nothing.  They remember nothing about the election loss.  They 

learned nothing from the election loss. 

 

I would suggest to the hon. members opposite that what they 

should do is learn that the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan rejected them precisely because they had no plan 

in health care, that they allowed the health care system to 

deteriorate to the point where now we have to repair it as we do 

the financial system. 

 

Now the member opposite wants to know about his hospital 

boards, and I say to the member opposite what I've said to the 

Leader of the Opposition and to everybody in this House: in 

due course there will be a white paper on health care tabled by 

the Minister of Health.  We invite hospital boards to sit down 

to meet with her and her officials.  We invite you to sit down 

and to give us your ideas, if you have any ideas, about how we 

build the best health care system for the 1990s. 

 

I say to the hon. members opposite, look it, leave the '80s 

behind.  We're not in the 1980s.  This is the 1990s.  We're 

building a brand-new health care system for Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that the second report of 

the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures be now 

concurred in, and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. 

Britton. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a 

pleasure once again to enter into debate on the amendment as 

proposed by the member from Wilkie yesterday in this House 

as we were debating the motion 

on the rules and procedures of the House, of the Assembly of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, as I went through my opening 

comments yesterday, I laid out a number of proposals of how 

we should rethink this issue that is before us. 

 

The member from Wilkie, I think, had an amendment that was 

very germane to what we are attempting to tell the House and 

tell the people of Saskatchewan.  What he is saying is that 

rather than go out against the time-honoured traditions of this 

House, to go against what so many members of this House 

have put on the record in the last three years, that we put in 

place a process whereby it can be referred back to the Rules 

and Procedures Committee of this House and that we truly 

involve the public in a way that this Assembly has never been 

able to do previously. 

 

In all the history, Mr. Speaker, of our House and the rules and 

procedures, we've always been able to solve these problems 

internally.  There has been accommodation.  There's been 

co-operation.  There's been an ability of members, even when 

pushed to the limit, to back off and come up with a reasonable 

solution. 

 

And yesterday the member from Wilkie, as other members 

have done, read into the record comments made by most of the 

senior members with the government side, very revealing 

comments: the Attorney General's comments during that 

particular debate, the comments from the member from 

Saskatoon Broadway yesterday.  I read into the record the 

comments of the member from Prince Albert Carlton, the 

leader of the government team in the Rules and Procedures 

Committee. 

 

All of those comments, Mr. Speaker, spoke about our 

traditions, spoke about our ability in the past to come to a form 

of compromise that did not sully this Chamber.  Unilateral 

decisions by majority government, particularly by very large 

majority governments, simply has never been acceptable.  The 

Attorney General in his comments said he did not think that a 

Conservative party in opposition would want this type of rule 

change foisted upon the Assembly.  And of course he was 

speaking from his days in opposition.  And I just heartily agree 

with the Attorney General's comments. 

 

So what the member from Wilkie proposed, given the fact as I 

explained yesterday that . . . and I'll review it for some 

members that weren't here because I think it's a very 

fundamental point.  We in Canada have been going through a 

fundamental change in our society in the way our relationship 

is to executive councils of government and the courts of our 

land. 

 

(1045) 

 

And this in an ongoing process, Mr. Speaker.  It was thought 

by some, back in the 1981-82 period, that we would probably 

go through at least 50 years of transition before we as a society 

came up with what was probably a modus operandi that 

would then take us through a longer period of time.  The fact is, 

Mr. Speaker, the fact is that we will have increasing amounts of 

interaction between the 



1402 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 1992 

citizens, the voters in our country and our province, and the 

courts.  And as I said yesterday, I don't believe for a minute 

that this question of the ability of people to take government 

on, using those constitutional rights, will diminish.  In fact I 

believe that they will become ever more prevalent. 

 

The whole question of retroactivity is one that the Canadian 

population is becoming increasingly frustrated with.  The 

ability of government to break contracts, to rewrite history, to 

in effect enter into some of the fundamentals of this new 

constitutional process that we're involved in, means that 

individual citizens and groups of citizens will increasingly look 

to the courts to rectify that problem. 

 

So if they're going to increasingly look to the courts, Mr. 

Speaker, then we, as elected officials in our province and in 

Canada who subscribe to the British parliamentary process, are 

going to have to get on with life, get on with change, get on 

with adapting to that reality.  That reality seems, in my mind, to 

have some element of public involvement beyond elections or 

by-elections. 

 

And I guess if one wanted to get really definitive, Mr. Speaker, 

in the amendment raised by the member from Kindersley, 

perhaps it could even come down to the question, the 

narrowness perhaps that this Assembly could define of 

questions, say, of retroactivity. 

 

Now we all know in this Assembly that taxation measures have 

been done since inception of our province with retroactive 

components to it.  Oftentimes you will have a change in sales 

tax, or you will have a change in gasoline tax, you will have 

something announced before a budget two or three months, and 

then the budget process comes along and makes the increase 

legal.  And I think all of us recognize that that is a fundamental 

right of government.  The question of taxation and how we 

manage that has always been one that will probably have that 

component. 

 

But then there is the other side of the equation, Mr. Speaker, 

that we in this Assembly and all assemblies across Canada will 

have to deal with, and that is the question of contractual 

arrangements, of the ability of citizens to seek redress through 

the courts. 

 

Is it a fundamental principle of our country or is it not, that 

those people . . . and we have the example now in this province 

that has caused all of the problem, the bell-ringing, the impasse 

that we've had in this legislature . . . Is a contract signed over a 

fairly lengthy period of time one that should ultimately be 

arbitrated by the courts of our land as per the constitutional 

changes, or should it be arbitrated by Executive Council of 

government when in effect Executive Council of government, 

as per the rules we have now, hold all the cards? 

 

The Executive Council, even though they may be at fault . . . 

because Executive Council of government has the ability to 

then marshal a majority of elected members of this Assembly . 

. . in other words the 12 or 13 people of Executive Council who 

make decisions, who make decisions oftentimes in the sanctity 

of the cabinet room.  Possibly right, possibly wrong -- in this 

case many people in the province believe wrongly.  But simply 

saying 

because Executive Council messes up in some way, we will 

then have the rest of the members of the Assembly simply 

come in and fix the problem for them, and we won't let the 

courts in our land involve themselves in that process . . . And 

the public is saying no, that's wrong. 

 

Whether it's redressing the question of salaries, of contractual 

arrangements of salaries of individuals, whether it's this 

question of GRIP or whether it's a question involving some 

future contractual arrangement that the Executive Council of 

government enters into on behalf of Her Majesty, it simply is 

something that the public, I don't believe, is going to stand for 

much longer because you will have this ever-increasing 

impasse in our land. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure exactly what that mechanism 

is.  I'm not sure if that mechanism is an automatic hoist that 

then is broken down into several components.  And I'm going 

to get into the question, Mr. Speaker, that the government has 

put forward about a three-day hoist, because I think it's 

something that hasn't really been thought out.  And I think we 

need to put that three-day hoist in comparison to, for instance, 

the things that are on the blues in this legislature today, to make 

a true evaluation of where this might take us and what kind of 

legislative process we might have at the end of that day.  

Because it's simply not good enough to come in with a rule 

change such as that without applying it to what is happening 

here outside of the GRIP question or what may happen in the 

years to come.  And it's very important, I think, that members 

of this Assembly understand that process very clearly before 

they subscribe to the motion as brought forward by the 

government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is quite lengthy in how we would view 

this, but I think the only way that members can truly assess the 

proposal of the government is to actually put it into the 

perspective of some of the business that we've done here in this 

Assembly in this particular session.  It's something that all of us 

know about and I think it's only right and proper how we would 

compare the rules, as proposed, to legislation that we have seen 

recently. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, the government said the reason it 

needs to end bell-ringing is that the opposition cannot be 

trusted not to veto everything they disagree with.  Now, Mr. 

Speaker, you as a long-serving member of this legislature know 

that that simply is not true.  That anyone who has spent any 

amount of time in here knows that that's simply not true.  The 

amendment proposes that the Rules Committee reconsider the 

length of the suspension and the possibility . . . or the 

amendment that we proposed says, reconsider the length of the 

suspension and the possibility of public hearings. 

 

And there's a point here, Mr. Speaker.  If the government is 

worried about bell-ringing becoming a routine tool in this 

House, they should understand the fact that a three-day 

suspension is far more likely to become routine.  In fact I 

would say, Mr. Speaker, that if this rule change goes ahead, 

three-day suspensions will become the normal process, just as 

there's a two-day notice of requirement now in our rules book. 

 

Effectively all of the government proposals will be . . . in 



July 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1403 

other words this three-day notice will simply become part of 

the normal period of notice, this three-day suspension.  And 

just as the opposition agreed to extend the time allowed for 

replies to written questions from two days to five, adding three 

days now. 

 

I mean, the government is saying it's equally willing to extend 

the notice of motion period from two days to five, or three 

extra days.  And that is a big fear, Mr. Speaker, because I don't 

think we need that in the process.  I don't think we need it to 

become the norm, and simply have instead of a two-day period 

of notice, a five day. 

 

And I think the only way that we can truly analyse that, Mr. 

Speaker, is to take a look at the order paper of this Assembly 

and see how it would fit in with the three-day hoist in place.  

And I think you must compare that to the amendment as 

proposed by the member from Wilkie, where we're talking 

about a much longer suspension accompanied by public 

hearings. 

 

The whites of last Friday can be looked at as a record, which 

incidentally reflects the record of, in my opinion, co-operation, 

co-operation that this official opposition in most cases has, I 

think, conducted itself in this Assembly. 

 

And as the member from Churchill Downs stated on July 7 of 

'92 when he introduced this motion, he says we -- meaning the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) government -- have no 

assurance that this bell-ringing won't be used again and again.  

And the government has used this argument all the way 

through saying why it must limit suspensions to three days. 

 

Well I say to the Associate Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker, 

that there have been many pieces of legislation put forward in 

this House that we have not agreed with, the official opposition 

has not agreed with.  Now that does contrast somewhat to the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone who has on many 

occasions voted with the government. 

 

But to make my point, Mr. Speaker, I would refer to the whites 

of July 3, and I see recorded there that on May 12 '92, Bill No. 

1, an Act to amend The Clean Air Act passed first reading.  Not 

to create confusion, Mr. Speaker, I'm referring to the Votes 

and Proceedings dated July 3, '92 which contain within them 

the notation on an Act to amend The Clean Air Act as having 

received first reading on May 12, '92. 

 

And on that day the Bill passed first reading.  It passed without 

incident.  There was no bell-ringing.  The government did not 

object it . . . or the opposition didn't object.  There was no 

rancour, no shouting.  This Chamber was very normal. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if there had been the proposed three-day 

suspension in place, what might have happened?  Well 

probably on a Bill such as The Clean Air Act you would not 

have had anything happen on first reading.  It would have 

simply moved ahead. 

 

But we didn't have any forewarning, Mr. Speaker, at the time 

of what was in that Bill.  So I suspect that, given some of the 

ramifications that a Bill like that has on industry and 

it has on individuals in this province, that a three-day 

suspension would have been declared on second reading. 

 

Now by the same token, Mr. Speaker, if the opposition had felt 

that the contents of that Bill upon first reading had been 

sufficiently Draconian to, for instance, put at risk a large sector 

of our industrial society, we would assuredly, I think, Mr. 

Speaker, looked instead to -- for instance a 60-day or a 30-day 

suspension -- some type of suspension that was fairly lengthy.  

And that that suspension, in our mind, should have triggered 

some type of public consultation process or some public 

process that allowed the people involved to take the edge off, if 

you will, of the Draconian measures in the Bill. 

 

I don't think, Mr. Speaker, at any time on Bill 1, would you 

have seen a bell-ringing episode that would stop this Assembly 

from operating on everything else that it had before us.  The 

preference would have been the public process that would 

allow the government then to back off on a Draconian measure. 

 

Now as we know, Mr. Speaker, that Draconian measure wasn't 

in Bill 1.  But none the less, Mr. Speaker, I assure you that any 

opposition, in my view in the time I've been in this House, 

would have considered it a very serious thing to exercise the 

right of suspension if we knew that that suspension was going 

to, for instance in the case of 60 days, almost take up an entire 

legislative session, that it would have effectively blocked the 

passage of Bill 1 in that session. 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. Speaker, on June 4, 1992, Bill 1, an Act to amend The 

Clean Air Act passed second reading.  The opposition had a 

chance to review the Bill and could have made a determination 

of what to do with it.  And the official opposition did not stand 

in the way of this piece of legislation.  We may not like 

everything that is in the Bill, but, Mr. Speaker, certainly the 

bells did not ring.  The official opposition did not walk out of 

the House.  We were responsible therefore in dealing with an 

Act that we thought in turn was responsible to Saskatchewan 

taxpayers. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that contrasts with what would have I 

believe been the process under a three-day suspension.  And I 

suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that on second reading of an 

important Bill to the people of Saskatchewan, it is very likely 

indeed that we would have asked the Bill be delayed from 

second reading for three days to give the public a chance to 

gather their thoughts on the Bill.  We almost certainly would 

have used such a small and insignificant measure in the public 

interest. 

 

So on the second reading of Bill 1, the three-day suspension 

would have been invoked, and it would have been used to give 

the public their first chance to get more than a passing glance at 

a Bill before it was debated in principle, the debate in principle 

being the second reading stage debate, to give the public a 

chance to know what is going on before the process becomes 

sort of irrevocably committed to passage.  So Bill 1 would have 

been the subject of a three-day suspension in second 



1404 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 1992 

reading. 

 

Now what would have happened, Mr. Speaker, if a 60-day 

suspension with public hearings was the alternative?  Would 

the opposition have done that?  Mr. Speaker, I don't think we 

would have triggered that process on Bill 1.  I don't think it 

would have been reasonable in the circumstances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see the experience that Bill 1, it tells us that 

bell-ringing did not happen, that a long suspension would have 

not happened, and that a three-day suspension more than likely 

would have applied.  But what in the end would such a 

suspension have accomplished that the normal workings of this 

Assembly could not accomplish? 

 

The Rules Committee, at least the government members, say 

it's intended that the suspension serves as a replacement for 

prolonged bell-ringing.  Well, Mr. Speaker, it's clear that even 

though that's the spoken intention, the reality when applied to 

the things that we have seen on the whites of this Assembly 

simply isn't fact.  I don't believe that the committee ultimately 

wants to come up with a solution that would have that sort of 

ramification for something like Bill 1. 

 

Let's look at another example, Mr. Speaker.  And I think it's 

important that we . . . even though this may seem boring and 

routine to members of this Assembly, this is the work that this 

Assembly does.  Many of the Bills that we see in this House 

are in fact of a housekeeping nature; some might even say they 

are boring and routine. 

 

But because of that, Mr. Speaker, it verifies the point that I've 

made and that members in the then opposition made for hours 

on end in this Assembly in 1989, that it simply wouldn't be 

proper for a large majority government or any government to 

arbitrarily change the rules of this Assembly, because the tactic 

that we are discussing has been used so rarely and it would be 

far better for members of this Assembly to come to some sort 

of conclusion that allowed members to move on into the future, 

all feeling that the rules of this House are fair and apply in an 

even-handed way. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if we return to a look at the Votes and 

Proceedings of this House, you will look on May 12, '92, Bill 

No. 2, An Act to amend The Ozone-depleting Substances 

Control Act passed first reading.  It passed first reading without 

any hesitation on the part of the opposition.  And under the 

current rules and procedures this Bill was considered on the 

next sitting day of the House.  And this is another one of the 

member from Melfort's series of Bills dealing with the 

environment. 

 

And I say to the member from Melfort, did we ring the bells on 

this particular Bill?  And as all members of this Assembly 

know, we did not.  We did not ring the bells, and Bill 2 

received first reading without any disruption of any kind.  It 

was brought into the Assembly and it received first reading as 

is recorded in the Votes and Proceedings. And it passed 

second reading on June 4, '92. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another of the Environment minister's Bills was 

considered on May 12. An Act to amend The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act passed first 

reading as you will recall. 

 

On July 3, An Act to amend The Environmental Management 

and Protection Act passed second reading.  Bill 4, that same 

day, An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley Authority Act 

passed first reading. 

 

The point is, Mr. Speaker, and I have some 30 pages of Bills, 

30 pages of Bills that are either in consideration or have been 

passed by this Assembly in this session . . . I mean, it goes on 

and on and on, right through the process of Royal Assent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we as members of this Assembly have to think 

very seriously about each and every one of those Bills and how 

the fact of a three-day suspension, which became the norm 

rather than the exception, would be applied.  And I suggest to 

you, Mr. Speaker, in many of these cases, many of these cases, 

it would have been convenient, it would have been convenient 

for opposition members to ask for a three-day hoist.  But in 

effect, Mr. Speaker, it simply would extend the period of 

notice. 

 

It might be convenient because one interest group or another 

interest group would then have a little more time to sort of 

study the meat of the thing, particularly if the minister 

responsible has not done some type of public consultation 

process previously, if the Bill is just dropped into the Assembly 

and no one has the slightest inkling about what is going on.  

Then it would be convenient.  But it simply would, I maintain, 

Mr. Speaker, become very mundane and very ho-hum, and it 

simply would not replace those few issues that come along that 

are of extreme importance to the public -- whether they be 

SaskEnergy, which so many members of the then opposition 

spoke so vociferously about, or whether it is a question of 

legality involving the contracts of over 50,000 farm families. 

 

Questions such as this then, Mr. Speaker, given that this 

Assembly doesn't need three more days notice on its agenda to 

study Bills, given that that simply isn't a workable solution in 

my view to the impasse that's before us, then we have to look at 

another mechanism.  If the member from Wilkie's amendment 

as proposed isn't suitable to government members in either 

whole or part, if government members cannot accept the idea 

of some type of public input that perhaps takes partisanship out 

of an equation, then I would like to hear them propose some 

type of subamendment or some type of further amendment that 

would cover that off. 

 

One of the big complaints that I have heard, both in the 

SaskEnergy debate and the GRIP problem, is that everyone 

says politicians are trying to use these questions in a way that 

the public doesn't really appreciate.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, 

my comments yesterday when I talked about the growth of the 

Reform Party, about the joke that Preston Manning uses in 

describing politicians in our society today, and how more and 

more members of the public are starting to subscribe to that 

very theory, means that we had better start cleaning up our act.  

That if the sole raison d'tre of bell-ringing is simply to 

politicize every contentious issue that comes along, then I 

suggest 



July 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1405 

to the members of this Assembly that we increasingly are going 

to be viewed in some type of sceptical manner. 

 

In order to reverse that tide, to reverse and bring about more 

confidence by a voting public today, we are going to have to 

come up with a mechanism that allows them to pass judgement 

on some of these issues in a non-partisan way.  And I suggest 

to you, Mr. Speaker, that that is a job that all members of this 

Assembly had better apply their minds to. 

 

It simply isn't enough to go into the Rules Committee, the rules 

and procedures of this Assembly, and use seven members of 

the government as a majority to hammer and ram through this 

Assembly in three or four days, rule changes because they're 

politically expedient for the time. 

 

The public will view that process with no end of derision, of 

scepticism, and simply say it is politicians playing their silly 

little political games.  And in the end we, the voting public, the 

taxpayer, will get the shaft.  Because if this can be done, what 

happens when the next government comes along, when the 

NDP are thrown out of office and another party takes over?  

And it will happen.  As assuredly as I stand here, it will happen 

at some point. 

 

And will the next majority government say, well we're going to 

make up for some lost time.  We're going to go in, we're going 

to use the Rules Committee, and we're going to change some 

things because these guys have set the precedent.  Even though 

they stood, man and woman, in this Assembly and went on for 

days and days and days, saying how they didn't want to do it, 

they ended up doing it anyway because it was politically 

expedient at the time.  That cynicism in the public will mount 

and mount, and everybody that seeks public office in this 

province will be tarred with that brush. 

 

So I say to you, Mr. Speaker, the amendment, in my view, is a 

reasonable one.  It's one that was done with a lot of thought and 

research.  And I look forward to government members getting 

on their feet and proposing alternatives, proposing alternatives. 

 

Because this is the last opportunity; this is the last opportunity 

for those members of this Assembly who spoke in defence of 

democracy and the rights of members, of public involvement, 

of allowing, as many members said and are quoted in Hansard, 

of letting the public have their say on a contentious issue. This 

then is the opportunity for those government members to stand 

on their feet and talk to and work with that amendment. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have a few more quotes that I wish to enter 

into the record because I don't believe some of these have been 

talked to before, and I think it's important that we remind the 

public as we go through this very serious matter, what 

members of this Assembly felt about this question in the last 

few years. 

 

And I would quote, Mr. Speaker, from May 11, 1989, the 

member for Saskatoon Riversdale.  And he says: 

 

 What new-found democrats are these, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  

What new-found democracy is this? 

What kind of a charade is this?  What kind of an 

unprecedented action is this for these people to bring forward 

a motion for rules change without consultation . . . without 

any consultation from us; out of pique, out of pique. 

 

 They know that the people of Saskatchewan oppose what 

they have done and oppose it vigorously, and they wanted the 

opposition to do what was being done, and they've gotten 

beaten up.  I don't mean beaten up politically; I don't care 

about the politics.  They got beaten up on this fundamental 

policy of theirs, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  They got beaten up 

and now they're coming in and they're going to show us who 

the bosses are.  Again, what kind of democrats are these? 

 

 . . . for the first time in the record of the province of 

Saskatchewan . . . they come forward to change the rules of 

this House in the name of democracy, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

What kind of a double standard is this? 

 

 These are the people who say they're the defenders.  If they're 

the defenders, why don't they approach us in this kind of a 

fashion -- traditionally -- of trying to define the rules in a way 

that we could all accept and agree, these self-proclaimed, 

new-found democrats? 

 

(1115) 

 

I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the member from Riversdale wasn't 

referring to New Democrats when he made this very eloquent 

defence of democracy in our province.  And again I quote the 

member from Riversdale, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 That's the context in which this motion is to be done, and let's 

not fool ourselves as to what's happening here.  This 

government, if it was really genuinely committed to 

democracy, would have, as much as it hurt the Minister of 

Justice, as much as he is opposed to what he did, they would 

have done it in the traditional and normal democratic way.  

Let's not be fooled about what's being planned here. 

 

And I quote the member from Riversdale: 

 

 Now they want to introduce the bell-ringing motion to come 

back and to say to us that on top of all of this artillery that 

they're going to use to submerge the opposition -- forget 

about the opposition -- and submerge the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan.  On top of all of that they say, we 

are going to muzzle you for ever on this issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think those words from the Premier of the 

province of Saskatchewan in 1992, as delivered in 1989, are as 

relevant today as they were then.  The issue was different, but 

the premise that members of this Assembly should be able to 

work out these fundamental rule decisions should be removed 

from the politics, that the weight of the majority should not 

prevail, that indeed, as 



1406 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 1992 

the member from Riversdale says, who are these new-found 

democrats that would do this to the legislative process in this 

province? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the answer is very clear to us in this 

Assembly in 1992 who these new-found democrats are.  It is 

the NDP Party of Saskatchewan.  It is the words of the Premier 

of this province.  It is the NDP Party of Saskatchewan who 

would now change the rules of this Assembly unilaterally, 

unilaterally for small-term political gain, knowing full well that 

for ever more, for ever more this Assembly will be changed. 

 

As the Minister of Justice, the member from Fairview, was 

quoted as saying, he said:  I don't think that Progressive 

Conservative Party in opposition in this province would want 

these rules as we don't want them. 

 

I mean the very two people, Mr. Speaker, who have been 

engaged in the negotiations of the constitution of our country 

over this last period of time, the two individuals that we have 

trusted, that this province has entrusted to go to the table for us 

on the fundamental issues of rights and privileges and how we 

will fit in the Canadian matrix, these two individuals are on the 

record.  They're the two individuals that people in this province 

have to trust. 

 

And knowing full well that that constitution guarantees people 

their day in court, knowing full well that they both have strong 

heartfelt feelings for this Assembly and its rules and basic 

democratic fundamentals -- have them both on the record -- 

how, Mr. Speaker, can this government, how can these 

members sit in this Assembly in the face of the evidence and 

ramrod through this Assembly these very rule changes that they 

have spoken so eloquently in defence of, that they have spoken, 

we assume at the constitutional tables of our land, in defence of 

each and every one of us, just in the last few days. 

 

The absolute core, I say to you, Mr. Speaker, of this NDP Party 

government are the member from Riversdale and the member 

from Saskatoon Fairview.  And they are on the record, 

irrevocably on the record of this Assembly in their defence of 

members' rights, and in condemnation of a government that 

would propose to change the rules of this Assembly 

unilaterally. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that is why, that is why I say to the 

government members in this House, take this amendment as 

proposed by the member from Wilkie.  Put your own stamp on 

it.  Amend it.  Change it.  But the spirit of it, the spirit of it 

which gives members of this Assembly the second chance, the 

spirit of it that says, give the public of this province an 

opportunity to be involved, to be involved in the contentious 

issues, in the legal issues, in the issues that attest to our 

fundamental rights as citizens, and then we will have an 

Assembly that is moving in the direction that the voters and the 

taxpayers of this province want.  Then we will have an 

Assembly that says, I am marching in time with the people that 

I'm supposed to represent. 

 

I'm not going backwards.  I'm not going to let my narrow 

political agenda, I'm not going to let the screw-ups of my 

Executive Council get in the way of what's right, what's decent, 

and what should be the process that we follow in 

this Assembly. 

 

Amend it to say, well we don't like a period of public 

involvement that is 60 days long.  Maybe 20 or maybe 30.  I 

don't know, Mr. Speaker, what the right answer is. 

 

That is something that members in the Rules and Procedures 

Committee should have thought of before they came in with 

this narrow, narrow motion.  There should have been the type 

of discussion that gave the public some assurance that we were 

doing our due diligence, that we had explored other 

jurisdictions, that we were prepared to in this Assembly for . . . 

and all members are saying the bell-ringing mechanism needs 

change; that if we do away with it here, what other safeguards 

should be given to the opposition. 

 

Maybe there are committees of this House that need to be 

changed in their chairmanship.  Maybe there are ways that the 

government can determine or the opposition can determine the 

order of Estimates, as is done in some jurisdictions.  There are 

lots of of ways, Mr. Speaker, that we as members can structure 

this Assembly to, on one hand, give up a tool seldom used and 

enhance it with other tools that have never been here before. 

 

And I say to government members, if you are truly, truly 

interested in this process, if your involvement in the Rules and 

Procedures Committee is something that you take very 

seriously, then I would think that you would take this 

opportunity, you would seize this opportunity to take the 

amendment as proposed by the member from Wilkie and build 

upon it.  You would take it and you would build in some of 

those fundamental mechanisms that have been the tradition of 

the House but also allow us to move on into the future, and you 

will not sully this Assembly with a majority vote of the 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not on that committee, but I can tell you that 

it has been one of my very strong interests since entering this 

Assembly of how we would take this body of parliament and 

we would change it so that the art and the honourable 

profession of politics can be uplifted in the eyes of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

It bothers me, Mr. Speaker, when I walk down the street in my 

home community and people will make remarks about, oh you 

guys, you're simply in there looking after yourselves.  You're 

only looking at the very narrow interests of certain groups, that 

you're not speaking for me any more, that you're too interested 

in playing your games. 

 

And I've always felt, Mr. Speaker, that one of the ways that we 

can change that is to change this place by mutual consent in a 

way that will allow them to say yes, I believe my member of 

the legislature, I believe my member of the legislature truly 

speaks for me on a certain issue, but he doesn't necessarily 

subscribe to the views of his party.  He doesn't necessarily 

subscribe to the views of his leader.  He has the freedom, the 

freedom to express openly, publicly, not defeat his government, 

not destroy the basic tenets of a four-year term of government, 

but still have that freedom to express without tearing all of the 

structures around him down. 



July 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1407 

And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, with the assent of executive 

power in our government all across Canada -- and I say this 

most sincerely -- that the power of premiers and prime 

ministers, in my view, has become too great for our system to 

truly be representative of the people who elect us.  That we 

need to fundamentally rethink some of the ways that we do 

things so that people gain confidence back in elected members 

of this Assembly and other assemblies across our land; to know 

that when they elect a person, that person has some 

fundamental responsibilities to carry forward, and that those 

responsibilities are to the constituents and not to a political 

party necessarily, or some short-term political agenda that is 

being proposed. 

 

And I fear, Mr. Speaker, that if we as an Assembly pass this 

motion, the cynicism that will build in the public, the fact that 

assuredly, most assuredly, a government, a majority 

government in the future will do the same, means that we are 

going down the rocky road, Mr. Speaker, of no return.  That 

that fundamental reform that so many voters and taxpayers in 

this country are asking for will not occur. 

 

Because once we do this deed in here, once we allow the 

majority to simply override with a rule change, a rule change 

that I say is only because the GRIP issue is so big, that once 

they are off the horns of the dilemma of GRIP, then the need 

for the short-sighted political manoeuvring is gone.  That this 

Assembly may sit for another three or four years and you will 

not see bell-ringing.  But you will not also have solved some of 

the fundamental problems that are before us, that you will not 

have solved the need of taxpayers in this province to feel more 

directly involved in their political process. 

 

(1130) 

 

And that's why I'm saying to members of the Assembly, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that if government members would grab a 

hold of this amendment, grab a hold of this amendment and 

propose some concrete changes that we will resolve ourselves 

of this bell-ringing problem in a way that opens the door, opens 

the door for further changes in the rules and procedures of this 

legislature, it will start building confidence in the people who 

vote for us. 

 

And the alternative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this motion is 

rammed through by the government majority, means that the 

Rules and Procedures Committee of this legislature will cease 

to function.  I can tell you right now that that committee is 

done for the term of this government.  It will not be trusted.  It 

will not be seen as a tool of any member of this Assembly that 

will have anything meaningful come out of it.  It is done.  Just 

as surely as I stand here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that committee 

is finished. 

 

And I say to you, when that one stops to work, it will branch 

out into every other committee of this legislature.  We have 

been charged recently by the Premier of this province of 

putting an all-party committee together to view the 

constitutional amendments that are being proposed, the very 

amendments that our Premier stood in this House yesterday and 

talked about, how we as Canadians and Saskatchewanians will 

fit into a new structure. 

Now I suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that committee 

with a majority of government members is going to have a very 

difficult time going to the public of this province and saying, 

folks, we have a constitutional package that furthers the rights 

of individuals in our society, that protects our natural resources, 

that talks about an economic union, that does all of those 

wonderful things.  We have a Triple E Senate to protect our 

rights further. We are going to have government members on 

that committee going around the province who have just -- just 

finished ramming through unilateral rule changes to this 

Assembly. 

 

Now you tell me how you're going to sit down in town hall 

after town hall in this province and look the public square in 

the eye. 

 

There's probably people in there that take great issue in that 

hall with the broken contract that they have with Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance.  But their day in court, their rights as an 

individual have been put asunder by this Assembly because this 

government was going to ram through a rule change in order to 

get on with introduction of the GRIP Bill, to put aside the day 

in court. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don't know for the life of me, how 

any member on that committee, how any government member 

in good conscience is going to be able to say, I'm going to seek 

your advice, your wishes and wants on the constitution of our 

country, when I have just finished using the legislature of 

Saskatchewan to rewrite history and tamper with the evidence 

in court. 

 

But they're going to go out and they're going to say, we are 

charged with bringing forward a recommendation to the 

Assembly of Saskatchewan on how the constitutional package 

should be dealt with.  Should it be a resolution of this 

Assembly?  Should it be a referendum?  Should it be a 

plebiscite?  It should be something that the people can speak 

on. 

 

Now how do you go and sit in those town halls, at those 

kitchen tables, and hold your head up, given the fact that the 

member from Riversdale and the member from Fairview so 

eloquently presented the defence in this Assembly, and I'm sure 

at the constitutional talks, of individuals in our society?  How 

are government members going to do that? 

 

And in retrospect, how will opposition members who will sit 

on that committee, who have simply been trodden upon in the 

Rules and Procedures Committee of this House, how will they 

sit and interact with the government members on the 

constitutional committee, discussing a package that every 

citizen in this province should understand in a very clear and 

concise fashion? 

 

How are they going to sit together in the same town hall 

meeting when you have two diametric, I suggest to you, two 

diametrically different views of democracy and the rights of 

individuals?  And how are they supposed to take this 

constitutional package out to the people in some type of 

unanimity and harmony so that we as Saskatchewan people 

will have . . . And I only use that as an example, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 



1408 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 1992 

It will go committee by committee by committee through this 

legislature.  And sure these people will have their way for the 

next three years or three and a half years.  Just as sure as I 

stand here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they'll have their way.  But is 

that right?  Because that isn't our history; that isn't our tradition.  

It isn't the traditions that members of the then opposition in 

1989 spoke about.  And they know it. 

 

And if there's any new member of this legislature, any new 

members of the New Democratic Party caucus who haven't had 

the opportunity to go back and read Hansard in 1989, they 

should do it.  They should know what their colleagues said.  

They should know what the public of Saskatchewan heard and 

saw in the television cameras of this Assembly for days on end 

on this issue.  Because they then have to make a judgement 

about whether we're doing the proper thing in here and whether 

this province can stand another dose of hypocrisy from 

politicians of that magnitude. 

 

Every new member of this Assembly has to be able, I think, to 

assess and say, can the voters of this province, can we as 

politicians, can we as people committed to public life in this 

Assembly, stand another dose of hypocrisy of that magnitude?  

And I say to those members, I don't think that the public can 

stand that. 

 

And I think it would be incumbent upon the new members of 

this Assembly, people who have not been, if you will, tarnished 

by some of the past proceedings . . . they are the people that 

can take this amendment and modify it, change it.  That they 

are the people that can bring forward the intent of it, which is 

to take back to the Rules and Procedures Committee of this 

Assembly a mechanism to one: limit bell-ringing, but number 

two, on issues of major contention in this province, allow the 

public some type of input that isn't necessarily hard-core 

partisan rhetoric, but it actually has some honest-to-good meat 

and potatoes attached to it. 

 

And I think if new members of this Assembly took that 

mission, both government and opposition, you might be very 

surprised, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with what we might come up 

with.  That some of the wisdom of the old combined with the 

freshness of the new just might give us an opportunity, an 

opportunity to stop doing the unthinkable. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to enter another set of comments 

into the record, because I think it's important that people of . . . 

and I even subscribe to the view that within the New 

Democratic Party there are people of varying philosophical 

views, that not everyone's the same.  When I quote members of 

this Assembly, that it be a wide spectrum on this issue because 

I think it's important. 

 

And I would quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from May 17, 1989.  

This would be the member for Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain: 

 

 Mr Speaker, until now, as I indicated, this Assembly has not 

made these kinds of changes without all-party input and 

consent on any rule 

change.  As I say, this has been a strength of our system.  It 

has protected the majority from ramming through procedures 

without minority input and approval.  And this is an 

important . . . the importance of this tradition cannot be 

underestimated, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  This has got to be 

preserved as an important tradition. 

 

 Throughout the history of the Assembly, substantial 

consultation on rule changes has taken place through the 

mechanism of (an) all-party committees which are given a 

mandate by this Assembly.  Rule changes have, for the most 

part, been accomplished through consensus and without 

division.  And there are many (many) examples from 1985, 

1981, and 1986, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So sayeth the member from Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain on 

the issue of rule changes in the Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I say to that member as he sits and contemplates this 

debate, that member is well-positioned, I think, in the 

government caucus to take the amendment as proposed by the 

member from Wilkie and build on it, work with it.  Obviously 

these are strong, heartfelt views. 

 

They're the views that that member had no problem standing in 

this Assembly in front of the television cameras, knowing full 

well that each and every one of his constituents had the 

opportunity to tune in and watch . . . That those strong, 

heartfelt views mean that taking that amendment and 

reworking it, changing it, giving the opportunity for everyone 

in this Assembly to take a second look, that member must have 

those views.  He's a thinking member of this Assembly -- I 

know from talking with him -- as are many other members of 

this Assembly. 

 

That these views of a short time ago . . . and I have many more, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I'm not going to enter into the record 

today although my colleagues may.  But the fact is that the 

context is the same.  The issue is different.  The politics are 

much the same.  There are two very strong, divergent views, 

philosophical views in this province of how we attain certain 

things.  So the parameters are the same. 

 

And as we get closer and closer to the slippery edge on this 

question, then these members who feel so strongly have got to 

take this opportunity in my view, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

build upon it.  The slippery slope will get sharper and sharper 

and sharper.  And just as surely as I stand here, eventually 

members on this side of the House will run out of the ability to 

speak.  All of the members of this House know that this process 

will come to a conclusion.  And at the end of that conclusion, 

the alternatives get fewer and fewer.  And the record beside 

each and every member in this Assembly will be there for a 

long time.  Whether you're a one-term member of this House, 

which our history tells us many are, or whether you are a 

long-serving member of this House, which few are, that record 

most assuredly will be beside your name for ever and a day. 

 

(1145) 



July 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1409 

That ever since 1905 you will become the first.  You will not 

be the last, because after this government's gone somebody else 

will, just as sure as I'm standing here, end up doing the same 

thing.  Precedent is a wonderful thing, Mr. Speaker, when it is 

constructive.  But when it is destructive, the urge to use it 

becomes ever more prevalent because I think we as politicians 

sometimes allow our political thinking to get in the road of our 

rational thinking. 

 

And as I said before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the big objection 

that the voters and taxpayers of this province have with those 

of us these days who are elected and serve, is that we don't 

listen as much as we should, that we don't have perhaps the 

rules of this Assembly amended in the way that they should be, 

to ensure that we all are private members in this Assembly at 

all times.  And as private members we should respect more the 

wishes of our constituents. 

 

And there's only one way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we're 

going to get to that point.  There's only one way, and that is go 

back to the time-honoured tradition of this House and work this 

thing out -- not with a three-day hoist. 

 

As I pointed out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these pages are filled 

with the Bills of this House that have gone through the various 

stages, and they don't need another three-day consideration 

attached to them, and that's all a three-day hoist will become.  

That does not satisfy the public's need in any way on major 

issues that confront our society, whether they be legal or 

otherwise.  It simply will become another part, the same as 

notice, the same as written responses. 

 

That's not what the public is saying to us, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

They're saying, once in a while we need to become directly 

involved, at least until the members of this Assembly have a 

different spectrum in which to work, that allows them to stand 

on their feet and go against, go against perhaps their own 

government, their own Premier, their own party.  I think until 

the members of the public know that we have the tools 

available to us to do that without destroying our basic 

structures, then we're going to have to work with what we've 

got. 

 

And maybe members of this Assembly in my own party 

disagree with me.  Maybe members of the government disagree 

with me on that tenet, but I hear it over and over and over again 

out there with the public today.  They are telling me that there 

has to be change.  There have to be mechanisms available that 

don't tear down the house but change the house -- and I speak 

of that in a generic way, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- that allow 

democracy to come back into our political process in a way that 

it hasn't been there in my view for some time. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say that humbly.  I was a member 

of the Executive Council for two years in this province, a 

member of cabinet.  I know how the game is played.  I know 

how caucus works, and I know how things sometimes 

ultimately come to this Assembly that could be better served 

with a better process.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it's incumbent upon every one of us, as we go through 

this question here now, that 

we really, honestly think that through, we really, honestly think 

about that before we ultimately come to this conclusion. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that other members of my 

caucus wish to speak on this amendment because it is 

reasonable, it is sound, and I think the basic tenets are there to 

build on.  And I would hope, I would hope that some 

government member, as we head down this slippery slope, that 

some government member would take that amendment and 

give it some serious consideration, that some government 

member that truly understands and feels for this institution, that 

understands what the voters are saying about the cynicism, 

about the narrow political agendas, about our inability to take 

our scarce resources today and cut the costs that are so tied to 

our political rhetoric out of them . . . It's fine to be the way we 

were when you couldn't spend the money fast enough.  But 

when you have an ever-diminishing supply of taxpayers and 

taxpayers' money, then I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

politics is starting to cost us a little bit too much, that we 

probably can't afford to keep doing some of the things that 

we've been doing in this Assembly. 

 

And we're going to have to change that from within, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 

member from Regina likes to chirp from her seat.  If she 

doesn't believe some of the things that I've been saying to this 

House today about the average Canadian taxpayer and voter 

and Saskatchewanian, then let her stand on her feet and tell us 

otherwise.  And tell us why the amendment from Wilkie simply 

won't work.  Tell it on television where every last constituent 

of hers has got the ability to tune in and watch, and then tell me 

that I'm wrong. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that change will be done from within, and 

it will have to be done in some type of co-operative spirit.  And 

I say to you today that that amendment is reasonable; it is 

something that this Assembly had darn well better give due 

consideration to before we go the other way.  Thank you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I was 

slow in rising because I thought for sure that some of the 

people from the government side would want to get up and 

express their views.  But I certainly wasn't going to be so slow 

in rising, Mr. Speaker, that I lost my place in the speaking . . . 

on this here very, very important motion we're speaking on. 

This amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a good amendment, 

and I'll be speaking.  My remarks will be to the amendment of 

course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I spoke before on the 

main motion. 

 

And it's very, very important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, very, very 

important that this motion must go back to this special 

committee on rules and regulations.  It's just imperative that it 

must.  It was done in haste.  You can't have, Mr. Speaker, 

something that's happened this quickly that just go and have a 

few meetings in rules and regulations and this motion comes 

before the Assembly.  It wasn't well thought out. 



1410 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 1992 

And I'm hoping at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm hoping at 

this time that while we're speaking here . . . we've been 

speaking the greater part of the day on Monday, Tuesday, 

Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, and Saturday on this motion.  I 

think it started on Monday, if I'm correct . . . maybe it was 

Tuesday.  But anyway, yes, I'm sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

started on Tuesday so we've been talking, this is the fourth day.  

And I'm hoping at this time while we're talking that our House 

leaders and whips can be getting together and perhaps coming 

up with a solution to get us out of this impasse. 

 

It's very important that it goes back to the special committee 

because I'm sure that people have thought it out.  I'm sure that 

the many members on the opposite side, on the government 

side, must have surely been thinking this out very carefully.  I 

think they must be thinking it out very sincerely, thinking about 

what the results of this motion that the government brought in 

could do. 

 

And most importantly, what the motion could do, as brought in 

by the government members, is force it upon the people of 

Saskatchewan, force it upon this House with not having full 

co-operation from all parties.  There's three parties representing 

here in this House today, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- the Liberal 

Party, the official opposition, and of course the government. 

 

And I'm a strong believer of this Legislative Assembly.  This is 

my 15th session, my 14th year, and I've never seen anything 

happen in this House that's been forced upon anybody that it 

goes ahead without having co-operation of the members.  If 

you haven't got co-operation from the members, it just doesn't, 

it just doesn't work, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I think that's very important, that the committee conduct further 

consideration.  They must look at it and they must spend a lot 

of time.  Maybe they should go out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

maybe they should be having public hearings.  Maybe they 

should be talking about it. 

 

We have contacted some of the other provinces that have had 

this same problem.  There's six provinces in Canada where they 

don't have any rules or regulations to bell-ringing or whatever 

at all.  They just don't seem to have a problem. 

 

But we're living in a different type of a province because I will 

dare say, Mr. Speaker, that we're probably living in the only 

province in Canada or maybe North America or the British 

Commonwealth where a Bill such as the GRIP Bill came 

towards this House.  Not the Bill itself, but from what we 

understand without seeing the Bill and what we're told, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that it has this retroactivity about legislating 

this here letter that the farmers supposed to have got in March 

15, 1992.  And there's never been another Bill.  So that's why, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it's very important that we look at it 

in a proper manner, that we don't allow this thing to happen. 

 

That's why maybe Saskatchewan is much different than the 

other provinces, because maybe even the NDP government in 

Ontario, maybe the NDP government in British Columbia -- 

and they've had an NDP government quite a few years in 

Manitoba -- maybe they never 

brought a Bill such as this to the legislature to be discussed and 

ramrod through the legislature.  So maybe there hasn't been a 

necessity to ring bells for a long length of time. 

 

We've told by some speeches and by some of the members 

opposite that it's the opposition's fault, that we're the ones 

obstructing the legislature to proceed.  That's not true, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  It is not true.  We're not the ones that's 

causing it.  We didn't bring the Bill forth.  We're the 

opposition.  It's our duty as the opposition.  It's our duty to 

stand up for what we believe the people in Saskatchewan want. 

 

And we know that we're in a situation where we're outvoted by 

the government, that in time that we can fight these things as 

long as we can.  We're not agreeable with the rules and 

regulation motion.  We're not agreeable with the GRIP Bill.  So 

it's up to us to fight it as long as we can, knowingly that unless 

they start listening to the people that we'll be outvoted in time. 

 

But I have in my constituency, 14 people that I phone when I 

want to do actually a poll in Arm River.  Then they have four, 

five more calls that they make, and we can do a quick polling 

of what my constituency believes. 

 

And we had a meeting in Davidson on Tuesday night.  I spoke 

in the afternoon here, and I left at 5 o'clock, went out to a 

meeting in Davidson.  And we talked about what we're talking 

here now, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We went through it in detail, 

exactly what's happening and what our options are.  And then 

these people are going right back out -- and this is my own 

executive, Mr. Deputy Speaker; naturally they're going to 

believe along the lines we are, that I am -- but I asked them to 

go out and ask the public, go to the coffee rows and go to 

meetings and get back to me.  And I'm yet to have one call 

back where somebody says that they believe in ringing bells.  

The public don't like the ringing of the bells.  And I've never 

liked the ringing of the bell. 

 

We've had ringing of the bells for my 14 years here.  The bells 

have rang, and it's just to call the members in.  And then 

sometimes there'll be a 15, 20 minutes, a half an hour . . . I've 

often seen that just to get ministers here from . . . they're out in 

the various parts of the city.  And that's normal. 

 

But then sometimes we've had disagreements and we deal with 

the opposition.  And when the government was in opposition 

they'd go into their caucus lounge.  And maybe we've had 

stand-offs for a hour or two or three, but that's the most.  

Because I don't believe, Mr. Speaker, in my times of being in 

this legislature that we've had many controversial Bills. 

 

We've only had these two Bills, 1989 and now -- the energy 

Bill which the opposition at that time felt that they were doing 

the right thing.  And they were doing the right thing because 

they did table approximately 100,000 signatures on a petition.  

And they had their right.  And I always believed they had their 

right.  And so the Bill was withdrawn, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And now somebody said to me yesterday, one of the 



July 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1411 

members of the opposition chirped across to me and he said -- 

and he's right in saying this -- where's your 100,000 signatures?  

Well I guess as a caucus we didn't do that.  We didn't go out.  

And we've had the odd one, like the member from Thunder 

Creek had just a small little group of people sent a petition on 

their own.  But we didn't, our 10 members didn't go out and ask 

them to sign petitions.  But we certainly have gone out to the 

people talking about the rules motion and to the rules 

amendment. 

 

(1200) 

 

I was on the phone last night phoning people and talking about 

the GRIP Bill.  So we've really been contacting people.  And 

any time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that you get 55,000 farmers 

involved . . . and when I'm saying 55,000 farmers, it involves 

thousands more than that because the well-being of a farmer 

involves thousands more people.  It involves all the business 

men in this province of Saskatchewan.  So it's probably 

involving 100 to 150,000 homes. 

 

So we are getting lots of calls.  And I won't stand here and say 

that absolutely everybody is going to be agreeable with what 

we're saying.  Of course not.  I've talked to the House Leader 

and he thinks at one time is about a 60/40 as far as the GRIP 

program is concerned.  And we haven't done a poll on this here 

rules motion or the rules amendment.  We haven't had time.  

The amendment just came in yesterday. 

 

But we feel it's a real compromise and at least it's the 

reasonable thing to do to take it back to the committee and be 

serious about it to get the GRIP out of our minds.  And I ask all 

government members, if this goes back to the committee -- and 

I urge them that it can get back there -- that they would vote for 

the amendment; that we get back to the committee and all the 

members.  I'm not on the committee, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'm 

not on it, but there's two of our members are.  The Leader of 

the Liberal Party is on that committee and six or seven of the 

government members.  That we take it seriously before it 

comes back, know what it will do to the future, get all the little 

details put together of what it can do for us. 

 

And we're talking about like this motion that came in, and it 

was a three-day suspension period.  And we just said it wasn't 

acceptable, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And it's not; it's not 

acceptable -- three days.  It doesn't do anything for people that 

want to express their views on Bills of a controversial nature. 

 

Now there's many Bills . . . I've watched Bills come through 

this legislature for . . . oh, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I've seen . . . 

almost every year there would be two or three or four or five 

Bills just disappear -- pulled. 

 

Now I want to talk for a moment how important this three-day 

suspension would be.  Because in 1980-81 there was a Bill 

came forth to this House from the now government and was 

pertaining to adoption.  And it was almost through this House 

when we started to understand the seriousness of this Bill -- 

how it was going to open up contracts, and how the system 

worked at that time. 

And the bells didn't ring.  We didn't ring the bells in opposition.  

All we did is we asked the now Premier, who at that time was 

the minister of Justice, and we went to him and told him that 

we have people with many concerns and could we have the Bill 

put on hold for a while -- it was already through first reading, 

through second reading, and gone to committee -- and that we 

were wanting talk to people throughout the province to see who 

it was going to affect. 

 

And as a result of about two to three weeks of this adoption 

Bill, the now Premier, the minister of Justice at the time, they 

received approximately 10,000 letters.  And the minister of 

Justice stood to his feet here one day -- and naturally he didn't 

give us the credit for it, and I do give him the credit -- he says, 

I've heard from over 10,000 people that they want that Bill 

pulled.  And he pulled the Bill. 

 

So what I'm saying is a three-day suspension would not give 

the people the chance to have input into something that maybe 

they didn't know was happening in the legislature, and it would 

slip by.  And that's what'll happen with a three 

_day suspension. 

 

It's only going to be a few days . . . We get a few days now 

through first reading and second reading, and then second 

reading you get into details.  And you get into further details in 

committee and sometimes . . . Like the Minister of Social 

Services and myself, we got into kind of an impasse over the 

new adoption Bill that just went through here.  And I held that 

Bill up longer than it should have been held up.  I didn't 

understand it because I didn't have the answers from her.  And 

she gave me the proper answers.  And we just talked about it 

today because the minister had come over and thanked me for 

apologizing, and she apologized for our little impasse we were 

having because we didn't understand one another.  Once she 

made it straight and put it on the record, the intent of the Bill, 

then we let it go very quickly. 

 

And then the next Bill was a child care Act Bill, Mr. Speaker.  

And so I got her . . . I had talked to her about it.  I asked her 

some questions so we didn't even ask the question on that one.  

We just let it go from the spirit of co-operation.  And that's 

what you need in this legislature, is the spirit of co-operation. 

 

Now that can happen on the average, normal Bills that go 

through this legislature, but it is not going to work when you 

come to Bills like GRIP where it has retroactivity to this Bill.  

No Bills with retroactivity should be pushed onto people 

without a lot of input. 

 

And that's why I liked the member from Wilkie's motion, when 

they're saying this here controversial Bill should go out for 

public hearings.  It's very important that we go out for public 

hearings. 

 

But you know, it won't have to happen very often.  And I'd say 

there would have to be some control put on it through the rules 

and regulations committee, that you would have to have the 

House leaders or someone else that's . . . whips and the 

chairman of the public Rules Committee, whatever, have a 

handle on what Bills that you could put out to the public.  

Otherwise some opposition could take 



1412 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 1992 

advantage and want, just to hold up and obstruct, could want 

every second Bill.  It would have to be a Bill like the GRIP Bill 

and like the energy Bill so we know that it is of a serious 

consequence, which we've all agreed. 

 

There's been agreement from every government member that 

I've talked to that certainly the GRIP Bill and its retroactivity 

has caused a problem.  We know the government is in a serious 

problem here, that they've missed putting out the letter and they 

have to have this taken care some other . . . and it has to go to 

the courts. 

 

But I wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how much they thought 

this out.  Because I've contacted some legal people.  And that's 

why this is the most important issue that I think that we've ever 

stood and talked about for any opposition probably in the 

history of this province.  Because I've had legal lawyers, and 

well-qualified, tell me that the GRIP Bill is unconstitutional.  

Even if it passes through the courts and even if the farmers lose 

and the government wins, that when the law changes, when the 

law changes and they go to court as if . . . and this Bill is 

through the House and the farmers lose, it's the appeals court 

that it must go to to find out whether it's an unconstitutional 

Bill or not. 

 

So I think it's so serious that we're talking about a Bill that is 

unconstitutional.  And that's why I think it is just more than I 

can comprehend, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that actually that our 

people in the rules and regulations committee never thought all 

this out, didn't get serious about the consequences of what they 

were doing.  Because this could put a black shadow on the 

Saskatchewan legislature and it will be the government 

members and us both. It'll be every member here will be . . . if 

this turns out to be a non-constitutional . . . a Bill that's 

unconstitutional.  Now that could put a black shadow, as I say, 

on this legislature, and that puts me a part of it and it puts every 

member of this House a part of it. 

 

And I think that when it's through in this House, whatever 

happens here, whether we talk for several more days or 

whether it's just today or the first of the week, whenever we 

vote on this here amendment and it goes to committee, that's 

fine; that'll be one step forward.  And then if it doesn't go to 

committee and we're forced into voting on it, and we don't go 

along with it, and we decide to let the bells ring, well we know 

the bells can't ring very long. We can't let that . . . I'm sure that 

that won't happen too long.  It isn't going to be any advantage if 

the government's got their mind made up. 

 

We thought when the bells went for 11 sitting days before -- 

they rang for 18 days but 11 sitting days of this House -- we 

thought that that would bring the government to their senses 

and perhaps pull the retroactivity of that Bill.  But they didn't 

do that and we were brought back in by Mr. Speaker and put 

back to work.  And I'm glad we were, because in that first week 

that we were brought back in and last week there was a lot of 

Bills got through this here House. 

 

And I think that it was co-operation, and I just said it, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that I co-operated to the best of my ability 

dealing with the Minister of Social Services.  I seen some of 

my colleagues here, one of our members that's 

responsible for Rural Development.  He talked about a Bill that 

he didn't like and all the things that bothered us, but we didn't 

obstruct.  It's of a nature that I think the people out in rural 

Saskatchewan will put up an awful commotion. That's one 

where it could lead to the county system in this province.  And 

I think we voiced our opinion. 

 

But this Bill, the GRIP Bill which has brought the Rules 

Committee together, that is why we're talking about 

amendment here today. It is because of a Bill that may be 

unconstitutional in the courts of Canada.  Now that's why I 

think that we have to be serious on this side.  Because if 

anybody thinks, Mr. Speaker, that we're just sitting here 

filibustering and to put in time, partly they're right, partly 

they're right.  But we're not doing it on purpose just to waste 

time, because nobody more than myself would like to get the 

works of this legislature done and get back out to help my 

family with the harvest coming up.  I want to get the work 

done.  I have been here and some of the members opposite are 

shaking their heads.  Well when they're here as long as I've 

been here and sit as many days as I've been here, and sit here in 

opposition when the government starts throwing Bills at us, 

maybe in seeding time or harvest time, when most of us were 

farmers . . .  And we had to sit right through harvest, 129 days 

one time. 

 

I know what it's like to sit here and be a small opposition and 

work hard.  And I know, as a government member, what the 

opposition went through with the same thing when there was 

only eight or nine members from '82-86.  And I felt sorry for 

them because they worked hard.  They worked so hard that it 

was unreal. 

 

But that's the same position that we're in, Mr. Speaker.  We on 

this side of the House have to make up our mind.  Is this 

something we have to fight?  There's so many Bills that you're 

bringing forth that we haven't got a problem with, but there's 

Bills that we do have a problem with.  And we need longer 

than three days. 

 

We don't even know the details of the farm Bill, of the six-year 

leaseback.  We've been talking about it since election time.  Is 

three days going to be long enough to talk about it?  Now we'll 

get . . . I apologize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it'll be more than 

three days, because we'll have the first reading.  And we've had 

that.  And then we've been sitting back here two and a half 

weeks, or whatever it's been, two weeks, and we haven't had 

anybody put that Bill on. 

 

Instead of getting serious about the farmers out there and 

serious about them losing their farms to the lending 

institutions, they decided that the GRIP Bill was more 

important.  So they go to the Rules Committee and bring it to 

the House.  And let's get that done first so when we bring our 

controversial Bills in, then we can control it with the three-day 

hoist.  And that's not acceptable by this side of the House.  It is 

not acceptable. 

 

And I am certain, and I have been considered in our party 

throughout the years that I've been involved . . . I'm been 

involved since 1970 -- 22 years.  It's 22 years since I worked 

for Doug Neil, who was an MP (Member of Parliament) in 

Moose Jaw.  I was his campaign manager. 



July 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1413 

And I've worked with people long enough to know that I can 

go to any town, and give me a short time and I'll know how 

people are feeling about things.  And I know that we are right, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, about . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1215) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I know that we are correct, that we have the 

feeling of the average people from Saskatchewan on our side.  

It is right.  They believe.  I haven't got one individual that will 

say to me, let those bells ring.  But they say in this particular 

instance, you haven't got any other choice because the 

government is ramrodding right over top of you. 

 

They neglected to send a letter to the farmers.  We have 

farmers in south-west Saskatchewan . . . And this is a crime.  

And the member from Swift Current should know this.  We 

have people that had planted crops in the end of March, the 

first week in April, under the '91 GRIP, and borrowed their 

money.  And then in April it's taken away from them.  That's 

never been heard of in North America.  In fact what's 

happening in this House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I understand 

that's it's never happened, such a Bill, in the British 

Commonwealth countries of the world.  And England was 

several hundred years that they've had a government.  And 

Canada is the last one to come into the Commonwealth, and it's 

never been known that a Bill such as this. 

 

So that's why we are sitting here in this impasse that we're in.  

Because in other provinces I understand that they just, the rules 

and regulations committees, they met and they were able to 

come up very quickly with a mechanism to stop the 

bell-ringing.  They could do it very quickly. 

 

But they weren't dealing in Saskatchewan with a government 

that ramrods right over top of people.  It's a different situation.  

They know, they know what they did in the 1970s.  They know 

exactly what they're capable of.  They know that the same front 

row is back here doing it again, and they're power hungry, and 

they're out to do anything they have to do. 

 

I know what they want to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  They want 

to bring Bills forth to this House.  They want to do things.  We 

talked about it in question period today about what's happening 

in Department of Health.  And I won't get into that because I'll 

be called for being off the subject.  But it is what's happening 

all over, and this government, why you're doing this and why 

we're here discussing this Bill is because we have a different 

type of government, like I said, than anybody I know in the 

Commonwealth.  I don't know of another government in the 

Commonwealth that would bring in a Bill to destroy farmers, 

thus destroy maybe the economy of this country. 

 

When I have government members, Mr. Deputy Speaker, say 

to me, we cannot afford, we can't afford the 1991 GRIP.  Well 

my goodness why didn't they say that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and we wouldn't be here talking about the Rules and 

Regulations Committee and we wouldn't be talking about 

putting a three-day suspension on if they had of thought about 

that and told the people at election 

time that we are going to take the '91 GRIP away and we're 

going to give you nothing. 

 

And if they had have said that at those days, at election time 

said that and said all the things that they've done in the last six 

months, they wouldn't be sitting over there; they'd be sitting 

over here.  And we wouldn't be in this position at a Rules 

Committee trying to ramrod a new rule through so we can have 

a Bill go to the court and have the law behind it of this here 

legislature so they can beat some farmers in court. 

 

Why?  Why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, does this government want 

to take farmers on in court?  Why do they want to do that?  I 

thought that they were for farmers.  I have by the daily, and I 

don't mean once a day; it's usually one, two, three a day are 

phoning my constituency office and phoning me here and 

saying: where do we send our money to fight the Bill?  Where 

do we help the poor farmers?  This happening all over, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and that is exactly why we're here discussing 

this here motion, this amendment.  It's a good amendment.  

And I urge the members across the way to deal with this 

motion because it's exactly what we need. 

 

We need to be a proud group of legislatures.  We need you, the 

government, to be proud of what you're doing.  And we in the 

opposition will back you if you will take this here amendment 

and look at it seriously, vote for it, and then take it to the 

people. 

 

Take out every controversial Bill that hits this legislature of a 

real serious nature.  And that doesn't going to mean four or 

five, six Bills a year.  Because I said it before, there's only been 

two in my 14 years, the energy Bill and this one.  It's the only 

two Bills that we've had an impasse on.  So maybe it's only 

going to happen once every 5, 10 years.  So when you get a 

Bill like that for goodness sakes, take it out.  Because I'm sure . 

. . 

 

Here's the constituencies I want to go through, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, where I've had farmers either write me, business men 

either write me or call me and voice their opinion.  And the 

main one that I'm going to talk about is the two closest ones to 

me is the Arm River constituency.  And I would say when this 

thing first started, when the GRIP became an issue, that I 

wasn't getting many calls on it.  They knew where I stood on it. 

 

But after a while it soon got out that about this retroactivity and 

that's when calls started to come, and then they seen it was . . . 

they started to get serious about what the '91 GRIP really meant 

and their '92 GRIP.  And I've had calls of no end.  And they're 

serious.  I'm getting people talking to me in the street that I 

know have never voted for me and probably never will, but 

they're disturbed at what this government has done. 

 

So why doesn't that take the smiles off the face of the people 

opposite?  Why doesn't it get them serious?  Because I see from 

the seat several times that the several members will look at me 

and I can see them talking under their breath.  And why don't 

they just go do that, talking to their constituents and talk to 

them about the Rules Committee and what's happening and 

what you're really doing? 



1414 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 1992 

Because I'm sure if the member from Churchill Downs would 

go to his . . . and go and knock on doors in his riding and I 

guarantee, I guarantee, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the first door 

that I'll . . . just put me in my car, put yourself in my car, take 

me to your constituency and we'll stop at the first house by 

random.  And you go in -- and I'll give you the script what to 

say -- and they'll say, no we don't agree with you. 

 

And all you got to do is say that we are bringing in the Bill to 

this legislature, a GRIP Bill that is going to have . . . it's going 

to deem that farmers got a letter, that the farmers got a letter 

that they changed their GRIP Bill by March 15 that they never 

got.  That's what it's going to say.  Then you must say to them 

that to get this Bill through that we're ramrodding it through the 

Rules and Procedures Committee.  And tell them the exact 

facts.  And you'll say, you are wrong Mr. Member from 

Churchill Downs, they'll say you are wrong. 

 

Because I've gone to people on the streets, talking to someone 

in Davidson the other night, and I know he wasn't my 

supporter.  And I just stopped him.  I said, do you know what's 

going on down at the legislature?  He said, yes, you guys are all 

acting like fools down there, all of you.  He said, quit ringing 

those bells and get back to work. 

 

And I wanted him to say that because I knew he was a 

reasonable person.  So I stopped him and explained to him, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, exactly what's happening in this legislature, 

what the government is doing.  And he just said, oh well, that's 

your problem.  But I understand that he's never quit talking in 

Davidson ever since, and he's got NDP people and Liberal 

people and people that didn't vote for me, people that did vote 

for me, all upset -- from one man, one conversation. 

 

If you people would do that, go out to your ridings . . .  

Because I'll guarantee you, when I come back in here Monday 

morning I'm going to know the feeling of what they think about 

this amendment.  I know what they're going to be saying about 

what happened in question period today about the hospital 

closures in this province.  I know what they're going to be 

saying.  So it's all these people have to do this. 

 

And right now is not a good time for the government to be 

doing anything that's wrong.  It's not the time that this 

government can get away and have anybody like them for no 

matter what they're doing.  You can talk to a taxi driver on the 

streets of Regina, who knows nothing about farming, who cares 

less whether it's a '91 GRIP or a '92 GRIP; he could care less.  

But boy, he's heard about everything else they're doing wrong.  

So he says, well I'm against them whatever they're doing.  And 

that's exactly what he believes.  He believes, whatever you 

guys are doing wrong, that they can't trust you. 

 

And they can't trust you on this Bill.  And that's why at this 

time, the last few days, like I said when I first started to speak, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that at this time I hope that the House 

leaders are out trying to work something out as we speak -- this 

is our fourth day of speaking -- to work out a solution for this 

impasse. 

Well I see my House Leader is sitting beside me, so I guess it's 

not going on at this moment.  But I'm hoping that they can 

work out something, that somebody will give in.  Somebody 

must give in when we're impasse.  We're 10 people that are 

very set in our ways.  We believe what we're doing and we can 

talk here for a long time.  And we intend to talk and talk until 

the House leaders come up with suggestions to stop this 

impasse, take it back to committee, or do something with the 

GRIP Bill.  I don't . . . anything at all better than what we've 

got.  Do something between the '91 and '92.  They can do it 

right here in this House. 

 

I understand that the Premier has been talking to our leader and 

he's agreed with some of their suggestions.  Now it's not right, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Premier has sat and talked with 

our leader and says, yes, that's a pretty good solution, and our 

leader says, that's not a bad idea, and then within hours you get 

this regulation motion thrown at you -- within hours.  That's not 

giving it a chance. 

 

Who is responsible that we're sitting here for four days and it'll 

go on into next week?  Who is responsible that's not listening?  

Is it the Government House Leader that didn't take the message 

. . . or the chairman of the Rules Committee -- is it him, is it 

him that didn't take the suggestions back . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member should know 

better than to reflect on the chair of the Rules Committee, who 

is the Speaker of the House, and to not reflect on the actions of 

the Speaker. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'm sure 

that the member from Churchill Downs would like to get rid of 

me; he's been saying that since 1978.  But somehow or other 

he's got himself hid in a little spot in Regina here where he 

doesn't have to even work to get elected.  He knows where he's 

at; but he should be out in Arm River and have to work with 

people like I do.  And I have to deal with my people.  I have to 

show them that I'm speaking on their behalf. 

 

I told them in 1978, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I'll carry the 

message, whatever message they want, to this here legislature, 

and I have.  And that's why they returned me for my fourth 

session in this legislature, my fourth term of office, because I 

listen to people.  And my people would turn on me just like 

that if they thought that I was not bringing their message in 

here. 

 

We have our now leader that has done everything he could for 

farmers, and the farmers are backing us now.  That's why we're 

hearing from farmers: please ring those bells.  But they don't 

understand that we can't, Mr. Deputy Speaker, ring them for 

ever because it has to come to an end, we have to come to 

agreement.  And so rather than the heavy-handed government, 

rather than this heavy-handed government coming down to us 

and say, we're just not even going to deal with you; we're going 

to outvote you on this Rules Committee; and then the next day, 

or a day or two, we'll have the first reading of the GRIP Bill 

and then the second reading, and it'll be passed . . . And they 

didn't listen. 



July 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1415 

All right, we fought the fight, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have 

fought as long as we could.  And that's all we can do. Because 

my people, and I know that the people my colleagues represent, 

they want us to fight this as long as we possibly can in hopes, 

in hopes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in hopes that the members 

opposite will come to their senses and say, yes we're not 

listening. 

 

I can remember in 1982, when the now Premier, when the now 

Premier told me after the election: we lost the election because 

we didn't listen to people.  And I can't believe that they've 

come back in here in 1992 and here they are not listening 

again.  They're not listening. 

 

They have people . . . if you go out this weekend, all you 

people that are here, and contact your other colleagues -- the 

colleagues that are not here yesterday and the day before, 

there's a bunch of colleagues that weren't here yesterday and a 

few days before -- contact them to go talk to your people and 

find out what they're really thinking.  I ask each and every one 

of you to do that, sincerely.  Go out and say, are we doing the 

right thing?  But don't pose the question this way:  do you want 

the bells to stop ringing?  Because that's mostly what they do.  

They say yes, we want them.  But don't tell them . . . Be sure 

you do tell them why you're doing it, that you're trying to do it 

to get a rules regulation change so you can have an illegal Bill 

go through so crop insurance . . . 

 

And the Minister of Crop Insurance is in the House and he 

knows . . . He's a pretty decent sort of a man.  I've talked to him 

about a couple of things.  And I'm sure that he does not want 

this to happen.  I know that he's been told by this front row that 

there's been a mistake made.  We have blundered; we have 

walked over farmers; and we have to have you stand . . . they 

want to have him, that poor man, stand and take heat.  And he's 

going to take heat for all the farmers in Saskatchewan for the 

blunder in crop insurance. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Not as much as the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, as my colleague says beside me here, 

the Minister of Agriculture, when he comes into this House, 

and he comes in here with his farm Bill, the one about the 

six-year leaseback, which we may and may not be backing 

because we don't know the details of it . . . I know definitely 

we'll be having some amendments to that Bill.  But when he 

brings it to this House and we talk about it and talk about the 

GRIP Bill, he's going to have a hard struggle with it.  It's going 

to take a long time. 

 

Here we are, have all these days go by, just about the rules and 

regulations.  And we should be talking about the farm Bills, the 

ones that are here.  There's some important ones. 

 

Well then all right, Mr. Deputy Premier, would it be in order 

for me to make a motion that we revert back to government 

business?  Is that in order if I made a motion like that?  Can I 

ask that question to you?  Is it in order if I put a motion in that 

we revert back to government business and put this aside? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- The member has asked whether it be 

appropriate for him to move what is termed a 

superseding motion.  And it would be appropriate for the 

member to move a superseding motion to move directly to 

another piece of government business.  So if the member wants 

to do that, he's within his rights to do that. 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  All right, 

well I'm continuing on with my remarks.  I'll let my House 

Leader here . . . Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let's be fair.  I 

haven't got the motion written up.  So if they want to discuss it 

and hand me that motion written up, then at the end of my 

remarks we can do that.  And I thank you for your ruling, 

because I asked. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the reason why I said that, somebody 

said, let's get back and talk about the farm Bill.  So that was 

reasonable for me to say that.  I wanted to know.  I didn't say 

what we were going to do.  I said is it in order for us to do it?  

So while I'm speaking, we'll let the members talk about it -- if 

we want to go back to government business. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think they've gone in shock over 

there because they're so used to all these other things that's 

going on, I don't think they know how . . . they wouldn't be 

ready to get back to government work.  Then wouldn't have 

their . . . they haven't even got their ministers here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while they're talking about this, let's just talk 

about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the importance of the process of 

the hearings that we're talking about in the amendment; how 

important the hearings would be on Bills. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I'm having difficulty hearing 

the member and I ask the members to observe order. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'd like to, 

when they're discussing whether we want to do this or not or 

whatever and whether it's in order, I'll continue on with my 

remarks.  It put the government members into shock when we 

talked about going back to work because they're all sitting there 

half asleep and most of them have gone home.  It would put 

them into shock if we had to get back into . . . we haven't even 

got enough ministers here to probably go on with government 

business. 

 

But anyway that's up to my House Leader.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it's up to my House Leader and his colleagues if we 

want to do something like that today.  We at least now know, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it's in order to do that so if we don't 

do it today we can order for it and talk about it to our caucus 

and maybe do it on Monday.  It's in order.  So we know that. 

 

But anyway, going back, and it's quite interesting, it's quite 

interesting that all of a sudden they say they want to get back to 

government business.  Now this is a very interesting turn of 

events here, very interesting, because the most important thing 

with rule and procedure was to talk about the rules and 

regulation motion that come towards this House to put the 

three-day ice on the Bill, 



1416 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 1992 

that was the most important issue. 

 

But all of sudden they seem to maybe not think it's such a bad 

idea to get back off on it, so maybe we will be back, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, later today.  We've only got a little time left, 

so later today or Monday we might just be back on government 

business because we'll probably be doing that; we'll be thinking 

about it. 

 

Anyway back to the importance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the very, 

very importance of having the public hearings that our member 

from Wilkie talked about in the special committee under rules 

and regulations.  Now wouldn't it be important to go out and 

talk to the people because I have private members' Bill . . . we 

have a private members' Bill that's before this House.  And if it 

was only allowed for three days, these people that are involved 

in this would be a very unhappy group of people. 

 

And this Bill is pertaining to the Caronport Bible school where 

I've been involved with for a good many years of my life.  And 

Caronport, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Caronport Bible school 

want to change the name of their school, and it's always been 

called the Briercrest Bible school. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What's this got to do with bell-ringing? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, somebody just chirps 

from across there, what's it got to do with bell-ringing?  Well 

I'll tell you what it's got to do.  It's got a lot to do with freedom 

and what three days means.  It's got a lot to do with it, if they 

would just listen. 

 

It's got a lot to do with many Bills that may come forth towards 

this House.  Because these people want to change the name of 

their school from the Briercrest Bible institute to Briercrest 

schools.  But the town of Briercrest have opposed it because 

they got their school called Briercrest School.  So now this has 

been going on for close to a month and talking going back and 

forth between the two schools, and they've asked the Bill to 

come through in my name.  And then I see by next Wednesday, 

Wednesday coming, that this Private Members' Bill Committee 

is going to be meeting, and these people have a chance to come 

in and voice their opinions.  And then it has to go back to 

Caronport, and it goes back to Briercrest to talk about . . . What 

would happen if we just had a three-day hoist on these things 

and they couldn't even talk about it? 

 

Well it was several weeks even getting into my hand when it 

come to the House.  It came in the member of Thunder Creek's 

name first.  Then it was switched over to my name.  And now 

there's consultation going on.  And I think that members from 

the government here will be involved.  They must be involved 

in that committee.  And what are they going to say?  That if 

this goes through here in the next few days, that you haven't got 

any time to talk about it.  They just say, it's gone.  Once you're 

out of there, too late, you missed it. 

 

Well now is that going to make the people from Caronport, 

where there's 2,000 people there, and the town of Briercrest 

happy?  Because there's something's 

happened here that they weren't aware of, that the two schools 

being the same name is causing a conflict. 

 

And I think it's very important to this here legislature to think 

about this, to think about the seriousness of this, that you have 

to have something in your rules and regulations to take care of 

these type of things because that isn't a controversial Bill that 

has to go out to the whole province. 

 

But it has to have a mechanism.  It has to have a mechanism 

where you can put it on hold.  There has to be a mechanism 

between the House Leader or the whips or whatever, where you 

have a mechanism to say, here we have to have meetings with 

these different types of people.  This will happen all over. 

 

I before, Mr. Speaker, was talking about the towns that I've 

been contacted from about the GRIP Bill and about the rules 

motion that's come in here, and I'm going to mention quite a 

few of them here.  Thunder Creek and Arm River is where 

we're getting a lot.  I have some coming to me from the 

northerly side of Thunder Creek where they're closer to me, so 

they've been contacting me. 

 

But I'd like to talk mostly about the calls I'm getting from these 

members over here -- calls from Bengough-Milestone.  Now 

I've asked them to phone their MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) and ask them to voice their opinion to 

them.  And I'm sure they are.  So I'm sure that the member 

from Milestone, Bengough-Milestone, is getting calls talking 

about the GRIP Bill, talking about this rules and regulation, 

and talking about why the rules has . . . why you've done it.  

And I'm sure that he must be getting calls.  Because I've told 

these people, call your MLA.  Write them letters. 

 

And I'm getting many calls, because I know a lot of people in 

the Weyburn constituency.  My family came from there, and I 

have a lot of family roots there.  And I'm getting a lot of calls 

from them.  And I've said the same thing, contact about the 

Rules Committee and about the GRIP Bill and about the 

retroactive legislation of the letter, March 15.  I said, talk to 

them about it.  Be sure you talk to your member. 

 

So I know that the member from Bengough-Milestone's getting 

calls.  I know the member from Weyburn is.  Then 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, if he's not getting letters, he should be 

. . . getting phone calls.  Because I'm getting them from his 

riding.  I'm getting calls from his riding. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They're not answering their phones. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well that's the only way that they wouldn't 

be getting the message.  They're not returning their calls.  But 

I've returned the calls from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and 

they're not happy.  And I said, well if you're not happy, I'm 

only an opposition member.  And I'm not happy about it.  But 

tell your member.  And he says, I will.  So I hope that they are. 

 

And then I've had calls from Indian Head-Wolseley.  The 

member from Indian Head-Wolseley must be getting the same 

type of calls that I'm getting.  And I'm sure that he 



July 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1417 

must be taking it to your caucus.  I'm absolutely sure that they 

must be talking about it in caucus, hey?  I'm sure that the 

member from Indian Head-Wolseley says, I've just had so 

many calls and so many letters.  And he says to the now House 

Leader, hey what are you going to do about this, because I'm 

going to be in a lot of hot water here.  If the people out there 

are starting to get out, and boomerang out there that, hey, this is 

terrible legislation.  It's the worst legislation in the history of 

the Commonwealth.  I'm going to be in trouble if you don't do 

something about it. 

 

I think that's why there's been a little discussion.  There's been 

a little more discussion.  In the last day it started.  And there's a 

little discussion going on now, and there's a little talk here and 

there that maybe there's a way of working this out.  So let's 

hope that cooler heads will prevail over the weekend. 

 

The member from Churchill Downs, he's the one that brought 

the main motion to the House in the first place.  And I know, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if the member from Churchill Downs 

and I sit down for a cup of coffee together and we discussed it, 

and I know exactly what he'll say: that it's the worst thing I've 

ever had to do.  I just didn't like to have to stand on my feet but 

because of the blunder of the Minister of Agriculture, it gave 

me no choice. 

 

You know that, and I feel sorry for the member.  I've known 

him since 1978 since I came in here, and he doesn't like to do 

things like that.  But he had to stand up and make the motion as 

a senior member because of the blundering of the Minister of 

Agriculture.  But why?  But why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, do we 

have to have the blundering of one member who didn't send a 

letter out, why do we have to have it end up in Rules 

Committee?  Why does it end up in the Rules Committee? 

 

I can't believe that these people are doing such a thing as this.  I 

never in all my years heard of the blundering of a minister end 

up in the Rules Committee to solve his problem.  It's never 

been known.  If you didn't do it right . . . in the history of this 

country, if a minister blunders, the premier gets rid of him and 

gets another one.  Why didn't he get rid of him and get a man in 

that would apologize to the farmers and say, I didn't send that 

letter out, and I apologize?  Instead, the member from 

Churchill Downs had to get up and bring that motion to the 

House and use the Rules . . . imagine using the Rules 

Committee to solve a problem of a blundering minister.  I can't 

believe that. 

 

I've also been getting letters from Last Mountain-Touchwood.  

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's been my sister's seat since 1978.  I 

remember working in there against the great Gordon 

MacMurchy . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Is this a filibuster? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- The member from Churchill Downs asks me 

if it's a filibuster.  Well I'm talking and doing the best I can to 

give you a chance to go out of the House and talk to your 

House Leader and see if you can't bring this impasse to a stop 

-- to stop this carryings on. 

 

It's about time this come to an end.  Because, Mr. Speaker, 

it is imperative, it is very imperative that these so-called 

ministers from the front row over here, that they quit their 

snickering and smiling and get serious of what's happening -- 

get really serious that they are making history in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Because the now House Leader has said very clearly, very 

clearly, that yes, he said it on television, he said it . . . I will 

never talk about what one member says in private conversation; 

I'll never bring it to the floor of this House.  But, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the now House Leader said it very clearly and was 

quoted in the Leader-Post: yes, we are going to change history 

and we're going to have a Bill that's going to deem that the 

farmers got a letter on March 15. 

 

Now if any of you people can look me straight in the eye and 

go home and look all your constituents in the eye straight and 

tell me that we did the right thing, every one of you got trouble 

-- every last one. 

 

The member from Touchwood, I know he's got problems 

because I'm getting phone calls from people that said they 

voted for him.  I'm getting phone calls from the city of 

Yorkton, farmers from around the Yorkton area.  I'm not sure 

what . . . it would be likely farmers from Kamsack; it's around 

the Yorkton area.  But I would say my most phone calls and 

most contacts is a seat that I'm well acquainted with is 

Rosetown-Elrose where the Minister of Agriculture comes 

from himself. 

 

If he can go . . . I will challenge him to go to any neighbour 

within 10 miles, anyone, and give him the same challenge that I 

give the member from Churchill Downs, to go and tell him 

what they've done and see if he can get back.  Can he go and 

talk to anybody?  Can the member from Canora?  Can he go 

home this weekend and go to one farmer -- one farmer -- and 

tell him the facts and say, do you agree with what we've done?  

Do you agree that we are to get this here GRIP Bill through?  

We took it to Rules and Procedures, made a motion to stop the 

bell-ringing so we can bring the GRIP Bill in and have it first 

reading, second reading, Committee of the Whole, passed, goes 

to court, beat the farmers, and we save ourselves three-quarters 

to a billion dollars. 

 

Go say that to one farmer.  And if you can get backing from 

him, boy, you surprise me.  And make sure that it's . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I know I can't find one in my riding.  

I can't find one farmer that if you say it in that manner . . . Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, you don't go to them and say, here we know . . 

. Like over in the east side of the province, that the '92 GRIP is 

a little bit more acceptable because they grow low assessed 

land . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I know the member has been 

trying hard to observe relevance and to make sure that his 

remarks are germane to the motion and amendment before us, 

but I think the member has strayed.  And I encourage him to 

observe relevance and to speak to the amendment, the 

amendment to the motion before us. 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 



1418 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 1992 

Speaker.  Then I would ask the member from Canora or any 

other members if the member from Canora -- because he's the 

Minister of Crop Insurance -- if he would go out and ask his 

neighbours this. That there's been a Rules Committee motion 

come to this House and there's been an amendment by the 

member from Wilkie and ask if he agrees with this:  that the 

report now be concurred in, but that it be referred back to the 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures for further 

consideration of the time period over which a Bill may be 

suspended, and for particular consideration of a process to 

trigger public hearing during such a suspension of a Bill. 

 

Now I can't, Mr. Deputy Speaker, get any closer to the 

amendment than that.  That if he would go and say to his 

neighbours, do you believe in public hearings?  Do you believe 

in them?  And they would say, of course we believe in them.  

Do you believe we . . . Then say to them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

then say to them, do you believe we did wrong last spring to go 

and have the public hearings after they changed the GRIP?  Do 

you believe that was right? 

 

Because if you're going to have public hearings -- and this 

government talks about public hearings, they talk about going 

out and consulting but don't do it after the fact.  It may happen, 

and I'm not going to get into it, and I can't because you won't 

let me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, get into the Department of Health 

and what they're doing -- they're going out, maybe after the 

fact. But we hope they don't. 

 

But I challenge the Minister of Crop Insurance and the Minister 

of Agriculture to go out and talk to his people and say to them, 

one by one, neighbour by neighbour, town by town, and say 

that: are you in favour of public hearings when it's pertaining to 

a Bill and as has been discussed on amendment under Rules 

and Procedures in the legislature.  Go and ask them and I will 

guarantee that everyone will say yes. 

 

I have been contacted by . . . I'm not going to get into them any 

more because I've talked about a few of the main ones.  But 

I've got almost every constituency that I have been contacted in 

the last few weeks or contacts of some nature through letter or 

phone call or whatever.  Cut Knife-Lloyd, Touchwood, I've 

mentioned Touchwood, Nipawin, Redberry, 

Kelvington-Wadena -- seats that we don't hold. I've got the 

names down here of all the . . . Well naturally we're hearing 

more from our own seat -- Tisdale, Saltcoats, Kamsack, 

Shellbrook, we're hearing from all those areas. 

 

So if we're hearing from those areas and getting phone calls, 

letters, then the MLAs must be.  Because what I'm doing, as I 

said before, is saying to them please go back, please go back, 

tell your MLA, and take it to his caucus and get this thing 

stopped. 

 

Now the most serious thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's 

happening here is the members in the front row.  And the first 

member I put down there is yourself.  But now that you're 

sitting, and I won't make remarks because you're sitting in the 

Chair as Deputy Speaker, so I'll bypass you, but I'll move to the 

member from Athabasca.  And I'm 

only touching the members that have been here for a good 

many years, that know better.  They know better of what 

they're doing.  They absolutely know better. 

 

The member from Athabasca has been here since back in the 

'70s.  And I'm sure that nobody up in Athabasca knows much 

about what's happening here in this legislature.  But I know that 

he is a very honourable man.  He's a man I've become very 

good friends with.  And I know . . . I had a trip one time with 

him to Newfoundland, and we've become very close friends.  

And I know that if he goes and asks his people about . . . tell 

them what they're doing, that they'll not understand the farming 

and the GRIP Bill, but they'll understand, they will understand 

about retroactivity in a Bill.  But I ask and I challenge you to 

do that. 

 

The member from Regina Dewdney, now what is he telling his 

people?  They're going to hear a lot more about it in Regina.  

They're going to read the Leader-Post.  They're going to hear 

what the press is now saying about you people.  And it's 

starting to come our way.  I can remember when the media 

wasn't interested in hardly quoting anything that we've done. 

 

But now it's starting to turn.  Because they're turning on you 

people because you're bringing things forth to this House that is 

-- like I said a long time ago in my remarks here an hour or 

more ago -- that it's an unconstitutional Bill. 

 

And that's the only hope that Saskatchewan people have, that if 

you do ramrod it through this legislature, that if we have to ring 

the bells and we have to be brought in to vote, and if you have 

to introduce the GRIP Bill and you get first reading, second 

reading, and Committee of the Whole, and it's passed and the 

poor farmers lose their court case, the only hope we've got is 

the farmers hang in there, and I think they will, and take it to 

the Supreme Court.  And that is where they have the right to 

rule that a Bill is constitutional or not. 

 

And I'm told by many, many, very high-profile lawyers in the 

city of Regina that . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Name one. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well I'll name one.  He asked me to name 

one.  I know a high-profile lawyer in the city of Regina that 

knows, that know quite well that if this Bill ever got to the 

Supreme Court of Canada, that it would be ruled 

unconstitutional.  And that's the member from Churchill 

Downs.  He's one lawyer that I'm sure knows better. 

 

And there's many others.  There's many lawyers over here.  

And every last one of them knows what you're doing -- it is 

wrong.  And if they think for one minute that I'm going to start 

naming lawyers' names without their permission . . . But I'll ask 

for their permission on the weekend . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Churchill Downs, 

he did get up and speak, because he brought the motion to this 

House.  He did get up and speak. 

 

But instead of all this chirping I hear over there and 



July 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1419 

people contradicting what I'm saying and laughing about it or 

trying to rile me up or whatever, why don't they just stand to 

their feet on Monday and Tuesday and Wednesday?  And 

we've talked about this, our caucus, for four days.  Surely you 

can talk for four weeks, you guys.  Because you must be so 

right.  You must know that you're right, what you're doing.  

Stand up and say so.  Stand up and say so.  Quit saying it from 

your seat.  Stand up.  Because I'm standing up and I'm being 

counted. 

 

I'm the member from Arm River -- for somebody in television 

land that doesn't know who I am -- and I am saying that this is 

wrong, what this government is doing.  It is absolutely wrong 

to bring retroactive legislation of this nature to this House.  

And then they can't get it ramrodded through, so . . . because 

the bells already ring 18 days on it, 11 sitting days.  So they 

took it to a rules committee.  And they know it's wrong to bring 

it to a rules committee to get a Bill passed in this legislature to 

go to the courts in Melville or wherever it goes, to fix farmers 

-- to fix them. 

 

I had a farmer tell me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with your 

permission -- and it's pertaining to this here bell-ringing and to 

this GRIP -- that he said he was insured.  He's a big farmer -- 

him and his two sons -- but not so big maybe when you take 

three farmers in one; $475,000 guaranteed under GRIP '91.  

And he is going to be guaranteed 125,000 less by their figures.  

But they can change because you won't know on GRIP '92 until 

the wheat payment comes out, announced in '94, what you're 

going to get.  So don't try to fool the people in this province 

that you're going to ramrod a Bill through, through the rules 

procedures to try to tell them they're going to get some money 

out of the GRIP Bill . . . the GRIP '92 even compares to '91 

because you have to wait until the . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Again I'd just like to encourage the 

member to address his remarks to the motion that's on the floor, 

to the question.  That has to do with an amendment to a motion 

that the second report of the Special Committee on Rules and 

Procedures be concurred in.  And I'd like to just ask the 

member to address his remarks to the amendment that's before 

us now. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Now the 

most important one that I haven't talked about, it hasn't been 

said anything publicly, that just won't say a word.  You can't 

get him out of Ottawa long enough to come back and talk about 

the seriousness of what's happening in his own province, and 

that's the Premier of this province, the member from 

Riversdale.  Where is he? 

 

I challenge him.  Before this comes to a vote, I challenge, and I 

challenge everyone in Saskatchewan that will possibly be 

interested to challenge the Premier to stand to his feet and tell 

us in his words why he's doing this.  Tell us in his words why 

he's forcing GRIP '92 upon us through the rules procedure, 

through the Rules Committee.  How can the Premier of this 

province do such a thing as that?  I don't think that he can come 

in this House and face us. 

 

Because I remember in 1981 we had a Bill come forth to this 

House, and it was brought in by a member called . . . oh, I 

forget his name.  And he was the chairman of the 

committee, and he brought a private members' Bill in about . . . 

Billy Allen brought a Bill in here about private . . . to bring 

racing on Sunday to the city of Regina.  Well there was only a 

handful of us over here.  And all I did was stand up here and 

started quoting some scripture one night that there was laws 

made long before this government made laws, and challenged 

Mr. Blakeney to come in here and stand up to his feet.  And he 

had to walk in here and said, I have to agree with the member 

from Arm River.  He turned around to Gord MacMurchy and 

says, will you stand up and say?  And he had to stand up and 

say I agree with the member from Arm River.  And we 

outvoted them because they voted with us. 

 

Now there has to be some decent people on that side of the 

House that will do the same thing.  So when it comes to vote, 

voting from the member from Britton's amendment, I am 

asking the cool, calm-head, good thinkers there has to be over 

there . . . hey must have some enough people to stand up and 

vote for one simple little request.  And it's a very simple 

request: take it back to the Rules Committee and discuss it.  

Take it back.  Discuss it in a rational manner. 

 

Don't send your people to that Rules Committee, that are 

representing the Rules Committee, and don't have the House 

Leader send them there and say, no matter what you do make 

sure that GRIP '92 gets passed.  That's all it's saying -- use the 

Rules Committee; get it passed. 

 

Go back to the people that's telling you that.  The member from 

Indian Head-Wolseley, the member sitting beside him from 

Saskatoon, the member from Nipawin, there's some 

good-thinking members.  I'm looking at them.  The member . . . 

the House Leader or . . . he's in Rules Committee.  They're 

good-thinking people.  Sit down.  Sit the House Leader down, 

the member from Elphinstone, and say to him, maybe we're 

wrong to ramrod this Bill through the Rules Committee.  

Maybe we are wrong.  Did you ever think that you could be 

wrong? 

 

But I want you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want the high-profile 

people that are left here today to go to their Premier and ask 

him on Monday to take his place in this legislature and tell us 

what he thinks about the Rules Committee and see if he could 

say that we should be using the Rules Committee in a time of 

heat and a time of conflict and a time of impasse, that we 

should be using the Rules Committee to make this here GRIP 

Bill law in this here legislature.  See if he could say it.  I 

challenge you.  Do it. 

 

And I challenge the members that are all chirping from their 

feet, be sure that they stand up on Monday and say what they 

believe.  Say what you believe.  Put it on the record.  So then 

when I get calls from your own riding, I will say, well your 

member spoke; I'll send you a copy of Hansard.  That's not a 

difficult thing to do. 

 

Then we have another member that's been around a long time 

and that's . . . we've already discussed the member from 

Churchill Downs.  I wrote his name . . . his seat down here.  

Regina Elphinstone -- he's been a member that's been here a 

long time.  But one I would like to talk a little bit about is the 

member from Quill Lakes. 



1420 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 1992 

When he's here he's always chirping from his seat more than 

anybody, and why doesn't he stand up and be counted?  Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I ask him to stand up and be counted on 

Monday and say exactly what he thinks.  No smiling, no 

chirping from their feet -- stand up. 

 

I've only got a few minutes left, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 

want to close this way.  I want to close . . . I want to close this 

way, that this is to me . . . this is the second time I have spoke 

on this motion -- I spoke on the motion, now on the amendment 

-- and I am sad. 

 

I always say when I stand on my feet in this legislature that it's 

another proud day for me to speak in this legislature when I'm 

speaking on . . . even when I'm speaking on your budgets or 

your throne speeches or whatever, I'm always proud to stand 

and express myself.  But I am not proud to be standing here 

today, debating on what we've been debating for four days. 

 

I would like to go home this weekend and tell my people in 

Arm River that we've been discussing the most important Bills 

that's important to people in Arm River.  And that would be 

like the farm legislation, all the farm legislation, and several 

other Bills.  That's what they want me to report on. 

 

They don't want me to go home this weekend, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and say, we're still in that House for the fourth day 

and nothing is breaking; we can't break them down -- we can't 

break them down.  But I sincerely say to everyone, before we 

come back here on Monday, I ask the House Leader, the 

Premier of this province, and the Deputy Premier, the member 

from Churchill Downs, I ask them to sincerely put their minds 

to work on what common decency and what morality is in this 

province.  Because what you're legislating and what you're 

asking to do is even immoral.  It's absolutely immoral. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Canora, I ask him 

again, and I ask the member from Swift Current, who are very . 

. . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 1 o'clock, this 

House stands adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 

 


