




















































Hansard: May 11, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 275 

 May 11, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Economic Growth Projections 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Finance.  Mr. Minister, last Friday you said that 

this budget of betrayal was going to create 2,000 jobs and that 

the economy was going to grow by 3.2 per cent.  And you said 

this, sir, with a very straight face. 

 

Now these are fairly specific numbers, Mr. Minister, and I'm 

going to assume for a moment that you didn't just pluck those 

out of the air.  Mr. Minister, are you prepared to release these 

figures and the studies that went along with it that show that 

your numbers weren't picked from thin air? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, in response to the 

member's question, let me just point this out, that the 

government had two choices.  We either could have continued 

in the same direction as was here in Saskatchewan for the last 

10 years; we could have ran a deficit of $1.2 billion, as would 

have been the case under the former government's process that 

was in place. 

 

We decided that was the wrong thing to do.  Because with a 

deficit of $1.2 billion, Mr. Speaker, there was no economy 

because the government and the province of Saskatchewan 

could not finance that kind of a deficit because of our 

accumulated debt and guaranteed debt of $15 billion. 

 

We chose to do the responsible thing, and that is do significant 

cost cutting on the program side -- $344 million.  And 

unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we have to raise some revenues.  

That's what this budget does.  It sets us on the path to economic 

recovery because it's increasing the confidence of the investors 

and the business people and the future of Saskatchewan 

because deficits are nothing else than deferred taxes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, on Friday I asked you specifically 

to table the studies that back up your economic analysis.  Sir, it 

only took you a matter of days upon election to get your 

officials to whip up a report for you showing a 7,000-person 

job loss because of harmonization. 

 

Now I would expect, Mr. Minister, that those same officials 

must have done some type of report to back up the numbers 

that you presented in this House last Thursday.  Mr. Minister, I 

ask you specifically to table the results of those studies in this 

House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, it is well-known, and 

the members opposite fully understand, that the biggest 

concern that those people who create jobs in Saskatchewan by 

and large -- and that's the business community, the 

small-business community in particular; 70 per cent of the jobs 

in Saskatchewan created at that sector -- was the growing and 

burgeoning deficit.  They know that if we continue to follow 

that path, that there comes a day of reckoning.  In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, one of the reasons why we presented the budget we 

did present today is because to some degree we are at a day of 

reckoning. 

 

But rather than doing what the former government did, 

contrary to the advice of the member from Rosthern, and I can 

point out to him what he once said, rather than doing what the 

former government did, we had the courage and took the 

leadership necessary to address the problem and get this 

growing deficit under control so in fact there is a future in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, I'm wondering if these numbers 

that you so glibly throw out in the House today aren't a direct 

result of businesses such as Crown Life and Farm Credit 

coming to Regina; items such as Millar Western, the 

Bi-Provincial upgrader, Saskferco.  Mr. Minister, wouldn't you 

confirm today that those 2,000 jobs that you talk about are 

directly resulted from projects started by the former 

government and not the disastrous budget you brought down on 

Saskatchewan people on Thursday? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I won't say that at all, Mr. Speaker.  

But I will say this, that there are some of those projects which 

are there and may be coming, and we hope they're coming.  It 

looks positive.  We welcome them.  We don't follow the same 

kind of policy which unfortunately the members opposite 

followed in 1982 when they said anything that was started by 

the government before them was bad and we must destroy it. 

 

That's why, Mr. Speaker, they destroyed the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan because of that kind of ideology.  

That's why they did what they did with Cameco, losing $161 

million and selling shares at the wrong time. 

 

We're prepared to welcome any projects that may have been 

initiated before the last provincial election and will do 

everything in our power to facilitate any new economic 

development and economic activity that we can into the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- A question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Minister, I remind you that just a few short months ago 

you tabled in your own economic review, and I quote you, sir: 



276 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

Saskatchewan's manufacturing sector is small but the 

construction of a second heavy oil upgrader, a fertilizer 

plant and a pulp mill will help support economic growth in 

1991 as well as offer opportunities for more growth in 

(the) future when these new facilities come on stream or 

reach full capacity . . . 

 

Mr. Minister, you're being caught in your own political spin 

here.  You refuse to table anything in this legislature that backs 

up your own economic analysis in the budget.  I say, sir, that 

you simply are pulling numbers out of the air.  You have a 

budget of betrayal for Saskatchewan people.  Mr. Minister, if 

you don't table those documents in this legislature, then you are 

caught at your own misinformation, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, if members opposite 

don't want to take my word for it, let me just give you the word 

of some pretty credible people in the business report of The 

Globe and Mail which talks about:  "Province still trend-setter, 

this time in fighting debt."  That's a comment on the budget 

which was introduced here last Thursday . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And the article goes on to say: 

 

 Thus Saskatchewan, long Canada's trend-setter in everything 

from the co-operative movement to medicare becomes a 

bellwether of a different kind -- as provincial governments 

get more and more hooked on debt, international financial 

markets become less and less willing to support their habit.  

Where Saskatchewan goes, others will follow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, for 10 long years the 

members opposite when they were the government refused to 

recognize that you can't continue to spend and spend and spend 

without it coming home to roost.  We're going to change that, 

Mr. Speaker.  The member from Rosthern used to say that but 

nobody listened to him, unfortunately. 

 

We've changed the direction with this budget.  We're leading 

towards a day in the near future when we can have a balanced 

budget so that any growth in the economy in Saskatchewan can 

benefit people rather than benefit the money lenders. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, at a bare minimum your tax 

increases are going to cost the average Saskatchewan family 

over $1,200 a year.  You're going to pay more for income tax, 

more for sales tax, more for gasoline, more for property taxes, 

more for prescription drugs; more for the phone bill, the power 

bill, the gas bill, licensing your car.  You're going to pay more 

to see an optometrist. 

You're going to pay more to see a chiropractor. 

 

Mr. Minister, today the average Saskatchewan family is facing 

over $1,200 in costs.  You won't table the study that showed 

that you have some economic development agenda in your 

budget to help pay for those costs.  Aren't you . . . sir, what 

you're saying to Saskatchewan people in reality is, with a 

higher budget than last year, is that these taxes are for 

increased spending and not tackling the deficit? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

knows that the deficit has been reduced from what would have 

been $1.2 billion to $517 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Or if the members want to do year 

to year, it's being reduced from $960 million -- is what would 

have been had the former government's budget been fully 

implemented -- to $517 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, had the members opposite listened to their 

own advice, we wouldn't be here today.  Sure this is difficult.  

We said right up front that this is difficult.  But it's necessary 

because if it's not done now, not long from now, it will be 

much more difficult.  And the reason it's difficult and the 

reason it has to be done is because of the kind of wasteful 

mismanagement that was in this province when those people 

were in the administration on this side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Minister, you had no plan six months ago; this budget has 

shown you have no plan except to tax Saskatchewan people 

into the ground. 

 

If you had a plan, sir, if you had a plan that verified your 

numbers, if you had a plan that was going to create 

employment and jobs in this province, sir, if you had that plan 

you would table it in the legislature today. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, I ask the minister: will you table the 

economic analysis of your budget that confirms the numbers 

that you laid out to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, on May 7, on 

Thursday, on behalf of the government I tabled in this 

legislature the plan for Saskatchewan's recovery.  That is right 

here in this budget speech . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Now the members opposite may 

not like it.  They may not like it because they still cannot forget 

the degree to which the public of Saskatchewan rejected their 

so-called plan which brought this province from prosperity and 

an accumulated debt of $3.5 billion to an accumulated debt of 

$15 billion, bringing this province to the precipice of 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 277 

bankruptcy.  We're not prepared to let that happen.  That's not 

what we're elected to do.  And I can tell the member opposite, 

we're not going to let that happen to Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cancellation of Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 

minister who recently was responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan, the Minister of Community Services.  Madam 

Minister, your government has said all along that they're going 

to be very open and consultative.  Who did you consult with 

about this cancellation of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, when the government 

was faced with the crisis financially, which the former 

government left for this province, we had to make some 

choices -- some very difficult choices.  We had to look at 

programs which we could afford in order that those people at 

the lower end of the income scales could be protected and so 

that we could do certain things to try to provide some 

assistance to industry and business, such as the reduction of the 

E&H (education and health) tax on consumables and 

manufacturing, such as the reduction of the corporate income 

tax for small businesses.  We had to look at all those choices, 

Mr. Speaker, to make sure that we were able to bring this 

deficit down. 

 

Unfortunately one of the choices we had to make was to do 

away with the Saskatchewan Pension Plan which is costing 

$12.8 million a year, and probably unknown to the member 

from Kindersley, would have in the next three years had an 

unfunded liability of $80 million.  The taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, cannot afford it, and therefore the 

program had to go at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well I guess it is obvious, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Minister of Community Services is no longer the minister 

responsible for Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they talk about open and consultative.  Well I 

think if they would have been open and consultative, they 

would have found that women's groups, farm families, 

small-business people all favour the pension plan.  In fact, I 

would remind the Minister of Finance that he himself voted in 

favour of the introduction of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

 

In the absence of any consultation, did you at least commission 

a study or analysis of the effects of this heavy-handed move of 

cutting the Saskatchewan Pension Plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the government 

consulted very widely throughout the province with people.  

The government consulted with a wide cross-section of the 

public, including at public meetings.  We consulted with 

various interest groups and various 

community leaders in Saskatchewan. 

 

And they made one thing very clear to us.  They said to us: the 

former government brought this province to the verge of 

financial bankruptcy.  You are elected to do something about it.  

Mr. Speaker, we are doing something about it.  We were 

prepared to sit down and work out what we could afford and 

what we could not afford because of the waste and 

mismanagement that those people over there left us, and we 

made those decisions.  And we had to make the decision on this 

one as we made it, as tough as it was. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't believe they consulted with 

anyone, in spite of the fact that they say they did.  Because if 

they did consult with people, they'd have found that people 

were in favour of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  People who 

didn't have any access to a pension plan were covered with the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  Business people, farm families, 

single women -- 80 per cent of the people involved in it were 

women. 

 

Mr. Minister, did you at least consider salvaging the plan to 

give people the opportunity to continue with the plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, we considered every 

option that was available to us both on the revenue side and on 

the expenditure side.  We looked very carefully at making sure 

that the people who have invested in this plan were protected.  

And I have written to all of the individuals, making it very 

clear to them that their contribution, the government's matching 

contribution, and all of the accrued interest that is accumulated 

in the plan will be rebated to the individuals.  So, Mr. Speaker, 

that, I can assure the House and I can assure the member 

opposite, is being looked after. 

 

Further to that, we hope that the federal government will allow 

that that, the individual's choice as such, can be converted into 

an RRSP (registered retirement savings plan) so their pension 

benefits will continue.  In fact they will probably be better off 

under that arrangement than under this plan, which the former 

members put together just before the last election to try to get 

themselves some political mileage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again, the 

Minister of Finance talks about consultation.  It also goes on in 

your letter that you sent out that you're hoping the federal 

government will allow people to contribute their plan into the 

RRSP.  Did you consult with the federal government?  Did you 

get an assurance from the federal government that they will 

indeed allow that RRSP contribution? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- In fact we have consulted with 



278 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

the federal government.  We have some discussions that are 

going on with them.  The member may not know this, but in 

the past the federal government has always been willing to do 

this.  I have no reason to believe that the federal government 

would not be willing to agree to this.  These things take a little 

time.  It will all be worked out in the new few weeks, I hope. 

 

I hope that the member opposite will be helpful and that he will 

contact his friends in the federal government, maybe his 

minister from that part of the province, so that they will 

speedily approve this thing in order that this can be resolved as 

best as it can be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well it's certainly 

obvious to me that indeed the Minister of Finance has sharp 

political skill.  But I'd ask the minister: do you also have sharp 

leadership skill?  Will you today give up your pension, sir?  

And the Premier, will you give up your pension, sir? -- an 

unfunded pension.  That seems to be the only basis for your 

argument is unfunded pensions. 

 

Well, sir, you sit there with a $1 million pension of your own 

that's unfunded.  I would ask you today, will you show some 

leadership in this province, sir, and cancel your program, your 

pension?  Or will you bring back the pensions for the people of 

Saskatchewan that most need them, not you? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I know the member from 

Kindersley is new to the House and will not remember the 

history of which government actually took some significant 

action on pensions.  In 1978 it was this government that dealt 

with MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) pensions and 

dealt with public service pensions and introduced a money 

purchase plan which is fully funded and will continue to be 

fully funded in order that we don't continue to create the 

problem that has been created with the unfunded liability of the 

old pension plans.  We've already taken some of those steps, 

Mr. Member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Effects of Budget on Agriculture 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question to the 

Minister of Agriculture.  We've heard quite a bit today about all 

this consultation when there has been no consultation.  All this 

financial analysis -- no financial analysis. 

 

My question to you, based on your throne speech where you 

said you were going to be open, honest and accountable: can 

you show or demonstrate any analysis or consultation that this 

budget helps farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I find it absolutely ludicrous 

that the members opposite would talk about helping farmers 

when over the initiatives that they've 

engaged in in the last four years alone they've added to the 

provincial cost of federal programs in excess of $200 million, 

leaving the province in the devastation that we now find 

ourselves in, leaving us in the position where we have to make 

some tough choices, leaving us in a position where we have to 

look to our children and our children's children paying off the 

difficulties you've created because you didn't know how to 

manage an agriculture program or the Government of 

Saskatchewan for the 10 years you were in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a news release from the 

Saskatchewan livestock feeding association; Mr. Brian Perkins 

had a news release.  It didn't exactly put flowers around your 

throne speech or your budget speech.  We have the livestock 

cash advances gone.  The FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment 

program) is gone.  Gas is being taxed for the farmers.  The 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) has been gutted.  You 

got power rates up, SaskTel rates up, insurance rates up.  

Natural gas is up.  You've cut the natural gas program. 

 

Where are you going . . . The question, Mr. Speaker, is this: 

where are you going to demonstrate any support for agriculture 

like you promised when you had a 20 per cent decrease in your 

agriculture budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the 

members opposite that in the structuring this year's budget, 

which we had to do with a great deal of discretion and a great 

deal of priority setting, we maintained for agriculture 78 per 

cent of the budget for direct income support programs.  We 

maintained the $22 million that was in agricultural 

development, and we had as an additional objective the need to 

balance the budget of Saskatchewan.  Because without a 

balanced budget in Saskatchewan, there will be no programs -- 

not agriculture, not health, not education, not anything -- a fact 

the members opposite clearly do not understand, the way they 

managed this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Dale Eisler in his article said there's three 

things you need to do, Mr. Minister.  One is you need to raise 

the taxes to get rid of the deficit.  You have to be very specific 

at where you take your tax cuts but you also have to give some 

to the economy. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, you took out of the Saskatchewan 

agriculture economy . . . the livestock feeding association, you 

don't even understand it.  The FeedGAP, the volume of dollars 

in the pork industry that are needed, and the spin-off that it's 

going to have in Moose Jaw on the packing plant, in Saskatoon 

in the packing plant, in North Battleford in the packing plant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does the minister have any long-term, short-term, 

or any plan at all for agriculture? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't know if the member 

opposite has any particular line of questioning 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 279 

he wishes to pursue.  He seems to be shotgunning all over the 

place. 

 

But let's address the livestock issue for a moment.  The fact is I 

know something about livestock; I've been in the business all 

my life.  And I know that it's difficult to remove from that 

sector the support that . . . in removing the FeedGAP program 

and removing the interest free cash advances.  The difficulty 

with the budget that we have is that we cannot simply sustain 

the level of expenditure that's there and we therefore have to 

priorize the remaining expenditures.  We have sat down 

already with the livestock sector and talked to them; Mr. Brian 

Perkins's organization was represented there.  And we will sit 

down again and see where we should priorize the spending for 

the remaining funds we have. 

 

The fact is that we simply have to accept that the province of 

Saskatchewan cannot afford to be directly subsidizing input 

costs in any industry in the shape you've left us -- involved in a 

free trade agreement that discriminates against us, involved in a 

general agricultural sector where you've allowed the federal 

government to off-load onto the province.  You simply have 

left us . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, the minister 

indicated that we were using a "shotgun" approach.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, he just blew the agriculture out of the sky with his 

goose gun. 

 

I want to point out to you, Mr. Minister, you went to Ottawa 

and all you gave back to the people of Saskatchewan was a bill.  

You went to Edmonton and all you did is bring back a bill to 

the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan.  You went to 

the Minister of Finance and all you brought back for 

agriculture is a bill.  No money, no money -- only a bill. 

 

The question is: don't you know that the circumstances you are 

providing to agriculture in Saskatchewan are destroying farm 

families right now while you're sitting there? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, let me remind the member 

opposite about bringing home bills.  Until 1988 the province of 

Saskatchewan had no bills to pay for agricultural support.  We 

are beginning now to pay back the province's share of the 

drought assistance from 1988 -- $15 million a year. 

 

In the year 1990 we took on half of the federal government's 

share of crop insurance -- 40 to $60 million a year.  Talk about 

bringing home a bill. 

 

In 1991 we took on 140 to $150 million on GRIP.  Talk about 

bringing home a bill. 

 

And in 1992 we again from last year seen the federal 

government off-load its share of start-up costs for the program.  

Talk about bringing home a bill from your 

friends in Ottawa. 

 

Join us in getting the priority where it ought to be and getting 

the federal government to meet its responsibilities to 

Saskatchewan agriculture to keep us going through the trade 

waters that are going on that are a federal responsibility. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the answers put by 

members to items 14 and 15, I hereby table. 

 

The Speaker: -- Questions 14 and 15 tabled. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

questions put by members, items number 16, 17, 18 and 19, I 

would ask the questions be converted to motions for return 

(debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Questions 16 to 19 converted for motions for 

return. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for 

me to rise once more in my place and continue the debate on 

the budget speech.  I would like to congratulate once more 

today, as I did Friday, the Minister of Finance on the budget 

that he brought in.  As I said Friday, I think it contains the 

proper balance, the kind of balance that we need.  On the one 

hand we need to balance the budget, as the people of the 

province have told us that we must bring in a balanced budget, 

work towards a balanced budget.  On the other hand, we must 

be fair and have compassion.  And I believe that this budget 

does that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe that the people in my 

constituency understand that the bills must be paid.  We were 

talking about bills just earlier.  And the bills are out there, the 

bills of the last few years - 

_ millions and millions, in fact billions of dollars -- and the 

time to pay has come.  And they are ready.  The people in my 

constituency have told me that they're ready to do their part as 

long as we're fair and as long as we do it with compassion. 
 

They're going to do their part.  We're going to do our part, Mr. 

Speaker, to rebuild the province.  And it's going to 



280 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

take all of us. 

 

The size of the mess we're in is almost beyond words.  It's 

almost unfathomable to realize what has happened to our 

province in the few years that the previous government has 

been in.  But as I said earlier on Friday, I believe that the 

people remember, and the people know and will remember 

who caused it and how we got to the situation we're in today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget speech is our plan.  It's a new 

direction to rebuild Saskatchewan together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- And in it you can see that we haven't been 

afraid to tackle the challenges that are ahead of us -- and indeed 

there are challenges ahead of us, but we're not afraid of them, 

Mr. Speaker.  We're tackling them in the budget.  We've 

started.  We've started taking this province in a new direction, a 

direction where we pay our bills, a direction where we care for 

the poor, a direction where we care for one another in our 

community.  And that's the direction we're going; that's the 

direction the people elected us for.  And that's what we're going 

to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe that the people in this 

province are up to the task.  I know the people in my 

constituency are up to the task.   We will show the rest of 

Canada and the rest of the world in fact that, once again, as we 

have in days gone by, Saskatchewan will lead the way.  And 

we do have what it takes.  We've shown that before and we'll 

do it again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's just one more thing I would like to 

comment on before I take my place.  I'm surprised at some of 

the comments by some of the members opposite -- the 

comments that say we had our priorities right, the comments 

that say everything was in fact in order.  Mr. Speaker, when 

you know the facts, and in light of the facts, it seems almost 

unbelievable to me that anyone would say these kind of things. 

 

To take our province . . . It wasn't even the 10 years they had 

control of the province and to take it from a province that owed 

very little money and add to that $10 billion -- over a billion 

dollars a year of new debt, new money - 

_ added dollars, $40,000 a year in fact, Mr. Speaker, to a 

family like mine, a family of four, this is the reason that people 

asked me to get into politics and see if we can't do something 

about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- When we've had that kind of government in 

the past and the books have been open and show what the 

deficit is, don't try to tell me that everything's been in order.  It 

has not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know of the bankruptcies, the food banks, 

the line-ups at the food banks, the increases, the poverty.  It's 

real, and it happened gradually over the last few years -- quite a 

few years, about nine and a half years.  The people are leaving. 

We know the scandalous ways of the last nine and a half years.  

And yet some of the comments I've heard from some of the 

members opposite say we had our priorities right. 

 

Don't try to tell me that those are right priorities.  Surely to gain 

any credibility at all in the sight of the people of the province 

they ought to admit that they made some mistakes, and they 

ought to admit what they are. 

 

But no, they stay.  They hold on steadfastly to the line that the 

people of the province just misunderstand them.  We just don't 

understand.  Well the people in my constituency understand 

and that's why there was a change of government in my 

constituency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- I say their record is a shame, Mr. Speaker.  I 

say their record is a shame.  And there are many examples that 

I could use for coming to that conclusion. 

 

But I think the loudest example that I will use, the example that 

probably says it the clearest, Mr. Speaker, is the example of the 

way they paid some of their political appointees -- hundreds of 

thousands of dollars a year, plus the benefits that they got, plus 

the packages they got when they left.  And in the same town or 

the same city there was increasing line-ups at food banks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, don't tell me that that's right priorities.  I just don't 

understand that kind of an attitude, Mr. Speaker.  But I want to 

tell you just in closing, I saw that attitude once before.  I saw 

that kind of an attitude once before and I'd like to tell you 

where I saw it.  It was a day I was driving in rural 

Saskatchewan and my truck's windshield had gotten covered all 

over.  The windshield of my car had gotten covered all over 

with bugs. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I hate to interrupt but I have a very, 

very difficult time hearing the member from here.  I know it's a 

long distance but there's lots of noises in between.  So could I 

just ask, I think all of us should listen to the words of wisdom 

from the member from Nipawin. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I saw that attitude 

once before and I'll tell you where.  I was driving in rural 

Saskatchewan and it was a hot day and my windshield got all 

covered with bugs and insects or the remains of bugs and bees 

and insects.  And it was even getting hard to see, and I had to 

lean forward a little bit to be able to see the road.  And I leaned 

ahead in my driving position and I saw this grasshopper body 

laying on my windshield wiper, with his little green face kind 

of turned towards mine.  And the look on that face, Mr. 

Speaker, seemed to say to me, if I had the guts, I'd do it again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- No apology, no apology, no remorse -- 

defiance, defiance right to the end.  Just defiance.  No 

admission of a poor plan that morning, no admission of any, 

you know, anything that they had done wrong.  Just 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 281 

defiance to the end.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I think I've seen that 

look again, and I remember where I saw it before. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- But, Mr. Speaker, all joking aside, we will 

turn this province around.  We will return this province to the 

people that live in this province.  And we will regain control of 

our great province and we'll wipe this mess from the window of 

our province -- this stain on our past -- with strong medicine, 

and this budget speech is part of that medicine.  It's a hard 

choice, but we have shown and the Minister of Finance has 

shown that he's ready and prepared to do the hard choices that 

we must do to get rid of this stain on our past. 

 

I believe we're headed in the right direction at last to rebuild 

our province together, and I will support the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's 

traditional, I suppose, to stand in my place and say that it's a 

pleasure to address the budget.  Mr. Speaker, I can't say that 

today because it is not a pleasure.  After hearing the budget, 

Mr. Speaker, I was surprised and I was saddened. 

 

While maybe, Mr. Speaker, you might wonder why we were 

surprised.  We shouldn't have been surprised after all the leaks.  

But, Mr. Speaker, how could we not be surprised when we see 

the pension plan turfed out.  We see the FeedGAP program cut.  

We see cash advance for cattle cut, income tax up 10 per cent 

after the slogan, no more taxes.  Freeze taxes for four years.  

Axe the tax.  How can we not be surprised? 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the weekend I talked to some very 

disillusioned people.  Mr. Speaker, they feel betrayed.  They 

feel cheated, and they feel that they have been made fools of.  

They believed, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP (New Democratic 

Party), when they went to the voters and said we will be a lot 

different, they believed them.  No patronage, no tax increases, 

more for health, more for education, more for social services.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll be touching on some of these things in 

my remarks, and I'm sure that my colleagues will touch on 

some others.  I was told, Mr. Speaker, on the weekend, that this 

was a very moving budget.  People will be now moving to 

Alberta, Manitoba, and other places because of this very 

moving budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, addressing the concerns and needs of 

Saskatchewan is why we are here and also why I am so 

disappointed with the NDP government and with this budget.  

Mr. Speaker, I guess the public should be used to betrayals by 

now, since they have been happening on almost a daily basis.  

But it doesn't make it any easier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget ignores the needs of the people and 

what is worse it ignores the responsibility of a government to 

take care of its people.  They said that they were hitting those 

who can best afford it.  I point out to you the pension plan.  

Farm wives, single parents, part-time workers, even those who 

on a part-time basis found themselves taking welfare for a short 

period of time, were 

able to put in modest payments into the pension plan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Whether we are talking about agriculture crisis, the demise of a 

healthy education system, the underfunding of the medicare 

system, the lack of an economic plan, or poverty, Mr. Speaker, 

this budget does nothing to address any of those concerns. 

 

The people need answers, Mr. Speaker.  And all this budget 

gives them is abandonment.  The people deserve to know what 

the NDP are going to do to create jobs, to promote 

diversification, to improve our hospitals and not destroy them.  

To do anything.  But so far all we've heard is promises of 

reviews and committees and studies and not any real solutions 

to the problems. 

 

Study after study, Mr. Speaker -- I've counted eight, I think 

now -- and then we hear of lay-off after lay-off like we've been 

hearing.  And the news and this budget elimination of 500 

public service positions -- 500.  And on the other hand, the 

Speech from the Throne actually bragged about hiring 600 

more people. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, these are the things that people want 

answers for.  These are the things, along with the increases in 

everything from our phone and power bills each month to the 

breeding fees for ranchers.  And we want them to take a long 

look, Mr. Speaker.  The truth is as plain as it can be, Mr. 

Speaker.  This government has turned their backs on the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1445) 

 

There is a difference between a political leader and a people 

leader, Mr. Speaker.  And the problem that I find when I talk to 

people about the pension plan, they ask me why.  And the only 

conclusion that I can come to talking with them is because it 

was Tory blue.  Those people's thirst for Tory blood is still 

there.  They still think they need more blood from the Tories.  

So it doesn't matter who they hurt.  They kill a program that 

was well received by 60,000 people - 

_ 80 per cent were women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we heard the Minister of Health stand here and 

talk about the abused women.  We supported her on that. We 

said yes, there has to be something done to stop abuse of 

women.  Mr. Speaker, killing that plan is abuse to women. 

 

Now how can you on one hand and one day stand and give a 

very good presentation by the Minister of Health, so good that 

we supported it because we agreed with her.  The next day, Mr. 

Speaker, we kill the pension plan for housewives, farm 

housewives, young mothers, single parents, and those people 

who are on part-time work that can't access into a company 

pension.  It's gone. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the truth is as plain as it can be.  The people have 

turned their back . . . the government has turned their back on 

the people of Saskatchewan.  All of these increases, Mr. 

Speaker, in addition to many more, all of this on the heels of a 

campaign run by the NDP promising more and more for 

everyone: more services, increase to health care, education, 

more money to municipalities, bringing back the old dental 

plan, and more and more 



282 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

and more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NDP promised to give much more, but not to increase 

taxes.  They promised much more, but we did not get, Mr. 

Speaker, much more; we got much less, much less for 

everyone.  There isn't one person in the province of 

Saskatchewan that won't be hurt by this budget. 

 

And what do we see in the budget?  Well we see a 10 per cent 

increase in personal income tax, Mr. Speaker.  I was talking to 

a business man on Sunday afternoon, a small-business person, 

who we all acknowledge that small business creates the biggest 

percentage of jobs. 

 

He tells me that the 10 per cent increase -- without talking 

about the power, the phone, and the heat and the lights and all 

that -- it's going to cost him $3,500 more to operate this year.  

And, Mr. Speaker, we're talking about people who are trying to 

survive now.  They're on the ropes now.  If they're going to 

have to shut down . . . This gentleman has about 14 employees 

-- 14 families involved here. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask you, sir, and the people 

across the way, where's the slogan, axe the tax; tax freeze; no 

tax increases for four years.  Where are those things?  People 

feel betrayed.  They feel like they have been made fools of, and 

there is frustration to no end. 

 

A 10 per cent increase from the same people who said 

Saskatchewan people were being taxed to death under the 

Tories, and that enough was enough.  We heard that -- enough 

is enough. 

 

But they're saying now, enough is not enough.  And I guess 

enough isn't enough because this government has also added an 

extra tax on fuel to the tune of 3 cents per litre, which is 

thirteen and a half cents a gallon. 

 

This tax is going on to farmers who are barely hanging on.  

This is the people that we expected some help in the budget 

because of the things they had done before budget to the 

agricultural sector.  That's why we are surprised and saddened, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Not only do they not stop at these huge personal income tax 

hikes, Mr. Speaker, they go on and add an extra percentage to 

the sales tax which will bring in another $64 million.  Another 

64 after saying they had enough money. 

 

They said, when we wanted to harmonize, they said:  you don't 

have to harmonize; we don't need that money.  We don't need 

it.  So now they put on a 1 per cent increase on the very tax that 

we were trying to harmonize.  Which our figures, Mr. Speaker, 

showed that the net benefit to Saskatchewan by harmonizing 

was $250 million.  Net benefit to Saskatchewan.  Another 

broken promise from the members opposite. 

 

The new motto, the new motto for this government is enough is 

never enough.  The election of deception and deceit.  The 

election of deception and deceit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before the election the NDP said this: we'll 

stick up for the farmers; we'll help the business men; we're 

going to eliminate poverty and we will make life easier for 

families. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let's see what happened to business in this 

budget.  An increase in the general corporation income tax rate; 

an increase in the corporation capital tax surcharge rate on 

resource corporations; an increase in the corporation capital tax 

on financial institutions. 

 

Now I have a little difficulty here trying to see how this helps 

those people in business.  Maybe the members over there could 

help us a little with this help business. 

 

Well I can't see it, Mr. Speaker.  I ran a little business for a 

while and when I see this here, I'm kind of glad I'm not in 

business now.  Going back to the future, we're now going to 

have purple diesel fuel.  We're not going to have any tax 

rebates for the farmers; there's going to be a cap of $900.  

That'll help -- that'll help. 

 

That is for the farmers.  The provincial farmers, we all know 

the deplorable situation the NDP has placed them in because of 

the gutting of the GRIP program.  And they can talk and argue, 

and they can fight and bellow over there, Mr. Speaker, but the 

program was ruined, trying to fix one thing; one thing that you 

and I and everybody else knew had to be fixed.  That was the 

top end, so that the farmers could go out and do the job he 

knows how to do and not be penalized for it. 

 

We knew that; everyone knew that.  And to fix that, you ruined 

the program.  What have we got?  What have we got here?  It's 

a strange thing coming from a socialist government.  Here we 

have the only place that anybody benefits from that is the top 

end.  Where the guy has the most bushels, has the best crop, he 

gets the best return.  The person has the lowest return or he's 

wiped out completely, gets the lowest support.  How can you 

sit there and propose a program like this and call yourself 

socialists?  I don't understand that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader-Post had in it on Saturday, May 2 . . . 

not many people missed it, Mr. Speaker, because it was a 

full-page ad.  I'm not going to mention the people that put it in 

there.  I'm not so sure you would allow it.  But you know and 

everyone knows what I'm talking about. 

 

The ad reminded the members opposite of a few of their 

promises.  They reminded the people of Saskatchewan: here is 

what these people promised you.  Beside the pictures of each of 

the members opposite, including the member from Riversdale 

and the member from Regina Hillsdale, these people printed in 

bold quotes from each member. 

 

The member from Regina Elphinstone's quote was especially 

worth noting.  And I quote from the Leader-Post, Saturday, 

May 2. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's from the toy minister. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- That was from the Fisher-Price minister, yes, 

the toy minister. 

 

 "We've indicated many, many sources where we 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 283 

 would see the government saving the kind of money that 

would make these massive tax increases unnecessary . . ." 

 

That's a quote from Hansard, Mr. Speaker.  That was on June 

12, 1991. 

 

 "We've indicated many, . . . sources where we would see the 

government saving the kind of money that would make these 

massive tax increases unnecessary . . ." 

 

June 12, 1991.  And how about the leader over there, the 

member from Riversdale, and again I quote: 

 

 "In this campaign we will talk of the need to . . . ease the tax 

burden". 

 

September 20, 1991, quoted from the Leader-Post, February 

13, 1992. 

 

Ease, ease the tax burden.  Now, Mr. Speaker, either I don't 

know what the word ease means, or the Leader of the 

Opposition . . . or the Premier doesn't know.  What a load of 

hooey, Mr. Speaker.  What a load of hooey. 

 

Again I ask.  I ask again: what happened to the slogan, axe the 

tax?  Axe the tax -- no more taxes necessary.  We don't need . . 

. We have found other sources that make these massive tax 

increases unnecessary. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite said many times they 

would not increase taxes; they would be able to cut hundreds of 

millions of dollars from the government expenditures and in 

turn pass along savings -- savings -- to the taxpayers.  Well, 

well.  Some savings. 

 

They must be using their socialistic calculator again, Mr. 

Speaker, because the accounting method that I generally use is 

. . . my understanding is, when you pass along savings and you 

receive something, that means you got something and you 

didn't have to pay for it. 

 

Now it's pretty hard for me to accept that when we see what 

we're paying for . . . what we're getting here today, Mr. 

Speaker, in the budget.  And come to think of it, Mr. Speaker, 

the public of Saskatchewan has received something.  They 

received something from this NDP government.  They received 

a slap in the face and a complete betrayal -- a complete betrayal 

of the trust they put in those people opposite. 

 

Many people listened to the NDP during the campaign, Mr. 

Speaker, and they followed empty promises all the way to the 

ballot boxes.  They put their trust in those people opposite.  At 

the time, the public didn't know they were being lambs led to 

slaughter by this government. 

 

Well they know it now, Mr. Speaker.  But it took a few weeks.  

And never did it come home more -- how will I will say? -- in 

the budget.  On the weekend, Mr. Speaker, I met a lot of 

disillusioned people who held their head down and were 

ashamed to think that they supported those people and were so 

badly betrayed. 

 

Now the motive of the NDP government, Mr. Speaker, as 

far as I am concerned, they wanted to form government.  That 

was the total motive.  They didn't want to get elected to help 

the people of this province -- to improve life in Saskatchewan 

and protect families in our economic future -- they just wanted 

to sit on that side of the House. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe that's it, and they are now sitting 

on the other side of the House.  That has to be it.  Because there 

is no other explanation for the decisions they have been 

making, the contracts they have been breaking, and the people 

that are being betrayed.  No other answer that makes any sense, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let's take rural Saskatchewan.  I shouldn't use that term, take 

rural Saskatchewan, because they've already been taken by the 

members opposite.  They've been taken to the cleaners, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So let's use rural Saskatchewan, for instance.  Rural 

Saskatchewan is in a true time of crisis, and immediate help is 

needed.  Rural people expect help because over the last nine 

years they have received the help needed when times were 

tough.  During those years, the PC (Progressive Conservative) 

government secured over $13 billion for the farm families in 

our province, not just to help farmers make payments when the 

grain sales were short.  The PCs instigated counselling and 

assistance programs for farmers to give them financial advice, 

drought assistance for crops and livestock, grants to help 

improve water supply on the farms.  Water is very important on 

the farm, Mr. Speaker, not just for homes but for livestock and 

gardens and so on.  How do you keep people on the farm if 

they don't have the amenities of life the same as people in 

urban Saskatchewan have? 

 

Mr. Speaker, they gave them help to control grasshoppers.  

They brought natural gas, and now that program is cut also, 

Mr. Speaker.  They brought individual telephone lines to rural 

areas.  Now they've raised the rates and much more, much 

more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1500) 

 

These programs that the PCs put in, along with many others, 

Mr. Speaker, have helped many farmers remain on their farms.  

The help was there, Mr. Speaker, when needed. 

 

Now compare that to the last six months under an NDP 

government and see how rural Saskatchewan has fared -- 

complete gutting of the GRIP program, cancellation of the 

natural gas program.  Again I ask: how do you keep people on 

the farm without gas and lights and power and phones, and all 

those good things that people in urban Saskatchewan have? 

 

They're talking about the closure.  They're talking now about 

the closure of hundreds of rural schools.  Cancellation of Fair 

Share.  Mr. Speaker, that pension plan in Kindersley was a 

good example of what Fair Share could have done - $600,000 

payroll for that town of 4,900 people, a major impact on that 

small town, major.  They cancelled it.  They also eliminated the 

feed grain adjustment program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, help was there under the previous 



284 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

administration and not just for farmers, not just for rural 

Saskatchewan.  Evidence of diversification that took place 

under the Progressive Conservative government is everywhere 

in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, heavy oil upgraders -- two of them -- scattered 

from one corner of the province to the other; over 100 

community bond corporations formed in communities all 

across Saskatchewan; Whitespruce youth treatment of Yorkton. 

Saskatchewan communities network gives everyone in our 

province access to education which was a high priority in our 

government, Mr. Speaker.  Weyerhaeuser paper mill in Prince 

Albert -- they went from 300 workers to over 1,200 workers.  

Those are well-paid jobs, Mr. Speaker.  That was under the old 

government.  Saskferco plant in Belle Plaine. Mr. Speaker, the 

list goes on. 

 

Everyone in Saskatchewan expects results, expects the 

government to have a plan for the future.  What the people do 

not expect, Mr. Speaker, is to be left hanging while the NDP 

government flip-flops with their future.  They do not expect to 

be misled and betrayed.  They didn't expect that.  They have 

been left hanging, hanging to the left. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sorry to say the public should have expected 

the unexpected.  They should have; we should have too, but we 

didn't.  The litany of broken promises by this government in six 

short months is unsurpassed, is unsurpassed in the province's 

history. 

 

The budget will be another confirmation of further 

back-pedalling by this government.  I believe right now, Mr. 

Speaker, they have broken or set a new record for 

back-pedalling in this province.  Instead of building schools, 

the government will close them.  Instead of improving health 

care, the NDP will slash it.  Instead of creating jobs, this 

government is turning down economic opportunities and 

raising taxes.  Where is the slogan: axe the tax, no more taxes, 

freeze taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just the beginning.  This NDP government 

needs to answer some very important questions.  How can you 

justify breaking the energy contracts and throwing away 

thousands of jobs and billions of dollars for this province? 

 

Another ad in Saturday's paper was from the Synergy group in 

which they still want to press this government to wake up to its 

mistake.  And I hope the NDP have the courage to reconsider 

their stance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would say to those opposite that there is nothing wrong in 

admitting you are wrong.  And I think in this case they were 

wrong.  Ideology I think, Mr. Speaker, got ahead of common 

sense in that case.  I hope they do change their mind for the 

future of this province and for the future of my grandchildren. 

 

It doesn't make sense, Mr. Speaker, to turn an opportunity like 

that down.  Simply ideology or political reasons. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, how many other agreements are the 

government going to break?  This is a very scary subject.  We 

have been told there will be legislation put before this House 

and it will deem farmers to have 

received a letter before March 15.  Mr. Speaker, that's a very 

scary piece of legislation. 

 

We're wondering on this side of the House, does that mean that 

when it comes time for the province to pay their share of the 

GRIP program, because the Minister of Agriculture says it's too 

much money, he will send out or pass legislation that deems 

the cheques to have been sent or he deems that part of the 

cheques have been sent?  How many other agreements is the 

new government going to break, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Many other questions have not been answered by this 

government as well, Mr. Speaker.  How can you possibly be 

thinking of what is best for Saskatchewan and make a decision 

like that?  How can you claim to place education as a priority 

and slash funding at the same time?  How can you claim to care 

about the well-being of our medicare system and at the same 

time strip services to optometrists and the drug plan, double the 

minimum in the drug plan?  How can you say that and face the 

public? 

 

How is it that you can claim to care for farmers and 

home-makers and these people who are self-employed and at 

the same time cancel the very first pension plan allowing them 

to plan for their own future?  Was it because it was a Tory 

plan?  Everything that has a Tory tinge to it, they want to 

destroy.  And I don't think that's right.  I don't think that just 

because we done it, it should be destroyed.  Good or bad, they 

had to destroy it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that tells us something about the thirst they have 

for the Tory blood over there.  And how can the NDP claim to 

have the support of farmers when there are thousands 

protesting weekly to urge this government to honour the old 

GRIP?  Farmers banded together to sue the government.  How 

can they claim to be helping the farm sector, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The NDP government does not believe in keeping its word.  

And what's worse, what's worse and bothers me, is they don't 

think they have to.  They don't think they have to.  They said, 

we are government; we don't have to keep our word. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I consider myself a hired man of the people 

of Wilkie.  I went to the door and I asked for a job and they 

gave it to me.  I became the hired man.  So how can a 

government, any government, say, we don't have to listen to the 

people because we are government.  Mr. Speaker, they're the 

hired man. 

 

A good example of the NDP attitude is proven in the article I 

have with me today from the Star-Phoenix dated April 29, 

1992.  In it, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture is talking 

about how he will handle the thousands of farmers that have 

been betrayed by GRIP '92, and I quote: 

 

 Agriculture Minister Berny Wiens has threatened to bring in 

retroactive legislation changing the contracts . . . 

 

That's a quote.  That's the way he's going to handle it.  He 

didn't say: I will listen to them, I will discuss it with them, I 

will offer alternatives -- no. 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 285 

And if going to deem, a letter has been sent to all farmers by 

the March 15 deadline.  Even though a letter has never been 

sent -- not one letter, not to one farmer -- that we can find.  

Does that mean they can also deem the cheques have been 

paid?  Mr. Speaker, this is very heavy stuff. 

 

And can you believe it?  That's the next question.  What can we 

believe?  What can we believe coming from over there?  What 

can we believe?  I want the members over there to ask 

themselves the same question that I have to answer when I go 

back to meet my constituents -- what can we believe?  Well, 

Mr. Speaker, this government they not only don't think they 

should honour any contracts, they don't think they have to 

listen to a contract that's been signed; they just say they'll 

change them. 

 

Now we have some people over there, Mr. Speaker, in the law 

profession.  Mr. Speaker, we all hear the stories about the 

lawyers and all the rest of it, but one thing I believe, that 

lawyers are supposed to uphold the law.  Here we have a 

government, Mr. Speaker, talking about bringing in legislation 

to make it legal to lie.  Make it legal.  Deemed to have sent a 

letter when there was never a letter ever even drafted, not one, 

not one.  How are you people going to stand - 

_ and you farmers are going to stand -- in your place when that 

legislation comes forward and you're going to vote yes, that it's 

legal to lie. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. Order.  I believe the member knows to 

use that term in the legislature is unparliamentary.  Order.  I 

believe the member knows that it's unparliamentary and I ask 

him to withdraw the words. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, I thought . . . I withdraw, I 

withdraw, but I did believe I was on proper ground. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. 

Speaker, let me say it this way.  Let me say it this way.  The 

government not only doesn't think they should have to honour 

any contracts signed, Mr. Speaker, they say they'll just change 

them.  They'll just change them, signed or not. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, we've heard the joke 

about how to double the farmer's income.  Well you give him 

two mail boxes.  Well, Mr. Speaker, that's changed.  Under this 

budget this has changed, Mr. Speaker.  Now farmers can slash 

their income in half just by opening the mail from the NDP 

government.  They can slash their income by half. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while the government are breaking 

agreements and contracts with families, farmers, and business 

men, they are writing them for their friends.  They are writing 

them for their friends. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in fact I would like the NDP to table a few 

of the contracts they've made with their friends today.  Do that 

today.  Let the members of this Assembly and the people of the 

province know exactly how much Mr. Messer and the member 

from Riversdale's law partner, Mr. Ching, are making.  We 

know how he . . . we know how much it is. 

 

Okay.  Mr. Speaker, let's forget, let's forget about the 

verbal agreement.  And as one person told me in fun, Mr. 

Speaker, a verbal agreement is not worth the paper it's written 

on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the people that I've talked to want to see 

that in black and white.  The question arises, when you have a 

verbal agreement, the person that makes out the cheques to 

their own people -- how do they do that?  How do they do that?  

How do they know what they get every two weeks or every 

month or whatever?  A verbal agreement.  How do they do 

that?  Very interesting.  Very interesting. 

 

Now I would like the NDP to take a . . . It's a good line.  Open 

and honest.  Open and honest.  After all, isn't that what was 

promised to the public?  So how do you get your pay cheque 

when there's just a verbal agreement?  Who knows how to 

write those cheques?  There may be a . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, how do you do that?  I guess open and 

honest.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP are not taking care of the 

people and they're not being open and honest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how about the many agreements signed and 

sealed already?  The NDP are forcing people to wait, to put the 

projects on hold until the government feels like coming up with 

an answer. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people don't have time.  The province 

don't have time.  Farmers need cash, and the GRIP '91 program 

needs to be implemented before seeding.  I heard the 

Agriculture minister say that it was bankable, the new GRIP.  

Well the credit union don't see it that way, Mr. Speaker.  They 

don't see it that way . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, we 

have.  Credit Union Central sent out a message and I've seen 

that message, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1515) 

 

Seniors whose income is being supplemented cannot afford to 

have the seniors' heritage fund reduced, Mr. Speaker.  

Taxpayers cannot keep digging deeper into their pockets, and 

lower income people in this province soon will not be able to 

pay their power and their phone bills. 

 

And what has the NDP done about it, Mr. Speaker?  No 

answers to their questions, no solutions to their problems, only 

broken agreements.  Along with many others, these problems 

need to be addressed, Mr. Speaker.  And if the NDP were 

sincere in promising honest and open government, we would 

all have heard the answers by now. 

 

And in the meantime, while all the NDP reviews and meetings 

and studies are being undertaken, I say to the members 

opposite, don't break the agreements that are signed.  Don't 

delete programs that were successful and helpful just because 

they were not an NDP idea.  Look at them based on their merit, 

Mr. Speaker, especially when the NDP do not have a strategy 

and they don't have alternatives. 

 

I go back to the pension plan which we're hearing a lot about.  

Why would they not negotiate a different deal?  They didn't 

have to cut it.  They could have made a deal. 



286 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

People would have understood.  But no, because it was a Tory 

thing that was working good, they cut it.  What are you going 

to do?  What are we going to do here to replace the 

Saskatchewan pension?  What are you going to replace that 

with?  For farm women and single mothers, part-time workers, 

I don't know.  It's hard to understand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier in my speech I mentioned some 

accomplishments that came about under the previous 

government.  These accomplishments happened because we 

were a party with a vision and a party with a plan.  Mr. 

Speaker, this side of the House still offers a plan, a plan to 

continue to make Saskatchewan grow and diversify, 

alternatives to the NDP government's disregard of our rural 

crisis, and sound alternatives that bring about real results. 

 

The members on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, will not 

just sit back and complain.  We have some answers and we 

have some alternatives.  Mr. Speaker, we have a plan.  We 

have offered to discuss our plan with the NDP government 

through means like debating the farm crisis.  But, Mr. Speaker, 

the NDP were not open to ideas.  They were not open to 

solutions. 

 

As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province 

expected a lot.  They expect a plan for tomorrow, not rhetoric 

and fluff and promises of more reviews and more committees.  

And they deserve to know.  They deserve to know what the 

plan is.  The members beside me today have alternatives to 

reviews and commissions and endless studies.  By the time the 

NDP are done studying and reviewing, they will no longer be 

in government.  There will no longer be many people in the 

province to study, Mr. Speaker.  As I said in my opening 

remarks, this budget is a moving budget, and many people will 

be moving. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to represent the party that has worked 

to develop a plan, not a smoke and mirror show just for the 

sake of politics.  And, Mr. Speaker, I refuse to support a budget 

that betrays the trust of the people of Saskatchewan, betrays the 

trust that the people in my constituency voted in favour of.  

Some of them who supported me in other elections supported 

this government last time because they trusted them, and that 

trust has been betrayed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not be voting in favour of the budget, and I 

thank you for the time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding the fact 

that this is the budget speech in what is really the second 

session of this legislature, this is the first time I've had an 

opportunity to speak, and so the first time I've had an 

opportunity to congratulate you on your election as a Speaker.  

I'm pleased with both the process, which I think adds an extra 

measure of credibility to whoever holds the office, and I think I 

can also say, Mr. Speaker, pleased with the selection in this 

given case.  I think both . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I also want to begin by bringing 

greetings to this Assembly from my constituency of Regina 

Churchill Downs.  It is nowhere near the constituency of 

Regina Centre that I represented for some 15 years in the 

Saskatchewan legislature.  It is really in a different part of the 

city. 

 

I enjoyed getting around meeting them before the election, and 

formed what was at that time a rather pleasant relationship with 

them.  Notwithstanding the affairs of the last five months, I 

expect that would continue, although I must say I've not had 

quite as much time to get around and talk to them in the last six 

weeks as I would have wished that I had. 

 

I also want to congratulate the Minister of Finance for what 

was an honest and courageous budget, something this province 

has not seen in 10 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Budgets under the former 

administration, Mr. Speaker, began steeped in naivety, and in 

time moved from naivety to cynicism, and from cynicism to 

budgets that were downright fraudulent.  There's no other word 

for the last budget that was provided, and I think no other word 

to properly describe the comments of the former minister of 

Finance on the eve of the election when he said he thought he 

would be right about on target.  No other informed group in the 

province believed that.  Nevertheless he continued to maintain 

it. 

 

I noted, Mr. Speaker, the comments of the Leader of the 

Opposition following this budget.  I noted his comments that 

we had rescinded the harmonization of the PST (provincial 

sales tax) and then gone and imposed taxes which in his words 

were even greater. 

 

All I can say, Mr. Speaker, is that once again we see that the 

Leader of the Opposition can't count.  He can't count in 

opposition any better than he could when he was in 

government. 

 

I want to point out to members opposite that the combined total 

revenue in the income tax surcharge and the sales tax total is 

$125 million.  The revenue intake from the PST and the 

harmonization was in the neighbourhood of $400 million.  

There is no comparison in the impact of the two -- no 

comparison whatsoever. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, by maintaining our own taxes, we 

maintain taxes which we can tailor to meet uniquely 

Saskatchewan needs.  One of the very serious shortcomings of 

the federal GST (goods and services tax) and the whole process 

of harmonization is the provinces lose complete control over a 

very important area of their taxation -- absolute, complete 

control. 

 

And I think it's fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that until the federal 

government resolves that . . . and I think that's going to take an 

election and a change in government, because as much as we're 

going to try to persuade the current administration in Ottawa to 

change that, to provide more flexibility to the provinces, I think 

the current administration in Ottawa is simply too set in its 

ways to recognize the need.  And I rather suspect, Mr. 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 287 

Speaker, that no other province but Quebec is going to join in 

harmonization until some changes are made. 

 

Quebec's experience might be an example of what other 

provinces might want to avoid, Mr. Speaker.  Quebec wanted 

to ensure that its publishing industry was protected.  One can 

understand that -- a small linguistic group who have no other 

source of the written word except their own publishing 

industry.  While if its true books are published in French in 

Europe, in many ways they are not very meaningful to the 

Qubcois.  The federal government, however, refused to make 

any provision for that important segment.  Having seen that, 

other provinces have avoided harmonization, and I think will 

continue to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have travelled a long way since the current 

Minister of Finance delivered his last budget in the spring of 

1982.  We have travelled a long way indeed.  Our accumulated 

deficit on the operating side is now nearly $9 billion.  That's 

gone from virtually nothing to $9 billion. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, we have accumulated a $5 billion 

debt to the Crown corporations.  Another billion dollars, 

virtually, in guaranteed loans puts our total debt for this 

province at $15 billion -- a staggering sum for a province with 

a population of under a million people, almost all of that 

accumulated during the years the members opposite were in 

office. 

 

I want to concentrate most of my comments, Mr. Speaker, on 

the area of the Crown corporations.  Mr. Speaker, when the 

Progressive Conservatives took office in 1982, Crown 

corporations were well financed; a relatively modest debt 

except for SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) which had 

a significant amount of debt, none of it accumulated I might 

say, after 1971 -- almost all of that accumulated earlier than 

that to pay for some large power projects.  But SPC did have 

some debt, virtually very little other debt but that in the Crown 

corporations. 

 

Now we have a situation where taken as a whole, as a group, 

the Crown corporations meet every definition of bankruptcy 

within the federal Bankruptcy Act. Their debts exceed the 

value of their assets.  They're unable to pay the interest on their 

debts. 

 

How on earth did this happen?  Well it happened in a number 

of ways.  Firstly, during the 10 years through mismanagement, 

political interference, and because of some economic 

development projects which can only be described as bizarre in 

nature, the Crown corporations lost money. 

 

Even during periods of time when the Crown corporations lost 

money, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that government opposite 

continued to take dividends, took dividends from the Crown 

corporations in the amount of hundreds of millions of dollars 

even when the Crown corporations lost money.  Mr. Speaker, 

there were years when the Crown corporations had to borrow 

money to pay the dividends. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the Crown corporations engaged 

in a series of money losing ventures, some of the most bizarre 

investment decisions in the annals of Canadian history -- 

GigaText, Joytec, Supercart.  It seemed, Mr. Speaker, that 

every hare-brained idea which passed in front of members 

opposite was fair game for a very sizeable grab. 

 

There were other bizarre decisions, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Not 

only did they sell the coal-mines at Coronach, they never 

completed that project.  It was built for four units.  Only two 

were completed in 1982. The other two could have been 

completed at a relatively modest cost.  Was that done?  No.  

Why?  Because at the time it was represented by an NDP 

MLA, Allen Engel. 

 

(1530) 

 

What did these people do whose only thought was their own 

political benefit?  They started another project in the premier's 

riding, the Rafferty-Alameda project.  An enormously 

expensive project, it is as expensive as it is trouble. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are any number of questions which we 

simply can't answer.  We know what it cost, but we do not 

know how much we're going to lose.  We do not know whether 

the project can ever be made to work properly.  What we do 

know is there was a capacity to produce power on a known 

system at a low cost to Coronach which was overlooked solely 

because the project was in one of the eight NDP ridings after 

1982. 

 

The story, Mr. Speaker, goes on and on.  Crown Management 

Board, the holding company for the Crown corporations, lost 

$600 million in 1991 -- $600 million.  That includes $166 

million loss on Cameco shares completed just a couple of 

weeks before the election. 

 

Cameco you'll recall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was formed in 1988 

by a marriage of the SMDC -- the Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation, a corporation which had 

consistently made a profit -- that Saskatchewan Crown 

corporation was married to a federal Crown corporation, 

Eldorado Nuclear, which had consistently lost money.  The two 

together made an unattractive package, and they were sold at a 

time when the market was weak, against the advice of advisors, 

and rather than reaping a gain from the sale of these shares, we 

actually took a $166 million loss on the shares. 

 

It includes $64 million loss on the Bi-Provincial upgrader.  I 

want to say with respect to this project, Mr. Speaker, the profit 

potential was always marginal.  The project was built, not with 

a view to producing profits for the partners, but with a view to 

producing jobs. 

 

The original cost, 1.2 billion, has been bumped up twice.  Now 

it's over $1.6 billion.  To put it mildly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

these cost overruns have not enhanced the possibility of 

making a profit from the Bi-Provincial upgrader. 

 

This $600 million loss includes $50 million given as a grant, 

not as a loan, but given as a grant to the Meadow Lake pulp 

mill.  It includes a loss on deferred payments from the sale of 

the Prince Albert pulp mill to 



288 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

Weyerhaeuser. 

 

You recall, Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert pulp mill was sold 

to Weyerhaeuser in 1968.  In return, CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) received a promissory note for 

$236 million; Weyerhaeuser was only required to make a 

payment in years of very high profit.  Weyerhaeuser's profits 

have never been high enough to make a payment. 

 

And what is more alarming, Mr. Speaker, is that there is no 

means by which the province can really satisfy itself that the 

profits of Weyerhaeuser Saskatchewan are not being kept 

artificially low by the juggling of expenses.  We have no way 

of knowing that.  And so far as I'm aware, it isn't specifically 

prohibited in the contract which Weyerhaeuser entered into. 

 

Another example is the NewGrade oil upgrader in Regina.  The 

deal was that Federated Co-operatives build a Regina refinery 

worth $700 million and contributed that . . . the provincial 

government contributed $700 million -- the provincial 

governments, I might say, together with the federal government 

contributed $700 million --  $140 million in cash, $500 million 

in loans.  Profits, if any, went to Federated Co-operatives; 

losses were all absorbed by the provincial government.  And 

the list goes on and on and on. 

 

In addition to these 1991 losses, Mr. Speaker, the Crown 

Management Board has identified $875 million in what 

accountants call "non-recoverable debts."  They define that as a 

debt for which there is no asset which can repay it.  In the 

ordinary language of the people who live in your riding and 

mine, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's a bad debt, a debt you can't 

possibly collect -- $875 million. 

 

The Crown Management Board is paying $361 million loss 

from the 1989 privatization of Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan -- $361 million loss.  Mr. Speaker, this is one of 

the most unusual tales in Canadian political history.  This was 

one of the finest mines in the world and the best potash mine in 

the world.  This was a premier mine -- rich reserves, the lowest 

. . . some of the lowest-cost reserves in the world.  I won't say 

the lowest-cost reserves, but virtually the lowest-cost reserves 

in the world, by far and away the largest supply of reserves in 

the world.  This mine was sold for a $361 million loss. 

 

What happened?  Well PCS (Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Inc.) was created out . . . in the mid-1970s out of 

an Act of the government which began as a project to 

nationalize the mines.  In fact, they were never nationalized; 

they were purchased at a fair market price.  So profitable were 

they, Mr. Speaker, that the cost of acquiring the mines had 

been repaid out of profits by 1982.  These mines were very 

profitable. 

 

What happened thereafter?  While the PCS was forced to stay 

in the marketing agency, Canpotex, market share dropped very 

dramatically.  PCS lost hundreds of millions of dollars at a 

time, I want to say, when other potash producers were making 

a reasonable profit.  And then to add insult to injury, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it was sold at less than its value.  Why?  

Because the theory of 

privatization as developed by the Thatcher government in 

England was: you sell assets for less than their market value; as 

soon as they're sold, they'll rise on the stock market and the 

people who buy them will think, aha, this capitalism system 

works rather well. 

 

It does work rather well over a short period of time for the 

people who buy the shares.  But the taxpayer, Mr. Speaker, 

takes a real hosing, as they did on the potash shares.  What has 

happened, Mr. Speaker, is that we, the taxpayers picking up the 

cost of this, picking up the cost of $361 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if it weren't for this privatization alone, the gas 

tax, the tax on the gas could be a few cents lower -- this alone.  

When the public want to know what does privatization cost 

them, we could tell them it cost an equivalent of a few cents on 

the gas tax.  Because now the bills have come home, we have 

begun . . . we are forced to begin repaying this, Mr. Speaker.  

The result has been some of the difficult news contained in 

Thursday's budget. 

 

But there are many more examples, Mr. Speaker.  The Crown 

Management Board is repaying $118 million in losses from 

SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation).  

Sask Forest Products has a bad debt of $24 million.  

Saskatchewan Diversification Corporation -- this one just got 

started -- Saskatchewan Diversification Corporation owes $14 

million in bad debts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, interest on the $875 million in bad debts is going 

to be $93 million this year, $131 million next year, and that is 

interest which the taxpayer has to pay. 

 

To put that in its context, were it not for the $875 million, Mr. 

Speaker, we could reduce sales tax by a couple of pennies; 

reduce the gas tax by as much as 6 cents.  That's what $131 

million means to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan.  This year it 

means significantly higher taxes.  Because this year, Mr. 

Speaker, we are unable to postpone dealing with these 

problems. 

 

I want to spend a moment, Mr. Speaker, talking about the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation.  This was a 

creation by the Devine government in which they converted 

what was then called the Department of Government Services 

into a Crown corporation. 

 

The theory was reasonably sound.  The theory, Mr. Speaker, 

was that by converting it into a Crown corporation and sending 

the departments bills for everything they got, it would improve 

accountability, so the theory went.  Thus if a department 

decided that they wanted their public servants to have another 

10 per cent more office space, it would assist accountability if 

they got a bill for it and had to take that out of other 

expenditures. 

 

The theory behind it was not particularly unsound.  As was the 

case so often with the members opposite, the actual practice 

bordered . . . varied between being incompetent and being 

corrupt.  The conduct of that corporation was truly scandalous. 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 289 

And this is not, Mr. Speaker, to take anything away from all of 

the public servants who work there.  The vast majority of them 

are conscientious.  The vast majority of them went into the 

public service not because it was a road to riches but because 

they genuinely wanted to serve the public in a meaningful way.  

But the management, Mr. Speaker, of this Crown corporation 

has torn the heart and soul out of the vast majority of those 

public servants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the costs of the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation just exploded upward.  This doesn't 

appear readily in the blue book, but I recall in opposition, when 

this corporation was created in 1986, I recall extracting from 

the blue book figures, the cost of SPMC was $87 million 

SPMC spent in its first year of operation in 1986.  In 1991, Mr. 

Speaker, it spent $171 million.  In five years the cost of 

running this corporation had gone from $87 million to $171 

million.  And I might add, Mr. Speaker, there were fewer 

public servants to service after that period of time. 

 

There were two main abuses, Mr. Speaker, which went on.  

The first was using this Crown corporation to pay political 

expenses.  And I want to provide some examples, some of 

which were provided in the special report of the auditor.  Nine 

people from the premier's office were paid over $600 million in 

salaries through SPMC -- provided no service to SPMC.  These 

were political staff whom the premier did not want to account 

for. 

 

Seventy-nine thousand dollars in hidden payments by SPMC to 

one Dave Black to co-ordinate Grant Devine's tours.  Why not 

pay for it out of Executive Council?  Because they wanted to 

hide it.  And there was very, very little information available 

about SPMC during the years that the Conservatives were in 

office. 

 

Another $55,000 for photo services for Grant Devine paid for 

by SPMC.  One would have thought that would have been a 

proper expenditure of Executive Council; $437,000 paid for by 

SPMC to cover the costs of Fair Share Saskatchewan -- in fact 

to hide the true cost of Fair Share Saskatchewan.  The list of 

hidden costs, Mr. Speaker, goes on and on. 

 

(1545) 

 

The second abuse at SPMC was its role as a purchasing agent 

for Tory suppliers.  SPMC was fond of single sourcing.  That is 

they worded their requirements such that only the right person 

could get the contract.  SPMC frequently just ignored even the 

pretence of tendering for supplies.  Millions of dollars went in 

untendered contracts, and this province did some of the most 

expensive purchasing of any government in Canada. 

 

SPMC also leased space for government departments -- did it 

without any kind of tendering, and more important, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, did it without any regard for need. 

 

In 1988, Mr. Speaker, over 8,000 square feet of leased space 

was vacant at a cost of a million and a half dollars, and some of 

that was some of the most expensive office space in 

Saskatchewan.  Some of the vacant office space was in the 

Ramada Hotel, whose chief attraction must have been the 

opportunity for senior management to use 

the water slide during office hours.  I cannot imagine any other 

reason why one would rent a hotel for public servants. 

 

Before closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to make a comment about 

the Public Service Commission.  Under the Devine government 

the Public Service Commission had been completely 

discredited.  No one including . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member should not refer 

to the names of other members in the House, and should refer 

to them by their constituency. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, under the Progressive Conservative administration the 

Public Service Commission became completely discredited.  

No one, not the public, not the public servants, not the 

opposition, nor the government members believed this was an 

independent agency whose function was to enforce a merit 

principle in hiring. 

 

The idea of an independent commission hiring qualified 

people, promoting on the basis of merit, simply was not part of 

the former government's approach to government.  Hiring, 

whether it was for summer jobs, for senior management, or for 

relatively minor jobs within the public service, it was all done 

on the basis of patronage.  The most important qualification, 

Mr. Speaker, was whether or not you had a Conservative 

membership. 

 

I'm fond of telling the story of my law partner who was a good 

trial lawyer and had absolutely no interest in working for this 

government or any other.  He once thought he had some advice 

for one of the Conservative ministers who's mercifully no 

longer in the House.  Thought he had some advice for him. 

 

So he called him up, called the minister's office.  The 

receptionist said, what is your name?  He said, Mr. Tom Dore.  

She said, who do you work with?  And that gave him some 

cause for pausing.  He was afraid that if he said he worked with 

. . . I'm not so sure I'm even allowed to say my own name.  If 

he said he worked with Shillington Dore, he thought he might 

have a bit of a problem.  So the best he could do on the spur of 

the moment was to say, well I'm kind of between things. 

 

The minister's receptionist then said, well do you have a 

Conservative membership?  No, he said, I don't.  She said, well 

call me back when you do and we'll fix you up.  Goodbye. 

 

And that was the end of the conversation.  The conversation 

lasted a couple of minutes.  That was the . . . Mr. Speaker, if 

that was the comment made by a minister's receptionist over 

the phone, one can imagine the attitude at the Public Service 

Commission itself. 

 

Those things have changed, Mr. Speaker.  As minister 

responsible, we're going to restore a public service which is 

independent, which is professional, and which is free from 

political interference. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, I've discussed 



290 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

three areas -- the Crown corporations, the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation, and the Public Service 

Commission.  In each case, Mr. Speaker, the legitimate role of 

the government agency was undermined.  And it's been the 

same throughout the length and breadth of this government -- 

this consistent undermining of the role of government which 

came because the Conservative Party puts its interests ahead of 

those of the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, members opposite believe that 

government agencies were inherently inferior to the private 

sector.  And just in case there was any doubt in anyone's mind, 

they hired people to manage them who left no doubt about it. 

 

Secondly, the members opposite tended to transfer from free 

enterprise the notion that whatever an individual can do to 

improve his own lot is fair game.  I think it was Mr. Dextall the 

junk bond dealer who coined the phrase, greed is good.  That 

may or may not make sense in the private sector.  I think many 

of those junk bond dealers who are now in legal difficulty 

would say that the idea wasn't quite as good as it sounded when 

they said it. 

 

However whether or not it makes any sense in the private 

sector, which does have a set of checks and balances, it is a 

disaster in the public sector.  Greed is good in the public sector, 

meant patronage; it meant ruinous contracts to Conservative 

friends; it meant waste, it meant mismanagement; it meant that 

the whole function of government was perverted, as it was 

perverted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the only PC ethic in government appeared to be, 

let's make a deal.  All of government was run on a single code 

of conduct -- let's make a deal.  And in a bizarre way, Mr. 

Speaker, the former government reinforced the Tory message, 

government's only a threat.  Government under them did 

become a threat.  It seemed to exist only to prey on people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our history in this province tells us differently.  

We know that working together we can do things together 

which we could never accomplish individually. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1908 my father moved out from rural Ontario, 

lived about as far from Ottawa . . . the area they moved from 

was about as far from Ottawa as they now live from Regina.  A 

few years after they moved out to Saskatchewan they got 

telephone service.  Why?  Because the then premier, Walter 

Scott, a Liberal premier -- but a small "l" liberal as well as a 

large "L" Liberal -- the Liberal premier of the day had 

instituted a new Crown corporation, Saskatchewan 

Government Telephones, which quickly brought telephone 

service throughout Saskatchewan.  Had he remained in Ontario 

it would have been more than two decades before he would 

have got telephone service in that part of rural Ontario. 

 

Working together, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people were 

able to bring electricity to rural areas before it occurred in any 

other jurisdiction in Canada.  And indeed, SPC's 

(Saskatchewan Power Corporation) success in electrifying rural 

Saskatchewan became a model for the rest of Canada. 

Mr. Speaker, these are accomplishments in the past.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, we intend to build on them.  We intend to continue 

working together with Saskatchewan people to do together 

what we could not do alone.  What is more important though, 

Mr. Speaker, we intend to conduct government on the basis 

that people and not profits come first. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We intend to put humanity first. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it must be obvious that I will be voting in favour 

of the motion supporting this budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak in 

support of the budget presented by the Hon. Mr. Minister of 

Finance on May 7 in this Assembly. 

 

The throne speech of April 27 gave a general blueprint of the 

direction and vision this government has for the province of 

Saskatchewan in the days ahead.  As an aside, Mr. Speaker, I 

must say with a great deal of pride -- and I emphasize pride, 

Mr. Speaker, and I also emphasize confidence, Mr. Speaker -- I 

have pride and confidence in Premier Romanow and his 

cabinet colleagues for demonstrating the necessary leadership 

and courage needed to guide our province into the 21st century. 

 

As I stated previously, Mr. Speaker, the throne speech provided 

the blueprint for this budget, and now this budget provides the 

financial details chartering the course to be followed in 

addressing the major goal of our government, which is getting 

a handle on the deficit amassed over the last 10 years by the 

previous government. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, this budget addresses the central theme of 

the throne speech -- a mandate for change, a mandate for 

change not just for the sake of change, but a mandate to restore 

the fiscal integrity of the province of Saskatchewan for the sake 

of our children and our children's children.  In restoring fiscal 

integrity to this province, coupled with fairness and 

compassion for the needy, we'll be able to build a strong 

Saskatchewan in a strong Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I address this Assembly in defence of this 

budget, I would like to give a few general comments on the 

events leading up to the budget -- events which dictated the 

kind of budget needed to change the course of doom and 

destruction set by the previous Tory financial magicians, the 

former Tory ministers, Messrs. Lane, Andrew, and Hepworth. 

 

In my constituency of Weyburn, the overwhelming number one 

issue in the past election was the fiscal mismanagement of the 

public purse.  As has been so often and ably stated by others, 

the provincial treasury under the Tories was a public trough 

where many of their friends gathered to satisfy their greed, 

leaving behind very, very few crumbs for the needy.  And 

perhaps, Mr. Speaker, I'm being overly kind in my 

characterization since the 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 291 

majority of people may state that no crumbs were left at all for 

the needy.  The outcome of this insatiable greed, Mr. Speaker, 

is a legacy -- a monumental legacy of debt, more debt, and 

more debt, as each year passed under Tory rule. 

 

We can today only appreciate the irony of the words by the 

former premier from Estevan in addressing this Assembly on 

March 27, 1984 in support of his government's spring budget, 

which words are as follows: 

 

 And I say to the members opposite: mark that budget down 

on the calendar, and look a year later, and a year later . . . and 

so on down.  Because the people of Saskatchewan, indeed the 

people of Canada, have not yet really understood the impact 

and the significance of what that budget is going to do. 

 

The public now fully understands the economic devastation of 

the accumulated deficit of the past 10 years, Mr. Speaker.  The 

people of Saskatchewan on election day stated very clearly and 

unambiguously that this waste and mismanagement must stop, 

and that a New Democrat government must get a handle on this 

deficit.  And that is exactly what this government intends to do. 

 

(1600) 

 

But unfortunately, deficit reduction does have a cost.  As one 

of my constituents stated to me over the weekend, and I quote: 

I don't mind short-term pain for long-term gain.  End quote. 

 

On May 7 the Minister of Finance introduced this budget.  

Over the past several weeks there has been much speculation as 

to the content of the budget.  This speculation was fuelled by 

the press and the members opposite.  There was and indeed 

there was some bitter medicine in the budget for all of us. 

 

But let us not forget who was the cause of this financial 

malaise facing our economy.  Yes, Mr. Speaker, the fine lot of 

Tory members sitting across from me as representatives of the 

former government was the cause.  And as the budget was 

being presented on May 7, I'm certain the people of 

Saskatchewan will not forget what circumstances necessitated 

the bitter medicine being prescribed by the Minister of Finance. 

 

The Tory opposition will be reminded and continually 

reminded of their 10-year record of record deficits that have 

pushed this province precipitously close to bankruptcy.  The 

prophetic words of the former premier from Estevan recorded 

in Hansard on April 17, 1985 warrant repeating: 

 

 . . . I believe the kinds of things that we've initiated in this 

budget will be talked about for decades to come." 

 

Need I say anything more?  For the past several months the 

public has had the benefit of hearing from the Gass 

Commission, the Crown Management Board, and the Public 

Accounts Committee.  We've had some very interesting facts 

come to light from these reports in 

explanation of why we are where we are today with an 

accumulated deficit of 15-plus billion dollars.  There is no need 

to repeat the litany of misguided expenditures over the past 10 

years.  I am certain the members opposite do not wish to be 

reminded of their misdeeds. 

 

To use the words of the member from Wilkie, the deficit 

expenditures were indeed foolishness on the part of the then 

Tory government.  The member from Wilkie spoke these 

words in this Assembly on June 27, 1987, and I quote from 

Hansard: We could spend more money, borrow more money 

until, like we could owe 10 billion, Mr. Speaker, we could do 

that, but we won't.  We won't do that, Mr. Speaker, because it 

would be foolish. End quote.  Mr. Speaker, my opposition Tory 

colleagues engaged in unquantifiable foolishness over the past 

10 years. 

 

The disturbing fact, Mr. Speaker, is the Tories' unrepentant 

tenacity to hold firm to their conviction that there is no causal 

connection between the past 10 years of Tory rule and the 

present 15-plus billion dollar deficit.  It boggles the mind of 

how these members opposite can maintain such an unrealistic 

perception of the events over the past 10 years.  But perhaps it 

should not be surprising that the blind refusal to accept 

responsibility for this deficit is the same character trait that got 

them on the deficit treadmill in the first place. 

 

It is time for the Tories to claim ownership of this staggering 

deficit, Mr. Speaker.  The Tories put this monkey on the backs 

of the Saskatchewan people.  Together the people and the 

present government face the challenge of getting the deficit 

under control.  I'm confident that this goal is achievable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- In preparing the budget, Mr. Speaker, 

the Minister of Finance had several options.  The first option 

was to do nothing and stay the course of the present Tory 

government.  This was not a realistic option.  The people of 

Saskatchewan elected the present government to clean up the 

sad and sordid mess of woe left in the wake of 10 years of 

plundering the resources of Saskatchewan through unbridled 

privatization. 

 

The second option was to reduce expenditures to bring the 

deficit into check.  Forty per cent of public expenditures are to 

third-party non-government department agencies like school 

boards, hospital boards, and municipalities; 21 per cent of 

public expenditures are to individuals.  For example, doctor 

and medical services, agricultural support to farmers, and 

social assistance and income support for the needy. 

 

Fifteen per cent of public expenditures are for government 

operations; 5 per cent of public expenditures are for pension 

and other employee benefits; 4 per cent of public expenditures 

are for capital projects; and the remaining 15 per cent is 

required to service the public debt through payment of interest.  

This is a staggering percentage in comparison to the overall 

budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Solely reducing the expenditure side of the budgetary 



292 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

equation would have sent shock waves through our economy 

and would have risked a downward spiral of unemployment 

and negative economic growth.  These consequences were too 

severe to risk foolhardily. 

 

The third option, Mr. Speaker, was to increase taxes to meet 

the prior year level of expenditures.  This was obviously out of 

the question. 

 

The fourth option, Mr. Speaker, was to provide a combination 

of increasing expenditures and increasing revenues.  This was 

the most logical option and the option chosen by the Finance 

minister. 

 

Notwithstanding that the budget projects an overall deficit of 

$517 million, Mr. Speaker, the provincial treasury does have an 

operation surplus of $243 million prior to an expenditure of 

$760 million to service the annual interest on the accumulated 

deficit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one likes to pay taxes, including myself.  But 

there are no other choices.  The budget is overall fair, in my 

opinion.  This budget was bitter medicine for all of us.  As one 

caller stated on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 

open line show: This budget was surgically administered 

without the benefit of anesthesia. 

 

The budget fairly but adversely affects all of us.  We all share 

in the financial costs and the human costs of deficit reduction.  

However, Mr. Speaker, if there is any unfairness in the budget, 

the unfairness is in the fact that the Tory members opposite 

have left the burden of this $15 billion deficit reduction on the 

backs of all Saskatchewan taxpayers for many, many long 

years to come.  It is a tax burden that we must gradually unload 

ourselves rather than passing the burden to our children and our 

children's children.  The opposition members are trying to put 

the worst possible spin on this budget to further their own 

political self-interest. 

 

The introduction of the 10 per cent deficit surtax is just one 

small part of the bitter medicine administered to all taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan.  Saskatchewan now has the highest 

provincial income tax rates in Canada.  The opposition 

members continue to remind the government members of this 

fact. 

 

However, I would like to remind the opposition members that 

in comparison to other provinces, provincial taxes, utility rates, 

and insurance premiums paid by Saskatchewan residents is the 

third lowest in Canada.  This comparison includes provincial 

income tax, provincial sales tax, gasoline tax, car insurance, 

telephone, gas and electrical charges, and health care premiums 

charged by our sister provinces, British Columbia and Alberta. 

 

It would be more acceptable for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to 

have the lowest ranking in the combined category of taxes and 

other charges I have just referred to.  But the third lowest 

ranking confirms that Saskatchewan taxpayers are better off 

than their provincial counterparts in seven other provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to hear the Minister of Finance 

address the needs of low income families, children, and 

families in crisis.  In particular, Mr. Speaker, I'm referring to 

increased funding for the child hunger program; 25 per cent 

increase to the Saskatchewan child tax reduction credit for 

lower income families; increased grants for child-care centres; 

changes to the social assistance rates; measures to address the 

problem of family violence; and counselling for expectant 

teen-age mothers.  Increased funding and services to the latter 

groups demonstrates that this government is very cognizant of 

its moral obligation to help the disadvantaged. 

 

During tough economic times there is a temptation, Mr. 

Speaker, to respond to those groups who are best able to get the 

ear of government. However the poor, the impoverished, the 

families in crisis are groups which do not articulate their needs 

very well. Therefore government must remain vigilant in not 

overlooking their needs.  This government has responded in a 

compassionate way in redressing some of the injustices of the 

past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to spend a few minutes responding to 

some of the criticisms being directed towards this budget by 

the members opposite, for example, criticisms like the 

following. 

 

Criticism number one, the 1 per cent increase in the provincial 

sales tax is nothing more than the Tories' GST harmonization 

which your government vehemently opposed during the 

election and which your government subsequently repealed 

when elected. And criticism number two, the budget deficit of 

$517 million isn't deficit control. And criticism number three, 

the budget tax increases shall seriously restrict economic 

growth or employment. And criticism number four, the 

changes to the drug plan and chiropractic services are an attack 

on the medicare system. 

 

In dealing with some of our critics equating the PST 1 per cent 

increase to disguised GST harmonization, I have the following 

comments to make in defence of the provincial sales tax. 

 

Point number one, the provincial sales tax does not have as 

great an impact on family purchases.  GST harmonization 

would have applied to all purchases whereas the provincial 

sales tax exempts some of the essential family purchases such 

as food, children's clothing, adult clothing of purchases less 

than $300, restaurant meals, prescription and non-prescription 

drugs, just to name a few items that impact upon a family 

budget. 

 

Point number two, businesses, non-residents, and the public 

sector pay provincial sales tax on all taxable items whereas the 

GST applies to the last purchaser who consumes the product, 

and therefore it applies to people like you and me, Mr. Speaker, 

the consuming public. 

 

In response to the criticism being levelled at the size of the 

budget deficit, one must take into consideration the previous 

Tory '91-92 deficit of approximately $960 million which was 

reduced sizeably to $850 million by steps taken by this 

government within the first few months of being elected to 

office. 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 293 

During the past 10 years the average yearly increase of 

expenditures was 6 per cent, Mr. Speaker.  For the current 

fiscal year of operations under this budget, the expenditures are 

being decreased by 3 per cent.  This government is moving in 

the right direction. 

 

The deficit of $15 billion was not created overnight, Mr. 

Speaker, and nor shall it be eliminated overnight.  The right 

approach is to chart a corrective course and to stay on that 

course.  The objective of this government is to balance the 

budget within four to six years. 

 

The standard stock criticism, Mr. Speaker, to tax increases is 

that the economy shall be adversely affected, job creation shall 

be restricted, and business competitiveness shall be dampened.  

I say, Mr. Speaker, that the most serious threat to our economy 

is the deficit spiralling out of control.  It is important for this 

government to send a signal of fiscal restraint and fiscal 

responsibility to the business community. 

 

(1615) 

 

New businesses will not wish to locate in Saskatchewan or 

present businesses will not wish to expand if the deficit goes 

unchecked.  The major consideration for any business doing 

business in Saskatchewan is confidence in the economy of 

Saskatchewan.  There is no confidence with runaway deficits 

year after year which was the hallmark of the previous Tory 

government. 

 

Expanded taxation does have some restrictions on the 

profitability of businesses.  But this deficit was designed so that 

every sector of the economy, including business, labour, 

agriculture, and resources would bear part of the deficit 

reduction burden placed on our back by the previous Tory 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes the importance of job 

creation by small business.  Today approximately 70 per cent 

of new jobs are being created by businesses with fewer than 50 

employees.  In recognition of the stimulus role that small 

business plays in job creation, the small business corporate tax 

rate has been reduced from 10 per cent to 9 per cent.  This 

government is very conscious of the importance of 

employment, and over the next months this government has 

given its commitment to re-evaluate and rationalize all 

government programs and services in support of economic 

development. 

 

With the introduction of changes to the drug plan and 

chiropractic services, Mr. Speaker, our government is being 

accused of abandoning the principle of universal medicare.  

This couldn't be further from the truth, Mr. Speaker.  Tommy 

Douglas and Allan Blakeney pioneered hospitalization and 

medicare, and at the same time exhibited fiscal responsibility. 

 

Today we have to take the necessary steps to protect the future 

of medicare and to develop improved health care services 

emphasizing effectiveness and efficiency.  The biggest threat to 

medicare, Mr. Speaker, including all of our social programs, is 

the accumulated deficit and mismanagement of the previous 

Tory government. 
 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I will address the issue of fairness, 

budgetary fairness.  As I previously stated, and as the Minister 

of Finance stated in his budget presentation, the previous 

government left very, very few options for the present 

government in addressing this deficit. 

 

Fairness, like beauty, Mr. Speaker, is in the eye of the 

beholder.  At least during the budget debate, fairness is 

perceived subjectively through the eyes and minds of the 

elected representatives gathered in this Assembly.  However as 

time passes, a more objective standard of fairness shall form as 

the dust of political debate settles. 

 

I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that history will be kinder to this 

government than the opposition members in describing the 

fairness of this budget.  I will leave it to the historians to write 

the final commentary on this budget for the fiscal year 

1992-93. 

 

And on this note, Mr. Speaker, I shall sit down.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it is a 

pleasure for me to stand in this House today in support of a 

budget.  A budget that I might add, is the first budget we've 

seen in many, many years in this province that has in it, taken 

upon this government, the responsibility to create an 

atmosphere in Saskatchewan that will provide a program and 

planks of a program to build us into a new generation the year 

2000 and beyond. 

 

It has never been done in the last 10 years because, Mr. 

Speaker, the last 10 years have been full of budgets with one 

objective.  And that objective, Mr. Speaker, was the 

preservation of government, not the preservation of a society or 

a province.  And the members opposite know that. 

 

And technically speaking, that probably was good politics for 

the political party in power.  But, Mr. Speaker, I tell you, it 

wasn't a good atmosphere in which to live in this province, and 

to have the mounting debt finally come up from behind us and 

swallow us into a position now where we have to have very, 

very tough measures, very, very tough budgets in order to try to 

re-establish a balance sheet, re-establish an economy in a 

province that is in such very, very difficult times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to start today by talking a bit about 

agriculture, as I normally do.  The other day I started talking, in 

the few minutes that I had, about the process that we went 

through in establishing an agricultural sector in Saskatchewan. 

 

If you remember, Mr. Speaker, the process began by this 

government going to Ottawa and developing a GRIP program.  

I won't make this story very long, but the number of issues and 

items that the farmers in Saskatchewan were asking for simply 

were neglected.  They did not put a cost-of-production formula 

in.  They did not put in a spot-loss yield program.  They did not 

produce a program that was going to be delivered at the 

elevator.  They put a very short three-year actuarian program, 

therefore dictating that the premiums were going to be very 

high.  And they did not adjust the crop 



294 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

insurance premiums as they went along.  The process, Mr. 

Speaker, was flawed right from the beginning. 

 

Then when we took government the people demanded changes.  

We struck a committee.  The committee went out, received 

about 300 submissions, and every submission, Mr. Speaker, 

said we should change the program.  There were people from 

all parties made submissions, and they said we should change 

the program. 

 

Then through a long process of political manoeuvring, 

basically from Mr. McKnight and his friends on this side of the 

House, we had stumbling block after stumbling block after 

stumbling block, until finally on March 12 the decision was 

made in Ottawa to approve the new GRIP program.  On March 

13 we announced the program.  And now, Mr. Speaker, we're 

involved in a court case saying that the farmers weren't notified 

in writing by March 15. 

 

Well to me that seems like a Tory tactic.  Because the point 

here is whether or not they were notified in time or not.  That's 

an important factor farmers have to know.  But the point here 

was that Tory politics that Bill McKnight was playing in 

Ottawa, that were played by the Tory opposition politics party 

here in order to delay a whole process just so they could come 

back and say: well, you guys didn't give the farmers enough 

notice. 

 

That is typical Tory politics -- thinking more about themselves 

and the politics and sustaining their party's image than about 

the needs and wants of Saskatchewan farmers.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, right through my remarks today, you will see how this 

will flow through the priority list of the Tory politician: you 

first after me.  In every instance that happens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had created a program with three lines of 

defence.  Farmers' production was the first line.  The GRIP and 

NISA (net income stabilization account) programs were the 

second line.  And the third line of defence was monies from 

Ottawa to equalize any major cash losses from droughts or 

grasshopper infestations or any disasters in Saskatchewan. 

 

Since that time all we've seen is lip service to third line of 

defence.  We've seen nothing come out of Ottawa except Mr. 

McKnight saying: yes, well we should have a third line of 

defence.  We have seen this party vote against third line of 

defence.  Well, Mr. Speaker, what we plan to do is start new.  

We are beginning now the process of trying to think about how 

we create a new committee to resolve the problems that are so 

inherent in the GRIP program.  And we know that these 

problems are there, and we admit that they have to be 

corrected. 

 

We will be watching the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs 

and Trade) negotiations because GATT's going to be very 

important in the whole realm of how we deliver programs, 

what a subsidy is going to be determined and defined as, and 

it's going to play great consequence upon the type of structure 

program that we have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farmers want a simple program.  They want a 

program similar to the American program where you have a 

target price versus a market price, and the 

difference is paid.  It can be paid through the elevator system -- 

be paid through the elevator system on the basis of so much per 

bushel per variety of grain.  That once, old, tired, Tory 

government knew that when they created the GRIP program, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can remember going out to meeting after meeting in the 

country, and this was the funny part of it.  The Tories had 5- or 

600 farmers at the meetings in the spring when GRIP was 

being designed.  They thought, wow, what a wonderful 

program; we've got everything going for us.  What they didn't 

understand is that in order to have everything going for them, 

they had to listen to the farmers. 

 

The farmers were demanding a simple program -- a program 

that was delivered through the elevator, a program that was 

delivered on the basis of the difference between market price 

and target price per bushel.  That was a simple program.  And 

the other thing is with a cap on it.  That's what the farmers 

wanted, and that's what this government did not deliver. 

 

And now they stand in their place and criticize our government 

for trying to create positive changes.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, 

many positive changes were created, but to make positive 

changes to a flawed program.  That is why we are going to start 

from the beginning again.  This will be a new era in agriculture 

because the fact of the matter is that in order to sustain 

yourself, the reality is you better think about the people who 

elect you and not about yourself.  In the short term, as this past 

government found out, it will work; but in the long term it 

simply does not sustain itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to turn for a moment to the rally that was 

held on the lawn of this legislature a few days ago when the 

session opened.  Mr. Speaker, there are very, very many 

concerned farmers out there.  Not as many as some of the 

newscasters reported, but let's say there's 2 or 300 people out 

there.  And I say for the most part, they were concerned about 

their livelihood. 

 

But I have a bit of a problem because when you think through 

the whole process that went on on the lawn on that Monday, 

you can ask yourself:  who was leading the charade?  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I think most people know that a man by the name of 

Mr. Al Kormos was leading the parade.  But I think what most 

people don't know, Mr. Speaker, is that Mr. Kormos had his hat 

in the ring in the Saltcoats constituency for the last election.  

You think there's a little bit of politics going on here, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we saw the members of the opposition running around out 

there, you know, very happy that the farmers are angry.  Think 

about that for a minute -- the Tory opposition very happy that 

the farmers are angry, supporting an organization.  But do you 

think maybe there's a little bit of politics running through it 

when one of the key people of the organization had his hat in 

the ring in the election past?  Maybe just a little bit of politics. 

 

I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the sad part of this is, again instead of 

looking towards the problem and trying to come together to fix 

the problem, we see a Tory opposition playing politics with the 

lives of those people 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 295 

who are out there.  And that is shameful, Mr. Speaker.  Farmers 

are in crisis, we know that.  But using them for political 

purposes is obnoxious in my opinion. 

 

And I just want to say one more thing.  I noticed the premier 

today, many of you may have noticed the premier had a little 

button on, and I couldn't read it from here, but I know what it 

said.  It was referring . . . and it was received at the farm rally 

out there I presume, because that's where they're passing out all 

these little buttons.  And it said:  don't blame me, I didn't vote 

NDP.  It's very similar to don't blame me, I voted NDP last 

time -- not very original.  But still again do you think there's a 

little bit of politics running through here?  You might ask 

yourself who printed the buttons. 

 

My point, Mr. Speaker, is this:  this opposition can't let go of 

the tactics of the past and try to come forward after being 

defeated severely in this province, come forward and say:  

look, we will co-operate, and we will make sure that we work 

towards improving the farm problem. 

 

Did they do that, Mr. Speaker?  No, they did not.  Mr. Speaker, 

the Tories out on the lawn, the Tory politicians out on the lawn, 

were saying yes we need some improvements.  But you know 

what they did after they came in this House?  You remember 

the 90-minute emergency debate we had on agriculture where 

we had a motion and an amendment to the motion.  Out on the 

lawn the Tory, the good little Tory politicians, were running 

around saying, oh yes, we support farmers, we want to help 

you.  They come into this House, Mr. Speaker, and in a 

resolution, amendment that we put forward . . . I will read it.  It 

goes like this.  We asked: 

 

 (1) to call on the federal government to meet its outstanding 

commitment to provide farmers with the $500 million 

deficiency payment for the 1990-91 crop year as soon as 

possible and to deliver on its commitment for a third line of 

defence program this year as agreed to at the recent first 

ministers' conference; 

 

That was one.  Calling on a $500 million payment for 1990-91, 

an additional third line of defence for this year. 

 

(1630) 

 

And what did the people who were standing out on the lawn 

saying, we support farmers, do?  They voted against that 

motion.  What kind of hypocrisy. 

 

The second part of the amendment, Mr. Speaker, is, and I 

quote: 

 

 (2) to extend with the federal government's consent the 

deadline to a date which is mutually agreeable for farmers, 

the provincial government, and the federal government; 

 

Extending the deadline for the GRIP program.  Standing out 

there on the lawn where many of the farmers, most, in fact, 

were saying yes, we should extend the deadline -- and I would 

think the Tory politicians out there would be nodding their 

head -- coming into this legislature and doing exactly the 

opposite, exactly the opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And thirdly: 

 

 (3) to accept the request of farmers to establish a review 

commission to design a long-term farm income stability 

program based on the needs of farm families and the actual 

cost of production. 

 

Again, I think I've made my point.  Mouthing their support on 

the lawn with the farmers present, coming into this legislature 

and completely reversing their stand. 

 

And I just want to add one more comment, Mr. Speaker, just to 

show you the hypocrisy of this opposition and a major reason 

why they lost the government, and why people of 

Saskatchewan asked the New Democrats to try to put forward a 

new plan for Saskatchewan. 

 

The member for Rosthern just before, during the speech -- or 

sorry, just before the vote -- stood up, and I'd like to quote what 

he said to this House: 

 

 In the spirit of compromise, I'm going to make a suggestion, 

and I'd like to have that reaction from the government, and 

that is that essentially the amendments that are being 

proposed by the government is something that we feel in tune 

with and we would not primarily have too many objections to 

those amendments. 

 

He stood up in his place, and he said that about the 

amendments that I quoted and within a few minutes, when the 

vote came, did exactly the opposite. 

 

You wonder what the motive is, Mr. Speaker.  The motive is 

pure, blatant politics, as it was when they began government, as 

it was when they ended government.  But, Mr. Speaker, I 

guarantee you that it will be many, many, many years before 

the people of this province ever give that group, that band of 

terrible Tories, the opportunity to govern this province again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, we are very serious about fixing 

the agriculture problem in this province.  And I just want to 

make a . . . and I want to also say, Mr. Speaker, that I for one 

am not going to be apologetic about being part of hard 

decision-making.  So I want to talk about the FeedGAP 

program and the industry livestock cash advance program. 

 

And I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the last government again, I say, 

had one thing in mind.  Just find some money and throw it out 

anywhere and hope that they'll vote for you.  Well that didn't 

work.  It worked for a while but not for long. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the point behind all the moves made by this 

government is that you have to plan for the future.  The 

FeedGAP program was a response to a program changing the 

livestock stabilization program and the SHARP (Saskatchewan 

hog assured returns program) program to a national tripartite 

program. 



296 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

The national tripartite program was a flop, and most farmers 

will tell you that because this government didn't have the . . . 

does not have their heart in a stabilization program for the 

livestock industry.  So as a response, and a very good little 

political ploy, they bring on the FeedGAP program.  And for 

six years, Mr. Speaker, the livestock producers of this province 

had an interest-free cash advance to the tune of about $145 

million a year that they didn't have to pay interest on.  And 

those programs when they were started, I did not argue against.  

The members opposite know that. 

 

But my point, Mr. Speaker, is this: in the cattle industry today 

things aren't too bad -- a lot better than they have been in the 

past.  And, Mr. Speaker, if we don't recoup some of the 

expenditures that we've made in the past, for the next downturn 

in the cattle cycle there won't be any money.  And this is what I 

call planning for the future. 

 

If we don't plan for the future, Mr. Speaker, we will be asked to 

put money on top of money that we don't have, and we will be 

of no use to those producers.  And the members opposite know 

that.  But that type of planning never enters their mind.  They 

could not plan any further than the end of their nose, and that's 

why we got ourselves into this terrible, terrible situation. 

 

But as I said, Mr. Speaker, we are serious about fixing the 

problems.  As soon as we got into government we put forward 

a moratorium -- a short-term moratorium that was agreed to by 

the institutions and by farmers.  And I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

while we were doing that, the opposition sat over there and 

were becoming the very negative people that they are today.  

Because they do not . . . I say in this House, outside the House 

they say one thing but in this House they say another.  

Hypocrisy in action. 

 

We put on a moratorium to stop the people, the farmers who 

were in severe financial crisis from being pushed off the land.  

Following up the moratorium, there was a committee put 

together, Mr. Speaker, where we looked at the debt situation, 

and now we'll be bringing into this House legislation that 

addresses the debt, a recommendation of a six-year lease 

program.  And now the members over there say, well there's 

going to be problems with it.  Well I'll get to that in a minute, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the GRIP program, as I talked about, we're going to have a 

committee to build to the future.  They could have designed the 

program.  They refused to design a good program.  

Consultation process that they went through was absolutely 

useless because they didn't listen to the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also eliminated the CAFF program, 

counselling and assistance for farmers.  The main reason that 

was eliminated, Mr. Speaker, it was because it was only a 

guarantee that the banks received their money, and that was the 

problem with the CAFF program.  The guarantee could be 

made to a farmer where the provincial government would 

guarantee a loan to the bank for the farmer, but within six 

months the bank would call the loan, and you know what that 

meant?  It meant that the farmer was still off the land, and the 

banks got their money.  That's a typical Tory program. 

Were they concerned about the farmer?  No.  Were they 

concerned about the institution getting their money?  

Obviously yes.  That is one of the major reasons, Mr. Speaker, 

that the counselling and assistance for farmers program was 

terminated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Kindersley says, how did we 

correct it?  Well I'll tell you, Mr. Member, when we bring in 

the legislation on debt, there are provisions.  There will be 

provisions so that farmers can achieve operating capital.  And 

I'll bet my bottom dollar that you will stand over there and tell 

us that that's not right.  You know, I can just see it now. And 

I'm sure the member would like me to explain the details of the 

legislation, but unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I don't think that's . 

. . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You don't know it. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Well the member says I don't know it.  You 

wait and see, Mr. Member.  And I can certainly tell, Mr. 

Speaker, when it hurts the Tory government to have clear logic 

put forward before them because they understand that they 

were defeated on personal priorities and not the priorities of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a minute now, 

Mr. Speaker, about the debt committee.  The whole time we 

were in government -- the Tories were in government rather, 10 

years -- there was never any emphasis put on actually keeping 

farmers on the land.  In the six months, Mr. Speaker, that we've 

been here, there have been two initiatives.  First of all, the 

short-term foreclosure moratorium, and secondly, the 

recommendation from the debt committee that the Minister of 

Agriculture put in place a few months ago that was brought 

forward to the minister and will result in legislation. 

 

Two in six months, Mr. Speaker, that will do much to keep 

farmers farming their own land.  Ten years those people did 

nothing, absolutely nothing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- As I said, incentives for lenders to keep 

lending farmers money because there are situations where 

farmers need operating capital. It has to be addressed.  It was 

addressed in the past by that government with the home quarter 

provisions. 

 

Those types of things when we bring forward, Mr. Speaker, 

will certainly show the people and the farmers of Saskatchewan 

that we have a real desire to try to create an atmosphere of 

stability and predictability in the agriculture sector. 

 

And we can talk about ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation 

of Saskatchewan).  ACS now has a new board.  There is a 

complete policy review taking place.  We are going to be 

looking at criteria.  We'll be looking at many of the programs 

that are involved. 

 

And some programs were . . . the one program, Mr. 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 297 

Speaker -- I'll give the members opposite credit -- one program 

that could have been a good program was the vendor mortgage 

guarantee program.  But you know, in two and a half years, I 

believe, that that program was in place, you know how many 

people -- and the member from Morse who was at the time the 

associate minister of Agriculture -- do you know how many 

people got into that program?  Twenty.  Twenty in two and a 

half years. 

 

You would think in two and a half years the members opposite 

would ask themselves, why isn't this working?  Or else maybe 

they were saying, this is working very well.  This is working 

very well because on paper it looks like a good program.  But 

I'll tell you, once you get into the criteria you won't qualify.  A 

typical trait of every Tory program in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I go on.  Our government will stand fast and has 

stood fast on the grain transportation issue much to the chagrin 

of the members opposite, I'm sure. 

 

Remember in 1982 we were fighting the Crow rate battle and 

the big Tory slogan was: keep the Crow; let Blakeney go.  Well 

I'll tell you that's where it began and that's where it ended.  

Because the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, did absolutely 

nothing to protect grain transportation. 

 

Since we took government six months ago, we have presented 

briefs, we have organized information pamphlets on behalf of 

the people of Saskatchewan . . . sorry, mailed out to the people 

of Saskatchewan in order that they can understand fully the 

implications of losing the grain handling and transportation 

system. 

 

And what are these Tory cousins in Ottawa doing?  They're 

trying to eliminate the Crow benefit, and they're giving us 

every reason why.  And do I hear one of those members, Mr. 

Speaker, do I hear one stand up and defend maintaining the 

Crow benefit as it is today being paid to the railroads?  Not 

one. 

 

And they know the cash implications.  They know the 

problems that's going to be created.  But, Mr. Speaker, our 

government is and will be maintaining that fight. 

 

Another thing, Mr. Speaker, that our government will be doing 

is stopping the off-loading from Ottawa.  Under the GRIP 

program designed by those members opposite, 60 per cent of 

the dollars of the GRIP program came from within the walls of 

Saskatchewan -- 60 per cent.  And that resulted, Mr. Speaker, 

in $175 per capita -- $175 for every man, woman, and child in 

the province of Saskatchewan -- simply because the last 

government could not and would not design a program that 

Ottawa should have the most responsibility for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we've been watching the GATT negotiations.  

The GATT negotiations are very important because the 

supply-management issue, working and fighting for the lives 

through the feather industry and the marketing boards of this 

province in order that they might maintain their industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I talk about supply-management . . . when I 

was writing some notes down for this little talk today, I 

remembered something that I'd read and I went 

back to my file and I picked it out.  This is the Business Review 

in the winter of 1977.  This is fairly old, but I think it makes a 

point, because if you think and if you've watched politics and 

you've watched the last premier, the current member from 

Estevan, work over a number of years, you'll understand. 

 

And I want to make a quote.  Business Review, 1977.  This is 

from, and I quote: Dr. D.G. Devine, Professor of Agriculture 

and Economics, University of Saskatchewan.  And he says: 

 

 The manipulative power inherent in the marketing board 

legislation enables agricultural producers to limit supplies 

and to control individual and aggregate commodity 

marketings in efforts to increase prices and incomes.  In short 

. . . monopoly privileges. 

 

That's the current member from Estevan's writings.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, anyone who has watched him operate over the last 10 

years will know, even though he's paid lip-service to the 

marketing boards, even though he's paid lip-service to article 

11 in GATT that puts marketing boards in great jeopardy, he 

has done actually nothing to maintain the marketing board 

industries in Saskatchewan and supply-management industries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will work and we will fight.  We're asking to 

have input into the GATT negotiations as we are into the 

NAFTA, the North American Free Trade Agreement.  Again I 

want to refer to this clipping, Mr. Speaker, because it's an 

attitude -- an attitude that has transcended this province over 

the last 10 years. 

 

From the same article, Mr. Speaker, I quote, from the same Dr. 

D.G. Devine, Professor of Agricultural Economics, University 

of Saskatchewan, saying: 

 

 Realizing that most of our food is produced by less than 20 

per cent of the farmers, who tend to be good businessmen as 

well as producers, society may not wish to support higher 

food prices or "producer security" so that the non productive 

80 percent of the farm population can live in the country -- at 

a profit. 

 

That was the writings of the former premier, the member from 

Estevan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1645) 

 

And as I said before, even though he's paying lip-service to 

agriculture, in the end he has devastated the agricultural 

industry because his heart simply was not in it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government will plan and is planning for the 

future of agriculture in this province.  And as the days and 

weeks and years unfold, I think the members opposite will be 

very hard pressed to criticize any of those plans. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now away from agriculture to some 

of the other issues that are currently in this province.  We have 

seen, Mr. Speaker, in this government, after the 



298 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

Gass Commission where we opened the books and saw the 

terrible trail of devastation left by this previous government, 

there were a number of issues that came up.  And I want to 

make some comparisons as to how this government will be 

different than the last government. 

 

Remember the food banks' ever increasing line-ups?  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, as the food bank line-ups were increasing, we found 

out through opening the books in this province that as the food 

bank line-ups were increasing, the members opposite were 

lining up their glasses in their offices to partake of some 

$17,000 worth of free liquor paid for by the people of this 

province. 

 

Isn't that a wonderful image, Mr. Speaker?  The working poor 

paying taxes, the working poor paying taxes, other people 

taking their hard-earned money to try to raise families, lining 

people up at food banks, while the members opposite sat in 

their offices partaking of $17,000 worth of free liquor.  Mr. 

Speaker, there is a difference with this government because I 

can guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, that will never ever happen as 

long as a New Democratic government is in power. 

 

And it goes on.  The payments to the Tory ad agencies -- I 

think there was something like $28 million annually that we cut 

out completely.  We cut the wasteful spending out and 

increased spending to home care by 20 per cent.  That is one of 

the things that we've done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They were making payments to employees who did not even 

exist.  They can't find them -- 19 employees.  My seat mate 

calls them the ghosts, where the Government of Saskatchewan 

were paying 19 employees and nobody seems to know where 

they are.  Paying people who . . . they didn't know who they 

were, while other people in this province had to leave their jobs 

and leave the province.  Another nice little picture, Mr. 

Speaker, isn't it? 

 

Also, what we did as soon as we got into office, or very shortly 

after, Mr. Speaker, was cut out the five-year, no-cut contracts 

that many of the Tory friends received.  Remember the George 

Hill five-year, no-cut contract?  So we cut those out, made 

settlement with those people at a much lesser price than they 

were supposed to get, but being a responsible government, we 

did that. 

 

At the same time we added $28 million to the social assistance 

plan, Mr. Speaker.  That's another reason this government is 

different than the last. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, one little, cute little thing -- and I say cute 

in the most bizarre sense of the word.  Because of ideology this 

government separated mailings.  Remember when they were 

going to privatize SaskEnergy?  They separated the mailings, 

and they had a SaskEnergy mailing bill and a SaskPower bill.  

Simply because of ideology.  In one small move we saved the 

taxpayers of this province $725,000 by mailing 

SaskPower/SaskEnergy bills together -- $725,000.  And at the 

same time, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's not true. 
 

Mr. Upshall: -- The member says that's not true.  Well I think 

I'll put my credibility against his credibility any day. 

Mr. Speaker, at the same we saved $725,000 in mailings, we 

increased the child hunger funding by 35 per cent. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Would you allow a question? 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has asked 

me if I'll allow a question.  I'll tell you that's the problem with 

this government -- they don't listen.  So I'd encourage the 

member to sit in his place, open his ears and listen, and for 

once in their lives just think that maybe, maybe you made a 

mistake.  Maybe. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another initiative taken by this government is that 

we closed the Prince Albert premier's office in Prince Albert -- 

$150,000, Mr. Speaker, saved every year by closing the 

premier's office in P.A.  At the same we increased the child tax 

credit by $50 a child.  Those are some of the differences. 

 

And this government, when they had mounting, mounting debt, 

mounting up to $14 billion, did not do one of these things -- not 

one of them.  In total, Mr. Speaker, I think we saved $128 

million, which allowed single parent families, working poor, 

people at the food banks, will allow those people to be lifted up 

a little bit and to be able to partake in society and to live a 

decent life.  But that previous government wouldn't even think 

of that. 

 

We also closed trade offices in Hong Kong, Zrich, and 

Minneapolis, saving $2 million a year.  At the same time that 

allowed us to increase the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan by 25 

per cent and the Saskatchewan Income Plan, up by $120 per 

year and also allowed us to double the northern food 

allowance. 

 

See, Mr. Speaker, my point is this: 10 years of government 

with the blinkers on, looking straight ahead, looking in the 

mirror and saying, how do I preserve my position in this 

province.  Not thinking about how they can preserve the 

working men and women of this province and make sure they 

had jobs, not by increasing the northern food allowance and 

cutting the trade offices, not by closing the premier's offices, 

cutting out wasteful advertising, and increasing payments to the 

working poor.  Did not even enter their mind, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But there is a difference.  There is a difference, and we will 

prove it.  Already in this budget -- I say a very fair budget -- 

we're proving that changes can be made in order to maintain 

this economy and rebuild this economy of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk just for a minute now about the civil 

servants and other people who work for this government.  In 

the past we saw two standards.  We saw the George Hill types, 

who are the presidents of Crown corporations, making millions 

of dollars off the government over a period of years with 

five-year contracts, no-cut contracts.  But on the other side, we 

saw the civil service with premier and cabinet ministers 

looking over their shoulders, basically having a gun at their 

head and say, one false move and you're gone, walking up to 

civil servants and say, can I see your membership card -- 

threatening, overbearing, throwing 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 299 

the civil service into disarray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that has changed.  Because what the members 

opposite do not understand is that the civil service and the other 

people who work for this government are in the front lines for 

the public.  They're the people who have to respond to the 

public on a daily basis.  And if they have no confidence in what 

they're doing because the government is cowering over their 

shoulder, then they will not be able to perform. 

 

And we have seen, we have seen . . . And I use Mr. Jack 

Messer as an example where his predecessor, he's getting 

$300,000 less -- $300,000 a year.  And what does the member 

for Kindersley have the gall to do?  Stand up in this House and 

say, how come you spent $27,000 redecorating Jack Messer's 

bathroom. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that simply . . . after we cut the predecessor 

by $300,000, after the predecessor spent $150,000 

redecorating, I mean . . . And the other thing, Mr. Speaker, that 

really annoys me is that it seems that the press are no better 

because we have seen in the press the issues focusing around 

very, very petty problems as opposed to the major, major 

disaster -- the give-aways, the patronage that the previous 

government bestowed upon its favourite people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see some of the members getting a little irritated 

over there, and they should be really irritated because, as this 

province was dwindling and as the debt was building up to the 

billions of dollars that it is today, they were frittering away, 

wasting our money on their Tory friends.  And that is 

hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker, in the highest degree. 

 

We will build upon fairness, building up the civil service, 

defending the people who work for this government.  It doesn't 

matter if the opposition or the press or whoever are going to 

attack this government.  We will be defending the people who 

work for us because we have one rule: fairness and 

compassion.  And in order to achieve that, you have to defend 

the people who work for you.  You can't destroy them as the 

previous government destroyed the civil service and the 

attitude in this province.  Many good men and women, many of 

them who are still around but were not allowed to fulfil their 

position, their job, because the directions came directly out of 

the premier and ministers' offices to tell them what to do.  That 

was changing, Mr. Speaker, and in order to build this province 

that is one of the things that we're going to have to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another little point that I want to make before I 

close here is the point about question period.  And I find this a 

bit humorous . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If the member 

from Rosthern would listen, Mr. Speaker, I could . . . I'll ask, 

why do the members on the opposite side want to keep the 

deficit?  Every question period since the budget the members 

are getting up and saying: why did you do this, why did you cut 

that, why did you increase taxes, why did you do something 

else? 

 

Mr. Speaker, what they were saying is: keep that deficit.  And I 

ask the members over there: why do you want to keep the 

deficit? 

You know it's just like the story about the little boy who was 

taken out behind the wood-shed because he did something 

wrong.  Well he came back in the house and mended his ways.  

But not these 10 little terrible Tories.  No, no, they got a 

thrashing behind the wood-shed from the people of this 

province and only left 10 of them.  And they come back in this 

House, Mr. Speaker, with the same attitude -- why do you want 

to keep the deficit? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is blind Tory logic.  We see the Tory math 

saying, all we have to do . . . In fact, as an aside, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to say that I saw just briefly a part of the premier's 

interview last night on one of the television stations and I'm not 

sure which one it was. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- The former premier.  The former premier, the 

Leader of the Opposition, rather.  Right. 

 

And he was saying . . . they were talking about deficits and 

creating money to supply services to the province.  And you 

know what he said?  Well all they have to do is issue some 

more shares.  That's right.  All they have to do is issue some 

more shares.  What the former premier, the member from 

Estevan, doesn't realize -- and I say, even after a good thrashing 

would not listen -- a debt is a debt is a debt is a debt. 

 

With an attitude like that, Mr. Speaker, they will be in 

opposition -- if there's any of them left -- for a long, long time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- They took this province, Mr. Speaker, in 1982 

-- a province with assets of $9.2 billion and liabilities of 6.6 

billion, and in 10 short years the assets dropped to 4.4 billion 

and the liabilities went up to $9.9 billion.  And they still don't 

realize, with a $14 billion debt, they don't realize how things 

could be different. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I say things will be different.  We have 

been given a mandate to clean up the mess.  We have been 

given a mandate to be responsible.  This budget is the 

beginning.  And it's obvious that the members of the opposition 

haven't listened, haven't learned, and still don't understand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's hard to turn around the Queen Mary on 

Wascana Lake.  It's very hard.  But I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, if 

there's a will there's a way.  This budget, Mr. Speaker, shows 

clearly that the Government of Saskatchewan has the will.  And 

by looking through the budget and following through, we will 

show the people of this province the way to prosperity again.  

Thank you very much. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


