




















































Hansard: July 30, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1869 

 July 30, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As is 

known by the members, normally for interim supply there are 

two motions and at this time, as is the procedure, I want to 

move the second resolution, which is as follows: 

 

 Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1993, the sum of 

$371,537,300 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, just a point of clarification.  The 

fact that the minister has introduced the second motion . . . Is 

the minister expecting that the questions will then deal with 

both motions at the same . . . or is the minister asking for us to 

deal with the second motion and then we'll go back to motion 

no. 1?  Or is it the normal practice to have both motions before 

the floor at the same time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think the procedure is to deal with 

the second motion, but the procedure is the same in the debate 

and the questions. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I don't happen to 

have, but maybe the minister would have, on the first two 

interim supplies, he would have the totals of the one-twelfth 

that he had on the first interim supply, the total of one-twelfth 

on the second interim supply, and the total of one-fourth on the 

third interim supply.  Could he provide me with those three, or 

has he got maybe a summary of each of them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I can give the answer.  I'm just 

looking for it to see whether I have a summary.  And then I can 

give it to the member in writing, and it'll be a lot more helpful. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- As the minister is looking that up, what I would 

like to find from his answers are how the interim supply, 

one-twelfth and one-twelfth and one-twelfth -- we're in the 

third one -- has changed over time, and in which departments 

it's changed and why it's changed because we're dealing with 

the twelfth.  And we're on the third set of one-twelfths.  Where 

was it at three months ago?  Where was it two months ago?  

Where is it today, and why is it changed in total?  And where is 

it changed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I've got . . . Sorry, I don't have it in 

the form I can pass it over, but I have the amounts for the 

funding provided for each of the interim supplies.  First interim 

supply was 469,935,000.  Second interim supply was 

365,428,000.  The third interim supply was 376 million, which 

is the one we're dealing with, 376,635,000. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Will the minister be able to provide in addition 

to that -- and his officials may be able to get it -- the amount of 

money requested on the two special 

warrants prior to that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The April special warrant: 

316,925,000.  May's special warrant: 360,882,000.  And the 

logical question is why were they less than any of the special 

warrants is because we were very careful to provide only the 

bare essentials that were necessary rather than the one-twelfth.  

They weren't always the one-twelfth.  They were less. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Would the minister perhaps clarify why the 

twelfths vary.  If you're looking at a budget and your estimate 

and you've got a twelfth and a twelfth and a twelfth, would he 

explain the variation in the twelfths, what it comes from, so 

that in fact we can discuss what one-twelfth means and how it 

might change from one month to another. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Let me explain that.  I wasn't giving 

you the twelfth.  I was giving you the amount that was 

provided.  The one-twelfth would be $353,946,000.  That's 

what each of the one-twelfth is.  But the numbers I gave you, or 

gave the House, were the totals because of the different 

variations -- highway maintenance, highway construction, 

those kinds of things.  But the one-twelfth is what I just 

indicated. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- So, what you're saying is that your estimate of 

what the total would be in your first interim supply -- totally 

was 469,939. 

 

On the next one-twelfth, it dropped to 365,428 -- total.  And 

then it increased on this one that we're after tonight, 376,635.  

And the minister is saying those variations are due to changes.  

Could he elaborate a little bit why they changed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Number of reasons.  Some are 

because, as I indicated in the Department of Highways, on 

maintenance and capital.  The peak seasons are summer 

months.  There were also times when you had to make 

quarterly payments for revenue sharing for school grants.  So 

those are the major reasons why there are those variations. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well for example, Mr. Minister, we know that 

you're not . . . Well maybe perhaps I could ask you to give me 

the same number.  Did the numbers change on the category of 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation?  Did it change on 

the first, second, or third interim supply? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm informed it did not; in all three 

special warrants, it was the same amount. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Then it did change, 

however, in certain other categories.  Like it might change in 

terms of highways, and I think you suggested it did.  It might 

change in terms of quarterly payments, and it might change in 

terms of interest payments, interest payments that you would 

pay on a . . . You have a category.  Do you have a category for 

. . . 

 

I suppose in Finance you would have, I suppose, interest 

payments.  Well where would you find that, and did it 



1870 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

change?  And what else changed in a significant way?  You 

mentioned highways, you mentioned the summer-time, you 

mentioned quarterly payments.  Did anything else significantly 

change, like interest or anything else in those categories? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Things like interest payments 

would not be involved or would not be covered by interim 

supply because they're statutory.  What we're dealing with here 

are non-statutory provisions that have to be voted in the House.  

Things like interest payments are statutory and are covered by 

statute. 

 

But let me explain further the variances that are here so I can 

give you the specifics.  The total funds provided and to be 

provided which cover expenditures to the end of August -- I'm 

giving you the whole thing now, to the end of August -- will be 

one billion eight hundred and eighty-nine point eight thousand 

dollars.  This is $120.1 million more than five-twelfths of the 

voted amounts to be voted.  And this variance -- I give you the 

details of why the variance is there -- the payment schedule for 

school boards, who will receive eight-twelfths of their monies, 

91.5 million, because we will now provide school boards 

eight-twelfths of their money, according to the formula and the 

way the agreements are. 

 

The highway construction and maintenance provided by 

Highways and Transportation and Rural Development during 

the summer months, the variance is 12.1 million.  Expenses 

associated with fighting fire, fire fighting, carrying by Natural 

Resources, 8.2 million.  And the payment schedule urban 

revenue-sharing makes to municipalities for operating grants, 

8.3 million.  These are the total amount of the variances that 

are beyond the normal one-twelfth. 

 

And I just thought it would be useful for you to have that. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I don't think the minister would mind sending a 

copy of that over some time. 

 

A question, Mr. Minister. As you're collecting crop insurance 

premiums -- and obviously there haven't been many claims 

right now -- you are saying that the one-twelfth is an 

expenditure that you're going to make.  And obviously you're 

not spending money in Crop Insurance, so that money is 

accumulated or is there because you haven't spent . . . you're 

not paying claims. 

 

And you've collected money from last fall, and you've collected 

money through the winter, and you're collecting and you're 

collecting and collecting.  Yet you still don't show any fact that 

there are no expenditures going out of Crop Insurance to speak 

of -- I mean you have your operating, but you're not paying 

farmers anything. 

 

Could you explain that to the general public, why you have 

seasonal variations in other things that go up and down, but 

you're just collecting money now for Crop Insurance, and yet 

you're asking for one-twelfth. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes.  I can provide that and I'm 

going to read it to the member because I don't want to put any 

extra rhetoric in it or I want to make sure that it's 

accurate. 

 

But in interim supply is the traditionally accepted means of 

providing funding pending Committee of Finance deliberations 

and passage of the main Appropriation Act such as was 

discussed by the Chair a little while ago.  Provision of interim 

supply in Saskatchewan is based on the monthly funding of 

one-twelfth of the to-be voted amounts as contained within the 

Estimates. 

 

Interim supply is not like special warrants which are used to 

provide only urgent and immediately required funding.  Like 

other provinces, Saskatchewan practices a standard of 

providing one-twelfth as their base for interim supply. 

 

That is the way interim supply has been working in the '70s 

when I was here before; that's the way interim supply in the 

case of Crop Insurance or any other was done in the 1980s, and 

that's the way it is being done now. 

 

It's the established practice to provide one-twelfth except as we 

did in the case of the two special warrants when we did not 

provide one-twelfth because we only provided the funding that 

was necessary for the expenditure purpose, because it is our 

belief that to the fullest extent possible, those expenditures 

need to come to the Legislative Assembly for approval. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, so we are looking at some fairly 

significant variations from one month to the next in terms of 

what you might need, not only because of quarterly 

expenditures and seasonal things, but of changes in terms of 

policy that might cause the variation from one month to 

another as we look at . . . if we went through this process into 

the fourth time and the fifth time, that there might be some 

significant variations. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could say -- and maybe your 

staff could help you advise us -- what some of the variations 

might be that would be significant next month or the month 

after.  Now we've gone through three of these things, and some 

of them changed.  You run into it this time -- seasonal.  Are 

there other things that might come up that would cause the 

one-twelfths to vary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, I cannot with accuracy 

predict that.  Because what happens is that each month prior to 

interim supply, if an interim supply is necessary, we request the 

departments to submit their requirement.  The Department of 

Finance scrutinizes to see what . . . if there's anything that can 

be deleted.  And because we have only asked them now for this 

coming month of August, we won't know what it will be for 

September, because we won't be going through that process till 

after the middle of September sometime. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well I can appreciate that.  I notice on the paper 

you gave out on grants for Rural Development and lands 

branch, you have lands branch $155,900 more than the 

one-twelfth as requested, as community pastures only operate 

from spring to fall. 
 

Well, Mr. Minister, do you know of any variations in that as a 

result of these community pastures not being in very 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1871 

good condition, that would cause the one-twelfth to change, or 

the fact that you might have to operate and open up some 

others, close them down.  Anything that would cause that to 

change not only from last month to this month, but say perhaps 

in August and September. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, I don't know that.  That's 

something you'll have to ask the Minister of Agriculture and 

the Agriculture officials.  We won't know quite that specific 

information on the various programs that the departments run. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- In the Seniors' Secretariat, Mr. Minister, you 

have additional funding of $211,400 is necessary to providing 

operating grants to qualifying seniors' activity centres.  Past 

practices indicates about 80 per cent of the grants are paid by 

the end of August.  Could you explain that to the general 

public, and particularly to seniors, why the 211,000 extra is 

needed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, I can.  That once again . . . 

Over time there are certain patterns that develop on how certain 

programs are paid out.  I don't have that . . . Maybe I do, I'll 

find it in a minute.  But in the case of the Seniors' Secretariat 

for the grants to the seniors' activity centres, the past practice 

indicates that 80 per cent of the grants are paid by the end of 

August.  This is simply a number that the department justifies 

their request on the basis of past practice. 

 

So we're only providing the funding based on the past practice 

and the anticipation that that's all that they will need.  If they 

run short before the end of August, then they'll have to delay 

some things until September.  Because the legislature will only 

approve this amount of money, that's the only amount of 

money that they're going to be able to spend. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, on this paper that you've sent 

across, on special warrants and interim supplies, you have . . . I 

thought you just said that the special warrants don't apply to 

one-twelfth; it's just what's necessary.  Yet you've got in here 

funding provided was 316, the one-twelfth allocation was 353, 

and then you've got 353 all the way down that column.  So 

you've done it on the basis of one-twelfth and then you've built 

in the variance.  And you've got the variance which is negative 

in the first one and then positive in the rest of them, so you've 

got in the neighbourhood of $120 million variation.  Is that 

total variance there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Sorry, I apologize if I missed 

something the member from Estevan may be asking.  I refer 

you to the sheet which you have.  And the third column simply 

is an example of what the one-twelfth would be.  The actual 

amount of funding provided is in the first column.  You will 

find that in the first column the April special warrant was 

316.925 million, less than the 353 by . . . I guess by 37 million.  

May special warrant was 360.882 million, 6.936 million more 

because there are obviously certain required expenditures that 

had to be made which we could not avoid making because of 

either legislative provisions or agreements with municipalities 

or whatever the case may be. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, there's a big jump for 

example from May to the first interim supply, from 360 to 469.  

Do you recall what that was? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- All this information was provided 

to the members opposite when we dealt with that, but the bulk 

of that would be school boards' funding, municipalities, both 

urban . . . I guess urban municipalities in operating grants, 

revenue sharing.  The bulk of that would have been in there. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- So we're looking at, Mr. Minister, just so we 

have this right, from your first crack at it in April, we're 

looking at a variation in your Estimates of what might be 

needed from one-twelfth to one-twelfth, ranging from minus 

$37 million to a maximum of $115,000,989 and a total 

variance in the neighbourhood of $120 million.  Is that 

accurate?  The minister is saying is that accurate. 

 

Well obviously, Mr. Minister, as a result of these figures you 

put forward and some of the other discussions that you and I've 

been into in terms of what you estimate some of the 

expenditures may be, that's a pretty significant number.  And 

when you're asking for us to agree with your one-twelfth -- and 

this is grievance before supply -- obviously we would like to 

have an idea in the next four months, in the next four months.  

Just to go back; I mean we're looking at what's past.  April, 

May, June, and July -- you've got a variation of $120 million. 

 

Can you give us some indication of how much a one-twelfth 

might vary in the next four months, or is it about what we're 

looking at here?  It could be ballpark, up or down a hundred 

million dollars. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Once again I want to be very 

careful here.  And I don't want to indicate that is an exact, 

accurate figure, because I explained the process and that the 

departments have to indicate prior to interim supply what their 

requirements will be and justify those requirements.  But I 

think it's fair to say the 370 . . . that the interim supply that's 

being requested here is the ballpark figure of what you would 

be looking at. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well I appreciate that, Mr. Minister.  What 

we're trying to get at is that we know that there's going to be 

the likelihood of some changes in expenditures.  And from time 

to time you give the province, at least your staff does and your 

department does, sort of a summary of how the province is 

doing, quarter by quarter.  And we've gone through it the first 

quarter of the fiscal year.  We're going into April, May, June, 

July.  We're going to be looking at the second quarter. 

 

Could you give us some idea as we go through this.  This is the 

fifth sort of temporary measure we're into now because of the 

combination of special warrants and interim supply.  What's 

your best guess is of how the province is doing in terms of the 

general economy or anything that might affect some of your 

expenditures here?  Obviously we've asked about crop 

insurance.  We've asked about drought and some other things, 

but generally overall because it would give us an indication of 

whether there's any surprises coming down the piece in the 

next quarter or the next quarter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- When we began this interim 



1872 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

supply deliberations earlier today, I made it very clear that at 

this stage of the fiscal year it is difficult to make an accurate or 

even a close-to-accurate evaluation of where the overall 

expenditures and revenue pictures of the budget or the 

government will be. 

 

There has never been a quarterly statement or a quarterly report 

provided in the province of Saskatchewan.  I don't know all of 

the reasons for that, but that's obviously one of them. 

 

I have made a commitment, or this government has made a 

commitment, that we will provide a mid-term report in 

November which will provide an update on where we're at on 

the revenues; on the expenditures; whether we're meeting our 

objectives; if not, what corrective measures might have to be 

taken by the government.  That's a matter of public policy 

which we're going to implement come November. 

 

Now I made one error in that.  And I said that would be the 

first mid-term report in the history of Saskatchewan.  

Apparently I'm advised it's not because -- was it last year? -- in 

1991 in fact there was a mid-term report that was provided.  

That was the first one.  Ours, I would like to think -- and we 

will be working on it -- will be a far more extensive one 

because I think it is important for governments to realize that 

the whole budgetary process -- the reporting on the budget, the 

status of the economy, the development of the next budget -- 

has to involve more public input. 

 

We tried to involve more public input and I think with some 

success, but our interest is even to go beyond what we did prior 

to this budget, which was a compressed budget cycle, beyond 

what the former government did.  And the former government 

attempted some of that in its later years, and we intend to 

pursue that and refine it and try to make it work even better. 

 

So that's why we will have a mid-term report, so the public 

knows where it's at and the public can make some judgements 

and make some recommendations with some knowledge of 

what the financial position of the province is. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well I know you have some capacity to make 

this follow the line, but what I want to get at here is, in the last 

four months we've seen a variance, according to your numbers, 

of about $120 million and you can handle that.  You cope with 

that.  And you say your budget is still on track.  You put a 

target out there and by gosh you're going to meet that target, 

with a variation of $120 million. 

 

If that's true, given forest fires and given some seasonal things 

and on a total budget of about $5 billion, you have the capacity 

to handle the seasons, handle the forest fires, handle some 

changes in retail sales, and handle this and handle that and so 

forth, and still come in, you hope to be, on target or pretty close 

to your budget estimate of your total expenditures. 

 

Well I think you'll acknowledge that and that's what you've 

been telling us.  And if it's true maybe you could just 

acknowledge it again that you, in this first three or 

four months, you've got a variance range from minus 37 to 

your best guess to plus $115 million.  And that variation totals 

up, of those differences, 120 million but you still say you're on 

budget.  And given those things that have to move up and 

down, you're going to make it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm afraid that the member from 

Estevan has misunderstood what this is all about.  The variance 

that is here is not a variance from the budget.  It's a variance 

from the one-twelfth provision in interim supply.  All of the 

monies that are being requested here and all of the monies that 

have been provided for in other interim supplies are within the 

budget. 

 

So there is no variance from the budget involved.  There is 

simply a variance from the one-twelfth provision because in 

some cases some departments have to spend more than 

one-twelfth in a particular month.  That means having used up 

more than one-twelfth, they will have less to spend later in the 

year because they obviously will need less money later in the 

year. 

 

The member said you don't construct roads in January.  Maybe 

you do certain kinds of work.  So the variance has got nothing 

to do with variance from the budget.  The budget, as far as we 

are concerned, is on track.  The variance is from the 

one-twelfth. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, fair enough, but you can't have it both 

ways, Mr. Minister.  If you've got funding provided as 1.8 

billion and one-twelfth allocation is 1.7, you're out $120 

million based on the twelfth, your Estimates.  Well, you either 

are going one-twelfth or you're not. 

 

Okay, so if you're going to go one-twelfth, one-twelfth -- and 

that's what this is all about is the twelfth -- then we know that 

the one-twelfth is going to be wrong.  That's what you're 

saying.  It's your best guess overall this month's one-twelfth.  

And you're going to be wrong. 

 

Well, you've been wrong on every one so far.  Your own 

numbers say one-twelfth allocation is wrong.  So if you're not 

wrong then what's the variance?  And if the variance is in there 

because you've made some mistakes in terms of interpretation 

or seasonal things, perhaps you could explain then why we 

shouldn't be concerned about the one-twelfth and your capacity 

to be accurate if you've got that in there. 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- There's nothing . . . it's not wrong 

and there's no variance from the budget.  I mean, let me try to 

give an example.  Let me try to give the member opposite an 

example.  Let us say that the member from Estevan had a 

budget of $12 for the year.  But he would get $1 in January, $1 

in February, $1 in March, but he had to spend $3 in April.  That 

means there would be, after that, some months in which he 

wouldn't have $1, but he still would end up spending $12.  

That's exactly what's happening here. 
 

The department . . . some departments haven been budgeted a 

certain amount of money.  They spend that money sometimes 

more in certain months than they do in others, and all that this 

does is provides the money that 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1873 

they need within their budget for the months in which they 

have to expend it.  Urban Affairs doesn't spend equal amounts 

in 12 months because they provide revenue-sharing on a 

quarterly basis.  So at the end of the quarter, they pay a quarter.  

The same thing with school grants -- they're provided not on a 

monthly basis.  But at the end of it all, it still adds up to the 

same amount in the budget that was provided originally. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I really appreciate that 

illustration.  The point is, and you make it very well, that once 

in a while you might need three or four months money in 

various departments, for various reasons that you've already 

mentioned here.  It could be because of forest fires, it could be 

because of community pastures in the summer.  You fix roads 

at a particular time.  That twelfth and those Estimates are going 

to be different than in February or March or some other time. 

 

Now when you have these kinds of variations . . . which I'm not 

saying are your fault, but that's what happens; you have some 

expenditures, and so forth -- quite normal.  What I'm asking 

for, under these normal conditions, you can forecast when 

you're going to have a lump sum payment or some things that 

might cause some variation.  And I want to give you an 

example, just so that we can talk about it.  I'm not saying it's 

your fault.  I just want to throw one out here. 

 

From month to month in here, you can vary with forest fires, 

$20 million, and you know it.  From month to month, you can 

vary, because of other expenditures that can go up or down, 

certainly 1 or 2 per cent.  And 1 per cent on 5 billion would be 

50 million.  Not too bad. 

 

Given the variations that you have in here, not your fault, eh?  

Not your fault.  Given the variations that are in here, could you 

tell me what kind of an impact, what kind of an impact on the 

overall scheme of things, a variation of $25 million would have 

on your budget. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- But let's not compare apples and 

oranges.  The variations we've got here are within the budget 

and the only variations that we're talking about here is 

providing more or less than one-twelfth for one month. 

 

And what the member is talking about is a variation from the 

actual total budget.  If there was as the member said, in the 

total budget an extra expenditure of $25 million other than 

what's been provided for, your deficit would increase by $25 

million.  Simple as that. 

 

Or the government would look at where it could cost-save in 

other areas to try to save all of the $25 million or a part of it.  

That's pretty straightforward. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- If, for example, Mr. Minister, we had some 

extra forest fires, then we got hit in July and we had to spend 

$20 million, then one of two things would happen: either you'd 

have 20 million more that you'd have to go get from somebody 

in terms of taxes, or you'd have to reshuffle in that department 

of forest fire defence, or you'd have to take from some other 

departments.  Is that accurate? 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- You can't . . . the member who was 

a premier for 10 years should know, you just can't take from 

another department.  You'd have to provide a special warrant to 

provide the funding. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I just ask you then: if you 

had a bad summer in forest fires and you needed an extra $20 

million, and that affected your overall budget and would 

obviously affect the twelfth because it was over, how would 

you deal with that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- One would have to provide a 

special warrant. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- What percentage of your overall budget would 

$20 million be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- When we do our calculations we 

may correct this, but on a quick calculation, it's about .4 per 

cent. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- So we're looking at an overall budget of in 

excess of $5 billion and if we had a $20 million variation 

because of forest fires for example, it would be 0.4 per cent of 

the budget -- 0.4, 0.4 per cent of the budget.  So it would be on 

$24 million, that would run on a twelfth -- it would be a couple 

of million dollars a month.  So 0.4 per cent, and if we took a 

twelfth of that, we'd be looking at a couple of million dollars.  

Is that accurate, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Under that kind of calculation, it 

would be .5 per cent and your deficit would rise accordingly. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Okay, Mr. Minister, I'm just getting an idea.  If 

we had $24 million variation as a result of something that 

would happen, as you point out, seasonally, that you'd have to 

deal with, say, in July or August or in any sort of special 

circumstances, either in interim supply or special warrant or 

budget, we're looking at 0.4 to 0.5 per cent -- probably less than 

one-half of 1 per cent.  And you've acknowledged that.  

Because this is pretty important, because I'm sure that you 

know what that kind of variation means.  It's very typical in 

expenditures.  Any budget, any budget, whether it's a municipal 

budget, a city budget, your personal budget, 1 or 2 or 3 per cent 

variation is not very much.  And certainly less than half of 1 

per cent is not very much. 

 

So if we looked at a disaster, if we looked at a forest fire, or we 

looked at a severe . . . oh I suppose hail storm or something like 

that, that would hit the city of Regina or Saskatoon, and you 

had emergency funds that had to be there, 0.4 to 0.5, less than 

half of 1 per cent would not be much of a variation, given the 

fact that you can have a variance from month to month of over 

$115 million in terms of what you might see -- not your fault -- 

but what you might see in expenditures changing from 

one-twelfth to one-twelfth. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I'll go through that again with you.  

Obviously, if you have an emergency situation, and you had to 

find $25 million or $24 million . . . It was a fire, and it 

happened, and you got to pay for it.  You've pointed out that it's 

not your fault, but you can get variations that range from minus 

37 to $115 million in terms of 



1874 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

one-twelfth would be to what you had to spend that month. 

 

Those variations -- not your fault -- over time in these first few 

months, have run $120 million.  Now that's pretty significant -- 

probably closer to 10 per cent.  But if you look at $25 million 

or $24 million on an overall budget, you've just acknowledged 

it's 0.4 to 0.5 per cent, which is less than one-half of 1 per cent. 

That isn't too difficult to accommodate, given the normal kinds 

of variations -- which aren't your fault -- that would normally 

come up in a budget of this size or any budget, a municipal 

budget, a school budget, a personal budget, or the country's 

budget.  Is 0.4 to 0.5, less than half of 1 per cent, a variation 

that you could probably accommodate in an emergency 

situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, once again the 

member from Estevan, either because he doesn't understand or 

is deliberately trying to confuse the two different things here . . 

. The $120 million variance from the one-twelfth is all 

budgeted for.  That's a part of the existing budget.  What the 

member opposite is trying to compare that to is an increase to 

the budget he mentioned a while ago of 3 per cent.  Well a 3 

per cent increase in the budget is $150 million. 

 

That's not insignificant.  That is a major amount of additional 

expenditure which would really get the notice of the rating 

agencies and the people who lend us money to try to pay for 

the huge debt which we have in Saskatchewan and to pay for 

the $760 million interest which we have to pay this year. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I'm kind of enjoying this little discussion 

here.  But we are getting to the point where we're getting off 

the Estimates now, or the interim supply, and getting into the 

major budget, which is something we should be talking about 

in the Estimates as a whole.  But I thought that since we're 

talking about the variance in the $120 million from the 

one-twelfth, it was a legitimate debate at that time. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think that's fair.  And 

we're just using your numbers on how you come up with your 

twelfth and your variance.  And the chairman's got the same 

piece of paper.  So all I'm pointing out is that when you look at 

this kind of variance that you've talked about in here, you're in 

the neighbourhood of 4 or 5 per cent of the budget.  What I'm 

talking about is if you had an emergency fire and you had to 

come up with $24 million, it might cost you less than one-half 

of 1 per cent to find that. 

 

And you said, well you couldn't find it in other departments.  

You'd have to find it in that department, or you'd have to have a 

special warrant, or you have to do things.  And I can 

understand that.  Maybe I could rephrase the question.  Would 

you think one-half of 1 per cent in emergency like fire would 

be unreasonable in any sort of provincial budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It would be, yes.  It would be a 

huge amount of money.  But I want to remind the member that 

the budget, as we have it now, has provided for the fire 

situation and the potential fire situation.  We are well 

within the budget.  We are well within the budget with regard 

to fire suppression. 

 

Who knows?  There may be a change.  But right now I can 

report to the House that . . . In fact I saw a report from the 

department today that there is no difficulty with the budget 

that's been provided now.  In fact they're under the projected 

expenditures. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- All right.  Fair enough, Mr. Minister.  You say 

that in fire you're not spending the money; you're under.  You 

may be saving 5, 10, 15, $20 million, and you acknowledge 

that can go up or down.  If it went up next week because you 

had some dry weather and forest fires, then your twelfth would 

be out of line.  You'd have some pretty significant variation.  

My only argument -- it's not your fault -- my only argument is 

you could probably accommodate $24 million given this size of 

a budget.  That's all I'm asking.  Is it too difficult to think of a 

variation in your budget as a result of emergencies like fire?  

You say there isn't one, fair enough.  It's not your fault and 

there isn't one.  Is that variation something that would be 

difficult to manage? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well first of all, the answer, would 

it be difficult to manage, the answer is yes.  But I want to point 

out again what the fire suppression was all about.  In the sheet 

which the member should have because I passed it over, it has 

for the Department of Natural Resources, a request of $2.620 

million in excess of the interim supply, the one-twelfth.  It 

clearly states on here that forest fire operations and northern air 

services for forest fires . . . because historic cash flow trends 

indicate significant funding requirements during the summer 

months.  That's the historic cash flows that normally are 

required and therefore we're providing that amount of money 

for the purposes of forest fire operations and northern air 

services for forest fires. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, all I'm asking -- and it's not 

your fault -- I'm just asking how the system works.  I'm asking 

when you look at fire fighting, and you've got a total budget in 

that department, what if you had an emergency and it ballooned 

where you had just a big problem.  And sometimes we've 

helped other provinces with forest fires, neighbouring prairie 

provinces and others.  If it ballooned to an additional $24 

million, how would you handle that and how would it show up 

in an interim supply?  Could you just explain how that would 

happen. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm glad the 

member asked the question because there is no emergency.  

And in the interim supply which we have before the House, 

we're asking for a specific amount of money.  If the legislature 

passes this interim supply, that's the amount of money we'll 

have, and that's the only amount of money they'll be able to 

spend in the month of August. 

 

Any money that needs to be for the month of September will 

either be done when the appropriation Bills for the whole 

budget passes some time in August, but if the House continues 

to sit and the Appropriation Bill for the budget does not pass, 

we'll be back here in September asking the House to approve 

another interim supply.  And 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1875 

if there were at that time -- I'm not going to get into 

hypothetical situations; I deal with real worlds -- if there is a 

need for additional money in September and if we are sitting 

and there is a need for interim supply, the member will be 

provided with that information at that time. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- All right well maybe we're getting some place.  

If there is a real emergency and you need money, and it was in 

the neighbourhood of $24 million, and the House was not 

sitting, then you would call the House back in and say we need 

whatever that amount is, let's say it was $24 million.  You had 

a mass of forest fires in August -- just to get the process -- and 

the fires aren't your fault; they're not my fault.  But if that was 

the case and you needed an extra $24 million beyond what you 

budgeted for, just so I have this process straight, you say that 

you would call the House back in . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 

. Well I just want to know, if you're over it by $24 million 

because of an emergency, what would you do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- If the House was adjourned and the 

budget had passed, we'd have to have a special warrant. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- So you would ask for a special warrant to 

address half of 1 per cent on the budget.  I just want to know 

exactly what you're going to do.  If you needed $24 million and 

the House was out, the budget was passed, and you needed that 

money -- regardless of whether there was a surplus any place 

else -- you would have a special warrant to get less than half of 

1 per cent.  That's what you'd do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we're not here 

dealing with an emergency situation or what might have to 

happen at some future time.  We're dealing with an interim 

supply requirement and request here, and that's . . . I think the 

member is really getting a little far afield. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I'm just repeating what you said 

to me.  I'm not . . . It's not your fault; I'm asking about the 

process.  We could be here in August and September and 

October going through this again.  That's fair enough, right?  

We could be.  This is the fifth time we've been through -- third 

time in this process and two others.  So we could be here at 

least one more time, if not two, if not three.  Now that's clearly 

. . . not to be argumentative, but that's the fact. 

 

I'm asking you what the process is if you run into an 

emergency on one-twelfth. What do you do?  And if you go 

over your global budget, are you going to ask for a special 

warrant whether the House is in or not?  Are you going to bring 

in a Bill or some measure to get an extra $24 million?  And if 

the House is out, how do you get that money?  And that's just a 

process question.  I'm not blaming you; I'm just asking you 

how you would deal with that.  And that's a fair question when 

we're going through this month after month after month. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, once again the 

member is talking about something in the future.  He's talking 

about what might have to be done.  I think he's out of order.  

But clearly I've said now for the fourth time --  

I've been keeping notes -- there will have to be a special 

warrant.  It's not a choice.  If the government has to spend more 

money in some department in which there isn't money available 

to be distributed, you'd need a special warrant. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well all right, Mr. Minister, you've now cleared 

it up.  If you needed $24 million, the budget was passed, and 

you've had this thing, you would have a special warrant for $24 

million.  So on one-half of 1 per cent the Finance minister, the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) Finance minister in the province 

of Saskatchewan, would have a special warrant. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, are you telling us that you would do that 

regardless of other economic conditions on your budget -- if in 

fact interest rates dropped, if in fact you didn't have any forest 

fire expenditures to speak of and there was a surplus there, 

there was surplus in other accounts, surpluses in other areas, or 

less automobile problems, or all kinds of combinations of 

things, without question you would have a special warrant -- is 

that what you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- If it's in the department in which 

the request is or the need is for additional money, you would 

need . . . if it can be accommodated within the department 

itself, then you can accommodate within the department itself.  

But if there is not sufficient funds within the department, you 

can't transfer money from one department to the other; you 

have to have a special warrant. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well just so we can clear this up.  You're saying 

if you had a $25 million surplus in your forest fighting account 

and you had a deficiency of the same amount in another 

account, when you look at the consolidated books, you would 

still have to have a special warrant to come up with that 

appropriate amount of money.  Even though you had surpluses 

in several other departments and several other accounts, you 

would still have to have a special warrant if one department is 

over.  Is that what you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer is yes. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- So as a result, Mr. Minister, you could end up 

with a special warrant for one department and then end up with 

a surplus in your overall budget.  Is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, this has got nothing 

to do with interim supply.  We've been at this for 50 minutes.  

The member is trying to put in time for some reason.  I really 

ask you to rule whether this is within the terms of reference of 

interim supply. 

 

The Chair: -- The minister . . . Order.  The minister has asked 

the Chair to rule as to whether the questions are in order.  First 

of all I will remind the House that earlier this day the Chair 

made a specific statement as to what is not acceptable for 

questions in dealing with interim supply.  And let me just, for 

the reminder of the members of the House, repeat that. 

 

It's been the standard views in this House for some time, the 

purpose of interim supply is to grant money for the 



1876 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

operation of government departments and programs on an 

interim basis while reserving to the Legislative Assembly the 

right to complete the detailed review of the Estimates at a later 

time.  And for this reason, members must reserve the detailed 

questions and Estimates in government financial policy for the 

regular review of the main Estimates. 

 

However as I listened very carefully to the questions being 

asked by the Leader of the Opposition, they do not, in the 

opinion of the Chair, violate that guideline.  For about the past 

28, 29, 30 minutes, they have been hypothetical and clearly 

they have been that, but they have been hypothetical questions 

dealing with the matter of granting interim supply. 

 

The minister certainly has the prerogative to state if he feels 

that the question is repetitive or that it has been answered, but 

the Chair does find the questions to be in order and recognizes 

the Hon. Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Really what we're 

after, Mr. Minister, is the process that you might go through in 

the event of an emergency.  And you know what emergency 

that I'm talking about. 

 

Obviously we're fortunate when it comes to forest fires.  But 

we're not so fortunate when it comes to 50 or 60 million acres 

of farm land.  And we're worried on behalf of a lot of people 

that there might be an emergency out there.  And as you know, 

we know, and I think it's fair, Mr. Chairman, we all 

campaigned on the basis of a crisis in agriculture. 

 

Now we have a crisis in agriculture.  You've come forward 

with your third interim supply, and there's no recognition of 

that.  And I'm just asking about the process.  You have not 

recognized the fact that there could be an emergency far bigger 

than fire. 

 

And you've told me what you do in the case of fire which is fair 

enough, and it's not your fault.  And the drought is not your 

fault, and early frost is not your fault.  But what might be your 

fault is if you were not prepared for that because you want to 

be prepared for forest fires.  You want to be prepared for other 

measures that come up.  And we want you to be prepared on 

behalf of the public whose money you're spending, be prepared 

in the case of a very serious emergency.  And if it's city people, 

country people, townspeople, seniors -- they're Saskatchewan 

families. 

 

So we want to know what process you go through in the event 

that there was a significant natural disaster when we are 

presented with one-twelfth, one-twelfth, one-twelfth.  And 

what happens if we run into the fall and we've got a devil of 

problem because of the weather?  How will you accommodate 

that if there's not enough money in your interim supply or in 

your allocation in Crop Insurance?  What will you do? 

 

And the second question is, as we look through . . . This is the 

third one-twelfth here.  What happens again in the event that 

it's a modest number, in fact maybe even a small number?  And 

you know the number that I'm talking about; 23 to $24 million 

might kick into gear a lot of 

money for farmers. 

 

How does that and how would that affect the variation in your 

month to month to month?  And certainly how would it vary it 

in over all because we don't think it would have that big of an 

impact, looking at your own numbers when you can say 

because of quarterly payments, because of summer allocations, 

because roads are done in the summer and because drought 

occurs in the summer, you could have these variations. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, we're just asking the process you go through.  

It's not your fault.  How do you deal with that in the event 

there's a $24 million disaster that's over your budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Now, Mr. Chairman, that is a very 

hypothetical question.  We are not faced with that kind of a 

situation today.  We are dealing here with a budget that has 

been presented to the legislature and we are dealing here today 

with one-twelfth of that budget basically, for the interim 

supply.  There is a variation in the one-twelfth. 

 

The member opposite is talking about a variation in the overall 

budget.  He knows the process.  I've explained it for the last 55 

minutes now. 

 

If the House is sitting, there has to be . . . part of the Bill has to 

be presented in the House.  If the House isn't sitting and the 

government feels that it needs to provide additional money, 

then you have to have a special warrant. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- We're just getting at the process, Mr. Minister.  

Now the second question, and part of that: would you think less 

than one-half of 1 per cent would be significant, either on a 

twelfth or your overall budget?  Is that statistically even 

significant and is it significant in overall financial 

management? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Any deviation from the budget is 

significant. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Would you care to elaborate on that.  On a $5.2 

billion budget, or whatever the total is, would you care to 

explain why $24 million would be significant? 

 

Is there any number that you might not -- if we're in here in 

August going through the one-twelfth we're going through, and 

this is the process, September one-twelfth -- is there any 

number that you wouldn't worry about in terms of a special 

warrant?  Or is there some level threshold that you would 

worry about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, because of the 

huge debt that this province faces, created by the member 

who's been speaking on the opposite side all evening, because 

of that huge debt which has no reason to exist except for the 

mismanagement of the former government, and because of the 

$760 million in interest charges which the taxpayer has to shell 

out this year to pay for that debt, any deviation from the budget 

which has been presented in the House is significant.  And it 

will be considered that way if we face the situation where we 

have to look at it. 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1877 

Mr. Devine: -- All right.  Mr. Minister, we've noted and dealt . 

. . we'll just put it on the record that number one, that if you're 

$24 million out one way or another, it would be a small 

variation compared to the month-to-month variation that you 

have here. 

 

Number two, Mr. Minister, that if you do have a department 

that's over, you're prepared to bring in a special warrant under 

an emergency. 

 

Number three, Mr. Minister, can I just get your brief 

explanation . . . and you might not want to do this.  And I don't 

mean to be argumentative, but you might want to duck this.  

But perhaps you won't.  The one-twelfth that would be 

necessary to satisfy last year's Agriculture budget would be 

significantly bigger than the one-twelfth for this year.  And 

that's true for Agriculture and it's true for Crop Insurance.  And 

under the seriousness of the environment that we face here in 

agriculture, that you and I both campaigned in, is a crisis, 

where you have cut the overall budget from 312 to 265 million, 

70 million you've taken out of that budget. 

 

And the crisis has deepened -- and you said you won't talk 

about hypothetical.  Mr. Chairman, I'm sure that you would 

agree, Mr. Chairman, that what I'm talking about is not 

hypothetical.  There is a farm crisis, there's a rural crisis, there 

is crop problems, they're late, there's drought, and there's a risk 

of frost.  There are thousands of people that are being 

foreclosed on, which is real. 

 

And in this one-twelfth interim supply, I don't see any 

recognition of that crisis.  Where is the recognition of your 

agreed acknowledgement of the crisis, the public's agreed 

acknowledgement of the crisis?  Where is your 

acknowledgement of that crisis in this interim supply?  And if 

in fact even if you acknowledge $24 million, it would only be 

less than one-half of 1 per cent.  It wouldn't even be . . . I mean 

it would be very small compared to your total budget. 

 

Don't you think, Mr. Minister, to be fair to those tens of 

thousands of families, as we go through this interim supply, 

that you could at least acknowledge that there could be some 

variation there and that you would be prepared to back them up 

in the event they lose their farms, when thousands are asked to 

be foreclosed on, when we've got serious, serious, financial 

problems in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, once again this has 

got nothing to do with the interim supply, but I will speak to 

interim supply rather than the member who is way off the topic 

that we're addressing here. 

 

What the interim supply does is provides one-twelfth of the 

amount that's been budgeted for the Department of Agriculture, 

for the Crop Insurance Corporation, except for the Department 

of Agriculture what we have to pay for the federal government 

because of the agreement that was made by the former 

government. 

 

I remind the member something very important.  And I want to 

remind him this by quoting back to him 

something he once said several years ago when he was the 

premier.  He said: take care of the pennies and the dollars will 

look after themselves.  Well unfortunately in the 1980s he 

spoke that way but he never followed it.  Well it is not our 

intention to govern like the government of the 1980s.  It is our 

intention to govern with good management, to be frugal, to live 

within our means as best we can, and to get the finances under 

control so that in future years we can begin to do things that the 

public needs, things which we cannot do now because we're 

strapped by a financial situation which brings this province to 

the verge of bankruptcy.  And from hearing the member 

opposite, he'd like us to go even deeper in that direction. 

 

Well that's the Progressive Conservative way: make yourself 

go into greater debt and hope that somehow that will pay the 

debt.  That's not the way of the present government.  The 

present government's way is manage, look after the finances, 

leave yourself some room for the future, think about our 

children and think about our grandchildren.  Don't just think 

about yourself today.  That's the old, 1980s Conservative way; 

that's not the way of the 1990s under an NDP government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, that's just touched on a 

little politics, and I'm sure you would acknowledge that.  Mr. 

Minister, you didn't have to get into that, for Heaven sakes. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You'll have lots of time. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- We got lots of time.  We got some August, 

September, October, and November, and we're going to go 

through this month after month after month if that's the way 

you want to participate.  And the House Leader can get in, and 

he can participate too.  The whole NDP caucus can.  He won't 

acknowledge there's a crisis, and we're asking you to talk about 

it. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I've asked the minister to comment on revenue 

in this interim supply.  And the reason I've asked him to 

comment on it is that when he was the critic he would take a lot 

of time in interim supply talking with Mr. Hepworth asking 

about the impact of harmonization and taxes on the interim 

supply.  And I can quote, and I will.  On April 6, 1990 and he 

says: 

 

 And so I want to ask you, how much revenue have you 

estimated?  I'll wait for the . . . he's busy and I don't want him 

to miss the question, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And I go on: 

 

 I don't want to have to repeat myself, Mr. Minister, so let me 

ask you my question.  In the estimation of your revenues, Mr. 

Minister, how much revenue do you anticipate for the 

provincial treasury in the fiscal year from the goods and 

services tax (and then he went on to say) which comes as the 

result of the double taxation where the provincial sales tax 

will be charged on the federal goods and services tax . . . 



1878 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

And he asked those questions, and he asked about various 

kinds of things that would impact on the interim supply.  And 

today, Mr. Chairman, he's obviously facing a really significant 

crisis like a fire, and we're asking what kind of impact that 

might have on this twelfth and the next twelfth and the next 

twelfth because we might be here.  And he stands up and says 

-- and I respect your ruling, Mr. Minister -- oh, we can't talk 

about that because he only deals in reality and non-hypothetical 

situations. 

 

I say to the hon. member: the farm financial crisis is real.  

There's a farm financial crisis.  There is drought where people 

are ploughing up their crops.  There is a serious risk of frost, 

and you know it.  There's a situation where your government is 

foreclosing on thousands of farmers.  We asked the minister 

today, could he give us the number of people he's foreclosed 

on.  It's a serious problem.  It's worse than it was last fall.  And 

you have not only no provisions in your interim supply, you 

have less provision in your overall budget, and less provision in 

interim supply than any previous administration we've seen in 

years. 

 

So, we're asking the minister in this interim supply, the third 

we've faced here, whether he's beginning to change his mind 

and say, I will have some provision available for farmers if in 

fact they run into the very serious situation where they're asked 

to leave their farm. 

 

And he knows, and I'm sure all of his hon. colleagues know, 

that that's not hypothetical.  There are people who are losing 

their farms today.  And you're foreclosing on them. 

 

Would you, Mr. Minister, acknowledge that you could make 

some provision for people in a disaster situation, particularly 

given the fact that you've got a federal offer that would help 

Saskatchewan people, and help you as a result of the very 

serious circumstances that farmers find themselves in the 

province today. 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  I'll ask members of the House to 

come to order.  The Chair was listening very carefully to try to 

determine whether the question being asked was more specific 

to a function of a government department than previously has 

been ruled.  However, the Chair was unable to hear the 

question . . . Order.  And I'll ask that the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition repeat the question so that the Chair can hear the 

question -- just the question.  And then . . . Order, order . . . 

And then we'll allow the minister to answer. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My question was to 

the minister.  The generally -- and I'm sure in this legislature -- 

acknowledged rural farm financial crisis which is worsening, 

deserves the consideration, the respect and consideration, of the 

Minister of Finance in the province of Saskatchewan.  Would 

the minister be prepared tonight to acknowledge . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  The Chair has asked for order on 

both sides of the House.  And I'm having difficulty hearing the 

question being put by the Leader of the Opposition due to noise 

coming from both sides of the House.  And I will ask all 

members to come to order, to 

allow the Leader of the Opposition to put his question and 

allow the minister to answer. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, this is the third interim supply 

we're into.  And the farm crisis has deepened.  It is serious.  It's 

not hypothetical.  It is evident because we're ploughing up 

crops, thousands of acres.  Farmers are receiving foreclosure 

notices. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you bring yourself to acknowledge in your 

interim supply some recognition of the serious financial crisis 

that were there, particularly in the event that we all know that 

there is a serious, real, farm financial crisis and, on top of that, 

a drought.  Is there anything that you could do to acknowledge 

the fact that you might be there, even in co-operation with the 

federal government, in the future to help these people -- rural, 

towns, villages, and others -- in this serious situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I have never heard 

any politician in this province and particularly in this 

legislature pray for drought and disaster and frost as much as 

the member and the Leader of the Opposition seems to be 

doing.  It's almost unbelievable. 

 

The point I want to make is this.  Yes, there is a crisis in 

Saskatchewan.  The crisis in Saskatchewan is a financial crisis, 

created by the Leader of the Opposition when he was premier.  

Because when he tried to run this province, he didn't care about 

management of the taxpayers' dollars. He looked at . . . he did 

things like proposing a deficit in a budget in 1986 of $300 

million . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order.  The Chair is having 

equivalent difficulty hearing the answer being given by the 

minister, once again by members shouting from their seats 

from both sides of the House.  And I'll ask that the courtesy be 

extended to the minister to allow the House to be able to hear 

his answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me 

repeat again what I began to say, that the crisis this province 

faces is a financial crisis created by the former administration, 

the Conservative administration under the premiership of the 

member from Estevan.  Because here is what happened.  He 

took this province from a total debt of $3.5 billion and in 10 

years raised it to $15 billion.  Total interest charges 10 years 

from the time that that member took office were $43 million 

including Crown corporations. 

 

The interest payments on the Consolidated Fund this year are 

$760 million.  What does that do?  That straps the hands of the 

government from doing things that any government would like 

to do.  Not something created by this administration, but 

created by the member opposite because he paid no attention to 

whether his government spent money that they didn't have.  It 

was wasteful, it was badly managed, and therefore we face the 

crisis today. 
 

Now if the member was sincere, if he was really sincere about 

what should be done for agriculture in Saskatchewan, there was 

a golden opportunity to express that sincerity several weeks 

ago when there was in this legislature a motion, introduced and 

debated, which would have asked the federal government to 

live up to its 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1879 

commitment to provide $500 million of third-line defence, 

which the federal government promised to the province and the 

farmers of this province. 

 

That member and the member from Morse and the member 

from Thunder Creek and the member from Arm River voted 

against that motion because they weren't interested in the farms 

of Saskatchewan and the farm families of Saskatchewan.  They 

were only interested in defending a discredited Prime Minister 

in Ottawa.  Now that is a very strange sense of priorities, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Here's what the motion said, April 28, 1992: 

 

 . . . to call on the federal government to meet its outstanding 

commitment to provide farmers with the $500 million 

deficiency payment for the 1990-91 crop year as soon as 

possible and to deliver on its commitment for a third line of 

defence program this year as agreed to at their recent first 

ministers' conference; 

 

That member from Estevan signed an agreement with the 

federal government -- it was about 1990 -- which brought about 

this commitment.  And even though he signed that agreement, 

when it came to voting in this House on that resolution, the 

Conservative members voted against it.  I'm pleased to say that 

the independent member supported that motion, but the Tory 

members voted against that motion -- very straightforward 

motion.  So you really got to wonder about this new-found 

sincerity that the member from Estevan seems to be trying to 

pretend to have here in this debate that we're having this 

evening. 

 

If there was any sincerity in it all, he would've stood up with 

his colleagues and supported that motion instead of 

unanimously, on their side of the House, standing up and 

voting against the motion and therefore voting against the farm 

families of Saskatchewan and in fact against all of the 

taxpayers in Saskatchewan.  Because what they were really 

saying is, we're going to let the federal government continue to 

off-load their responsibility in the 1990s like they let them do 

in the 1980s. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm really happy you let the 

minister talk about the financial condition of the province and 

about agriculture and . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order.  I'll ask the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition to leave the Chair out of the debate in the Assembly 

and just to proceed in your debate before the House. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'm really glad, Mr. 

Minister, that you took the opportunity to elaborate on the 

position that you've taken to come up with your interim supply, 

which includes the federal government, the deficit, your overall 

budget Estimates, and general agricultural policy.  Because 

you've opened up this debate quite credibly. 

 

And I think it's time that we got into some of this because it has 

an impact on what you're doing on your 

one-twelfth, one-twelfth -- this is the third time around.  Given 

that, and you just finished talking about it, I want to read 

something to you because the federal government has just paid 

Saskatchewan $500 million, and we're going to put it on the 

record.  And you will never acknowledge it but I'm going to put 

it on the record.  This is the letter that goes to farmers from Bill 

McKnight and I read it today: 

 

 . . . the Third Line of Defence process, we identified the need 

to provide farmers with transitional assistance -- through the 

Farm Support and Adjustment Measures (FSAM I and II) -- 

while GRIP and the Net Income Stabilization Account 

(NISA) were starting up.  Between 1990 and 1992, over $500 

million was delivered directly to Saskatchewan producers by 

this process through FSAM I and II. 

 

FSAM I and II were cheques they received in the last few 

months, hundreds of millions of dollars that you have not 

acknowledged.  Now at the same time that they come up with 

the $500 million, you cut the agriculture budget from 312 to 

265, by $75 million.  And on top of the crisis getting worse, 

you have no recognition and no estimate of how you might 

help farmers in the event that there is 20 or 30 or 40 million 

acres in some trouble.  Now it seems to me it's a credible thing 

to talk about.  It's in every newspaper, every television, every 

editorial, that the NDP are not addressing rural Saskatchewan 

in this crisis. 

 

(2015) 

 

The feds have come up with 500 million; you've come up with 

$75 million less.  You have no money in this estimate now as a 

result of late crops and people literally ploughing up their land, 

and we're looking at another one-twelfth with your variations, 

with your own numbers that vary up to $120 million in the first 

four months.  We're asking for 24 which would kick in up to 

$40 an acre for people who might need it.  Hopefully it isn't 

any, but for those that need it, it would be substantial. 

 

And then your Minister of Agriculture -- we're going to call 

him on this because this is what we're concerned about -- your 

Minister of Agriculture writes the Producer, July 21 and he 

says this: the province, in spite of its limited financial capacity, 

has taken on a dramatically increased role in providing income 

support to farmers. 

 

That's not true.  It's not true.  Your budget cut it by $75 million.  

The crisis is increased by hundreds of million dollars, and your 

Minister of Agriculture writes: the province, in spite of its 

limited financial capacity, has taken on a dramatically 

increased role in providing income support to farmers. 

 

That's not true.  And you're giving to these people all across 

Saskatchewan that song and dance, and you're in here with not 

one tiny recognition of the crisis?  And then you've got two 

different numbers here.  You've got $300 million it's going to 

cost in one month, then you turn around and say it's $108 

million the next.  You're 2 or 300 per cent out.  And your 

Minister of Agriculture is writing people falsehoods, they're not 

true with respect to your increase in funding.  And that can be 

tabled.  Every farmer 



1880 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

in the province has got it.  And they're in deeper trouble.  We 

ask him today: how many farmers have you foreclosed on in 

the last six months, and they won't tell us -- or the last six 

weeks or even the last ten days.  And surely they know because 

if they don't know, it's inexcusable. 

 

And it's real, Mr. Minister.  It's not a figment of somebody's 

imagination.  We're in here on one-twelfth of this supply, 

looking for help for people who need it.  And they're in towns 

and villages and cities everywhere in this province, and you 

will not acknowledge it. 

 

So you want to get into the situation.  You're locked into it.  

And you're not going to get out by saying, well there'll be no 

more money. 

 

Let me just . . . A couple of comments with respect to your 

little conversation about the budget you're in and the financial 

situation you're in.  I'm reading from Donald Gass, Financial 

Review Commission news conference February 18, 1992.  And 

he says this, and I quote:  Blakeney used the same accounting 

principles, and the figures were correct. The main reason for 

the increase in deficit is due to accounting principles.  And 

under the accounting principles, the main element is unfunded 

pension liabilities. 

 

You know you changed the accounting principles.  You 

acknowledged in this Legislative Assembly that the deficit in 

1982 was 3.3 billion.  And I believe -- and you can 

acknowledge it -- the total public debt outstanding was 3 

billion; guaranteed debt was $230 million; unfunded liabilities, 

1.6 billion; for 4.9 billion.  That's when we took over -- 4.9 

billion. 

 

And you run interest rates at 22, 19, 18, 17 -- any figures you 

want to come up with.  Prime plus one over 10 years on a $4.9 

billion debt and you've got way over 15 billion, and on top of 

that you changed the accounting rules and principles.  You'll 

come up with what Gass did. 

 

So you're not fooling anybody to say you can't help tens of 

thousands of farmers because you cooked the books.  You 

changed the accounting principles. 

 

And you bet you they're going to be watching television, when 

you say to thousands of people -- and you campaigned for 

thousands of people -- there's a farm crisis.  And what did you 

say? 

 

NDP says GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) needs to be 

improved to pay out more by including costs of production.  

What a sham.  NDP says farmers will get better GRIP and 

more cash from Ottawa if you vote NDP.  In the last few 

months, as a result of our moves, they got up to $800 million.  

They've got nothing from you.  You've got nothing in the 

budget.  You've cut them by 75 million and on one-twelfth of 

interim supply, even less yet, and no acknowledgement of the 

crisis. 
 

And then you say it's because there was a deficit.  You know, 

sir -- and you were here -- the deficit was large in 1982 with 

20-some per cent interest rates year after year after year.  Just 

to cope with that with what you left because you borrowed all 

the money to nationalize 

mines and what not  -- at any interest rate and you plugged 

them in for 10 years on $4 billion and you got yourself 16 to 

$18 billion. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Why is the member for Shaunavon on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Leave for 

introduction of guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I hope the 

member opposite doesn't lose his train of thought here, but I 

would like to introduce . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  I'll call the hon. member for 

Shaunavon to order and simply proceed in the introduction of 

guests and not enter into the debate when you've asked for 

leave to introduce guests. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to 

introduce a couple of the constituents of Shaunavon in the 

Speaker's gallery -- Mr. Mike Zarry and Trina Floberg.  And I 

would like everyone here to congratulate them for coming this 

evening. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply (continued) 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 

Opposition. However, in recognizing the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition, I would like to say that I was about to intercede in 

the hon. leader's presentation made leading up to a question I 

presume.  The Chair has made several rulings earlier in this 

motion for interim supply regarding the acceptability of 

questions.  And I think at some point we also have to apply that 

criteria to the preambles to the questions. 

 

I understand that the Leader of the Opposition is engaged in the 

preamble to a question but it is sounding distinctly like debate 

on policy of agriculture and not on the interim supply 

resolution before us.  And I would ask the . . . Order.  I would 

ask members of the House to maintain order, and I'll ask the 

Leader of the Opposition to be aware of that please, and to 

proceed to his question as related to the interim supply Bill. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To the minister -- 

Mr. Minister, you know that your Estimates, that you have one 

term supply here on your expenditures.  Now your 

expenditures you want to have balance with your revenues.  

And I think this is fair enough.  And the revenues is . . . Well 

you asked questions in revenues in interim supply.  Evidently 

you don't want to answer any. 
 

But I want to go back and say, would you spend a little bit 

more time on your expenditures, on why you . . . and come up 

with the numbers that you're using to explain your interest rate 

expenditures, because you used a figure 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1881 

and you brought it up -- $750 million in interest rates.  And 

could you . . . and I think it's a fair one.  We're looking at 

one-twelfth of something here, that you're going to be 

spending.  And particularly if you're concerned about balancing 

this because you don't want to deviate, because you've got 

revenue and you've got a $517 million deficit when interim 

supply is supposed to be right on the money, whether you 

might want to elaborate on your conversation that you were 

doing in the House here and leading on your interest rate 

expenses, and how you come up with a 700-and-some million 

dollars, number one.  And number two, how it might vary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, that is a statutory 

issue.  It's not up to vote in this interim supply where we're 

dealing with non-statutory provisions.  The member opposite 

knows that.  And clearly he knows that that's something that is 

not covered by the interim supply Bill. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it seemed to be all right 

for the minister to talk about it when he cared to talk about it.  

And I'm asking him if he cared to throw out the figure, can he 

back it up?  If he wants to throw it out, back it up.  Tell me 

where it comes from and then I'll believe him.  Other than that 

he's just playing with it.  He's just throwing it out. 

 

And that's another reason I want to come back and say, if you 

have the capacity to provide some recognition of a serious 

financial crisis in this one-twelfth we want you to do it.  And if 

you're covering up with some fictitious $700 million worth of 

interest, we don't buy that and neither does the public.  And if 

you throw it out there then you should be able to back it up. 

 

So I'm asking you to back up the 700-and-some million dollars 

in interest payments that you say are preventing you from 

recognizing that the farmers are in crisis and they need your 

help. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer to that question, Mr. 

Chairman, is very simple.  $760 million of interest rate that's 

going to have to be paid by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan is 

on Consolidated Fund debt, almost all of which was created by 

the former administration.  Every single cent of it, except the 

$3.5 billion, which was a very modest debt, all in the Crown 

corporations and self-liquidating. 

 

And this is what the Leader of the Opposition wants to know.  

Well he knows because he created this debt.  He created this 

debt.  The member from Estevan says, well you're using the 

same accounting principles.  You're darn right we're using the 

same accounting principles.  And that's why the comparisons 

are so accurate. 

 

Because I have -- just to support my contention -- I have here 

the July 1 . . . the July 1986 Saskatchewan Financial and 

Economic Position, which was produced and tabled by the 

Hon. Gary Lane, minister of Finance of the former 

administration.  On page 23 of this report, Mr. Lane says that 

the gross debt of the province was $3.588 billion.  I didn't say 

that, the Conservative government said that.  Three-and-a-half 

billion dollars was the gross debt of the province. 

What's the gross debt of the province today, including 

guarantees?  Fifteen billion dollars.  Where did it all come 

from?  It came from the member from Estevan because of the 

way he managed this province.  What was the situation in 

1982, Mr. Speaker, when the member from Estevan took 

office?  Well the situation in 1982, again as stated and 

published by the minister of Finance under his administration, 

they had a surplus of $139.208 million.  That's where the 

member from Estevan started when he was the premier.  That's 

where he started.  Where did he finish when he was the 

premier?  He took the province from a surplus of $139 million 

and he brought the province to an accumulated deficit of $15 

billion, on which we now have to pay. 

 

On the consolidated part of that debt, the people of 

Saskatchewan now have to pay, this year, interest alone of 

$760 million.  Simple answer to the question from the member 

from Estevan: where did the $760 million come from?  It 

comes from the member of Estevan's bad management of this 

province when he was the premier.  That's where it comes 

from.  Because rather than managing well, he decided that he 

was going to just mismanage this province because it had so 

much going for it you could mismanage it, as he said in New 

York in the early 1980s.  That was the philosophy of that 

premier. 

 

But can you imagine, Mr. Chairman, I ask you, can you 

imagine a premier of any province -- think about this -- the 

premier of any province meeting with the financial community 

of North America in a public meeting, standing up and saying 

to them: this province has got so much going for it you can 

afford to mismanage it and still break even, unquote.  And yet 

that's what the member from Estevan said to the world. 

 

Now as a citizen of this province -- and at that time I was not a 

member of this legislature, at the will of the electorate; I was 

teaching -- I was embarrassed.  I really was embarrassed.  And 

I thought, well it's just a flippant statement.  But I'll tell you, 

Mr. Chairman, it so turned out after 10 years, it wasn't a 

flippant statement.  The member from Estevan meant 

everything that he said about mismanaging.  And that's why we 

now have this huge debt in Saskatchewan, and that's why we 

now are paying interest charges of $760 million this year alone. 

 

(2030) 

 

If it wasn't for those interest charges, we would have about a 

$249 million surplus.  Now wouldn't that be wonderful.  Just 

think what we could do with a surplus of $249 million, in 

health care, in education, assisting farmers, economic 

development.  But instead we've got this millstone around the 

taxpayers' necks, a burden on their children, a burden on their 

grandchildren.  And I feel strongly about that because I have 

children, and I have children who are married and I hope I will 

soon have grandchildren, and it troubles me deeply, as it does, I 

am sure, every member of this House that when they grow up 

they will look at the 1970s and say, what did the Saskatchewan 

people do for them?  Well I'll tell you, Mr. Chairman, the 

answer will not be a very good one for the 1970s of the former 

Conservative administrative because the answer will be, they 

created them a debt burden 



1882 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

which they shouldn't have had. 

 

Well this government is going to leave a different kind of 

legacy.  The legacy which we're going to leave is going to be 

one that says, we dealt with that debt burden in a responsible 

way and we're going to get it under control.  As difficult as that 

is going to be, we're not going to simply make political 

decisions which the former government did for 10 years.  We're 

not going to have the GigaTexts; we're not going to have the 

Nardei industries. 

 

And here is a good example.  In 1986, just to illustrate to 

whoever may be watching on television and in this House, in 

1986, in the midst of an election campaign, six days before the 

vote, this member from Estevan stood up at a place called 

Nardei industries in Regina, turned over a $300,000 cheque and 

cut a ribbon to officially open the industry, and two or three 

days after the election that place shut down.  Now that is why 

we have a cumulative debt of $15 billion, Mr. Chairman, 

because that's the kind of administration we had -- straight 

politics, no management. 

 

I'll tell you, Mr. Chairman, we're not going to have that kind of 

operation under this administration.  We're not going to have 

the GigaTexts, we're not going to have the Supercarts, we're 

not going to have all of this come along with a suitcase, meet 

with the premier of the former administration and we'll fill it 

with money as if it grew on trees. 

 

But it doesn't grow on trees.  My friends and my neighbours 

and everybody in Saskatchewan has to pay that debt because 

they're burdened with it now and there is no other way to pay it 

except through their tax dollars, and hopefully some economic 

development which will get the economy rolling and there'll be 

revenues from other ways.  I did not really want to get into this 

kind of debate, Mr. Chairman, but since the member from 

Estevan did, I felt a need to rebut him. 

 

He asked a very straightforward question.  He said where does 

the 600 . . . $760 million in interest charge come from.  The 

answer is very simple.  It is coming there because of the debt 

which he created because he didn't care about good 

management.  He only cared about his own personal 

re-election.  Now that, Mr. Chairman, is unforgivable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm really happy you took 

the time to explain the political history of how the province got 

into debt. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Minister, if your officials and you would 

acknowledge that the figures supplied by the Department of 

Finance show the debt totalled over $4.9 billion as of March 

31, 1982.  The debt breaks down, total public debt, outstanding 

promissory notes, treasury bills, SaskPower, Government of 

Saskatchewan, Crown corporations -- 3 billion.  The 

guaranteed debt was 230 million.  Unfunded liabilities 

including superannuation and so forth, 1.6 billion, and that total 

debt was in the ballpark of a little over $4.9 billion. 

And secondly, Mr. Minister, I wondered if you would take that 

4.9 billion in 1982 and convert 4.9 billion -- and you have the 

tables there -- to 1992 dollars. 

 

And then third, Mr. Minister . . . The minister is shaking his 

head; I'm sure he might not want to do this.  And third, I 

wonder if the minister would be prepared to take his new 

accounting principles and apply it to that 1982 debt converted 

to 1992 and see what kind of a number he comes up with. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, that is a question 

that is based on . . . I don't know what, but total debt is total 

debt.  It doesn't matter . . . oh, anything else matters if you got a 

debt of $3.5 billion, you have to pay debt at $3.5 billion.  If you 

have debt of $15 billion, Mr. Chairman, you have to pay a debt 

of $15 billion.  I mean there is nothing unusual or difficult to 

understand there unless you're the member from Estevan. 

 

But I want to show something to the member from Estevan 

which maybe he might be interested in.  And it's this, that in 

1982, when the total debt of the province was $3.5 billion, the 

net assets of the province were $4.426 billion -- net assets.  In 

1992, when we have a debt of $15 billion total, we don't have 

net assets.  We now have minus net assets of five billion, five 

hundred and nine billion, million, thousand dollars.  That's the 

comparison to make, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Not only that they increased the debt of the province, they 

destroyed the net equity or the assets of the province.  So now 

it's at a minus instead of a positive.  Now that was 

management, Mr. Chairman, but it's not the kind of 

management that the people of Saskatchewan wanted or 

deserved. 

 

But unfortunately it brings us to the situation where we now 

have a government which has to deal with it.  And I can tell 

you, Mr. Chairman, I can tell the people of Saskatchewan and 

tell the members of this House, we're going to manage it.  That 

is a mandate of this government.  That was the first and 

foremost platform commitment we made to the people of 

Saskatchewan.  I can tell the member from Estevan, we're 

going to live up to it because our concerns are longer than 

those of our own personal needs.  Our concerns are about the 

needs of our children and their children and their families. 

 

And if only the members in the opposition would begin to 

share that concern and begin to get responsible in this House 

and get on with the business of this House, get on with the 

interim supply so we can start to pay the bills that the 

government has to pay, so we can provide the money to school 

boards and municipalities.  Clearly the only purpose of what 

the members are doing is to hold up this House for some reason 

or other.  I don't know whether it's vindictiveness or whether 

the member from Estevan is still bitter about losing the election 

campaign although I suspect there is a lot of that there. 

 

I can tell the member from Estevan, please, for your own 

well-being, think about that.  It's not worth it.  The electorate of 

the province is never wrong.  It's a democracy.  They pick and 

they choose.  And in 1964 or '62, '64, there was an election.  

And the government 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1883 

changed, and the electorate made the choice.  In 1971 the 

government changed, and the people made that choice.  In 

1982 the government changed.  I was one of those who was 

defeated.  And I accepted it -- I hope and I think -- graciously 

because the voters spoke.  And in 1991 the voters did so again.  

They spoke.  It is their right to speak.  They have the right and 

the power of the ballot.  Accept that, member from Estevan. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Chairman, I say to the member for Estevan: 

after nine months -- I think it's been nine months -- it is time to 

get over the hurt and the bitterness.  And it's time to accept the 

will of the electorate and get on with doing a responsible job 

whether you're in opposition or in government because that's 

what the people elected us to do.  They didn't elect us to waste 

the time and to waste their money in this legislature with 

endless filibustering on every item. 

 

Why have we not seen a consideration of many Estimates in 

this House, Mr. Chairman?  Because the members of the 

opposition will not deal with the Estimates.  They will not deal 

with the Estimates.  They've dealt with two of them, the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, and they've 

dealt with the Public Service Commission.  They started 

Justice, they started Rural Affairs, and they started Education, 

but they continue to filibuster them instead of asking questions 

for information, and delaying this House.  Now, Mr. Chairman, 

surely the time has come -- and I think the people of 

Saskatchewan are demanding it -- the time has come for all 

members of this legislature to get on with the business of this 

legislature, which is the business of the people. 

 

The members of the New Democratic Party, the government 

side, are ready and have been ready, and we've introduced . . . I 

don't know the number of Bills, but many Bills.  I suspect it 

will be 80-some, over 80 Bills.  We've provided a budget; 

we've provided a throne speech.  And most of that has been on 

the order paper for weeks and in fact much of it for months.  So 

there is no reason for the members of the opposition to say they 

haven't had time to study or prepare.  They've had all kinds of 

time, if they would put their energies into it instead of going 

golfing while they ring the bells. 

 

Remember -- the House will remember and the people of 

Saskatchewan will remember because they saw it reported in 

the press.  One of the days that the members of the opposition 

were ringing the bells, the press had to go to the golf course in 

Estevan to interview the Leader of the Opposition, who 

obviously collected his pay -- collected his pay while he went 

golfing and caused the bells to ring.  Now, Mr. Chairman, 

surely that is not a responsible way to operate as an elected 

member of this Assembly -- not responsible. 

 

Now I simply say to the member from Estevan, stop thinking 

about yourself.  Let's all of us start thinking about the interests 

of the people of Saskatchewan.  I invite you to do that.  I can 

assure you -- I can assure the member -- that if the member 

from Estevan and all of the members from the opposition 

would seriously get to the work of the House, they would gain 

a respect in the public of Saskatchewan, much of which they 

don't have now.  I simply leave that with them to consider, and 

I want to do 

it in the most positive way.  Think about the people of this 

province more, and think about yourselves less. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

NOTICE OF MOTION FOR CLOSURE 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice, pursuant 

to rule 34, that at the next sitting of the Assembly, immediately 

before orders of the day is called for resuming consideration in 

Committee of Finance of the resolution for interim supply, I 

will move that consideration of the said resolution be not 

further postponed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2045) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 29 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order in the House, please.  The first 

item before the Committee of the Whole is item No. 2, Bill No. 

29, An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act. 

 

As this is the beginning of the Committee of the Whole, I will 

ask the Minister of Finance to introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have 

already introduced to the members the deputy minister, John 

Wright, on my right.  That always doesn't sound right.  And 

behind him is Mr. Murray Schafer, director of the education 

health tax, revenue division, Department of Finance -- no, 

behind me, sorry -- and Doug Lambert, director of revenue 

programs and legislation branch, revenue division, Department 

of Finance.  Those are the officials who are with us here this 

evening. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

would just want to ask you a question that you couldn't answer 

in the last Estimates that we were just in, but I'm sure you're 

prepared to do it now. 

 

You campaigned obviously on no PST (provincial sales tax), 

and so you took it off a number of items.  At the same time, 

now you're increasing the sales tax about 15 per cent, from 7 to 

8, on many other items.  Could you provide the House on the 

number of items that you increased the tax on in the province 

of Saskatchewan by raising the sales tax?  And could you 

compare that to the number of items you took it off of when 

you reduced and did not harmonize the PST? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I am pleased 

to inform the House that I already have provided this to the 

opposition when we were in committee once before.  The 

member from Thunder Creek has that information, and 

therefore the member from Estevan has 



1884 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

access to it.  I think it's counter-productive to continue to ask 

for information which has already been given. 

 

But if it is so desired by the member opposite, once again we 

will . . . In fact the member opposite, I recall very vividly, 

stood up in this House and read from the information which I 

gave him, which I gave to the member from Thunder Creek, 

and read from the information as he questioned myself in 

consideration of the Bill.  So for him now to stand up, Mr. 

Chairman, and ask for the question, is a strange lapse of 

memory, if it is not trying once again to waste the time of the 

House. 

 

But putting that aside, I will provide for the member opposite 

that information in written form so that he can have it, as I 

think is quite appropriate.  I don't have it with me right now, 

but I'll undertake to provide it once again to the member from 

Estevan directly. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the minister is 

mistaken and misinterpreted what I asked for.  When you, Mr. 

Minister -- I'll change the question -- when you changed the 

sales tax and you increased the PST, the provincial sales tax, 

from 7 per cent to 8 per cent -- that is 14 or 15 per cent increase 

-- how many items did that increase apply to, in the thousands?  

Give me that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, let's make 

something very clear.  The provincial sales tax, the education 

and health tax, remains the same as it was prior to the 

provincial GST (goods and services tax) which the former 

member introduced.  The only thing that has been done away 

with is the provincial GST, the expanded form of the E&H tax, 

which the former Conservative government had introduced. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, all of the E&H tax items that were there 

before that still exist and the new tax applies on them in the 

normal way. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, you have yourself a political 

problem because you raised the sales tax from 7 to 8 per cent, 

which is about 15 per cent increase, on thousands and 

thousands and thousands of items that everybody buys.  I am 

asking you -- because this is what this Bill is about -- how 

many items did you raise the tax approximately 15 per cent?  

You must have some idea of how many thousands of items that 

are taxed in the provincial sales tax.  Because you raised it 

about 15 per cent on thousands and thousands of items after 

campaigning on the fact that you were going to reduce taxes. 

 

Now you've got that number.  And if you don't, give me the 

closest estimate of how many items the provincial sales tax 

applies to in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, that's not a question 

you can . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order.  There seem to be a large number 

of members who would like to answer the question, but -- from 

both sides of the House -- and the privilege of that . . . Order.  

It is from both sides of the House.  And it is only the minister 

who has the privilege of responding to the question.  I'll ask 

you to allow the 

Minister of Finance to answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, it's impossible to 

answer that question without an awful lot of work because . . . 

The member from Estevan very well knows -- I assume he 

knows; he was the premier for so long -- that the way the tax 

system works is that the tax talks about items which are exempt 

from the provincial E&H tax.  It doesn't talk about items which 

are listed as items to be taxed.  So you can't answer that 

question that way.  And that's all I can say on that. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to say something else.  The 

member talks about the 1 per cent increase in the E&H tax on 

the base of items which are taxed.  But he forgets to mention, at 

the same time, that when he introduced the provincial GST he 

put on a hundred per cent tax increase on everything, on 

everything that was not already covered by the E&H tax, 

including services.  So that if at any time, after January 1, a 

senior citizen in this province hired a carpenter to do some 

improvements into their home so that they continue living in 

their home, they would have had to pay a provincial GST. 

 

That's what's gone.  We made that commitment in the election, 

Mr. Chairman.  We made it quite honestly, quite 

straightforwardly, and we eliminated it as soon as we took 

office.  I don't apologize for that.  In fact, I'm rather proud of 

that because it was the right thing to do. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I want that 

number.  And your people can get it.  If they can't get it tonight 

then they can get me an estimate pretty quickly of how many 

thousands or tens of thousands of items sales tax applies to in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  Because you raised the tax, Mr. 

Minister, on thousands and thousands of items by 15 per cent.  

That's what you did.  You raised the tax on thousands and 

thousands of items across the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And on the other hand you said we'll take it off of a handful of 

items.  Because you said, well we won't have it on meals, we 

won't have it on clothes under $300, we won't have it on certain 

book supplies.  But what we'll really do, but we won't tell the 

public, is we'll put a 15 per cent increase on everything else in 

the province -- thousands and tens of thousands of items. 

 

Now is that true, Mr. Minister, that you actually, despite the 

fact that you promised tax reductions, increased the sales tax by 

15 per cent on thousands and thousands of items in the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well I will want to read, Mr. 

Chairman, the exact provision in the Bill.  The Bill says in 

section 8(1), lists the classes of, or section 8(1) -- this is not the 

Bill, this is the description - 

_ lists the classes of property which are exempt from tax.  The 

purposes of . . . and we have an amendment in the Bill to repeal 

the exemption for tobacco products.  So it works the other way.  

It works on the exemption. 

 

Now the member talks about a tax increase.  Well let me 

address that question as well.  His provincial GST, which at 

one time he rejected -- if he wants, I'll read the quote, though -- 

and then because of pressure by the Prime 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1885 

Minister in Ottawa, for something he owed him, he decided to 

change his mind and he brought it in. 

 

But that, Mr. Chairman, that provincial GST that the member 

from Estevan introduced, fully implemented, would have 

caused the Saskatchewan taxpayer to pay $440 million.  And I 

don't think the member from Estevan will disagree.  The 

consumer, the consumer would have had to pay $440 million.  

Under this 1 per cent increase to the E&H tax there's an 

increase of $65.1 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, that's quite a difference on what the 

consumer is saddled with -- $440 million under the provincial 

GST, $65 million under the 1 per cent increase in the 

provincial E&H (education and health) tax. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, you can't get off by telling half 

the story.  You know that we only had it partially implemented, 

and it raised a very small amount of money compared to what 

you're talking about. 

 

Fully implemented, net it's over $200 million to the province of 

Saskatchewan, and you decided not to do that.  And 

Saskatchewan then becomes sales tax free for all businesses 

and farmers.  All businesses and farmers in the province of 

Saskatchewan are totally exempt from taxes.  And farmers and 

businesses are consumers, so the whole logic is they don't pay 

it twice.  They pay it as consumers, but they don't pay it as 

people who are going to produce economic activity. 

 

But what you've done, but what you've done is you've replaced 

that by charging senior citizens and people on low income and 

single parents a 15 per cent increase on thousands and 

thousands of items.  I want the minister to tell me how many 

items he raised the sales tax in when he went from 7 to 8.  Give 

me an estimate of how many items he raised. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well it's impossible to say that, Mr. 

Chairman.  I'm not going to get into Estimates because there is 

no such list.  The only list that exists . . . and the member 

knows that, and I've got the education and health tax in my 

hand.  And I'm going to get a page to come forward in a 

moment and get the photocopy of the section so the member 

has it.  The only way it dealt with is that it deals with those 

items which are exempt.  And then everything that is not 

exempt is subject to the education and health tax. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I said, how many thousands of items. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm not going to . . . I mean the 

difference between the former premier and this Minister of 

Finance is that that's the way the member, the former premier 

put together his budgets.  He said: well take a guess; let's take a 

guess. 

 

Well we're not going to take a guess.  We're going to work on 

information that is reliable, and as best we can we will prepare 

a budget that way.  So I'm not going to make a guess on the 

number of items because there is no such list.  New items come 

on the market every day.  You cannot possibly keep that kind 

of a list.  All you can do in law to apply this kind of a tax is 

provide the exemptions. 

And I'm going to ask the page to photocopy page 16, page 17, 

page 18.  And I'll provide it to the member opposite, and that'll 

be a full response to his question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you've just acknowledged 

my point.  Everything in Saskatchewan has had a tax increase 

as a result of you, except for a few exemptions.  Thousands and 

tens of thousands of products across Saskatchewan have had a 

15 per cent tax increase with a handful of exemptions, and 

you're proud of that. 

 

And senior citizens are paying it, and people on low income are 

paying it.  Single parents are paying it. Farmers who are going 

broke are paying it and you've just wholesale, raised taxes on 

thousands and thousands of items and you think that's a 

politically popular and good thing to do compared to taking off 

taxes on coffee and hamburgers and the PST. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who lost the election? 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- And your colleague here says who lost the 

election?  What you campaigned on is the following, and I 

quote the Star-Phoenix:  Romanow says he would cut, not 

increase taxes.  September 21, the Star-Phoenix: the party has 

also promised to abolish the provincial flat tax. The PST comes 

off October 21 -- October 8, and this is an NDP candidate.  

And during the debate, vote for Mr. NDP Leader and you get 

tax reduction and the PST is gone. 

 

Did you tell them that on all the thousands and thousands and 

thousands of items --  everything else --  you were going to 

increase the taxes?  No, no, no, no.  And the hon. member sits 

in there and he says I'm angry. 

 

No, the people are frustrated because you didn't tell them the 

truth.  You raised it on everything in Saskatchewan and you 

have a handful of exemptions -- just a handful, and it's on 

everything else.  You said, I'll tell you what we do, we can fool 

the people.  We'll promise to take the PST off which is on the 

new stuff, on meals and hamburgers, clothes under $300 and 

then what we'll do is we'll put it on everything else. 

 

And that's what you're coming to this House with.  You 

wouldn't have got elected doing that if you'd promised to do 

that.  That's why I'm asking you.  You took it off a handful of 

things and lost $200 million to balance your budget and you 

put it on thousands and thousands of other items and you end 

up with a $500 million deficit. 

 

And he says, what a joke.  Why didn't you tell the people about 

your little joke, your little story last October?  I'm asking you, 

is it true that you've raised taxes on literally thousands and 

thousands and thousands of items in the province of 

Saskatchewan?  And that's what you want to do with this Bill, 

go from 7 to 8 per cent, which is a 15 per cent increase.  Is it 

true, Mr. Minister, that you're going to raise taxes on literally 

thousands and thousands of items in the province of 

Saskatchewan?  Yes or no. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the reason that 



1886 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

there are tax increases in this budget -- and obviously tax 

increases are never popular, there's no denying that -- the 

reason there are tax increases in this budget, Mr. Chairman, is 

because the people of Saskatchewan have to pay for the debt 

which the member from Estevan created when he was premier.  

That's why the tax increases are there. 

 

And the people of Saskatchewan, although they don't like tax 

increases -- I can say this without any hesitation -- nobody likes 

tax increases, Mr. Chairman, but the people of Saskatchewan 

respect the commitment and the courage of this government to 

deal with that debt which the member from Estevan created.  

And they know that this is necessary. 

 

I want to tell the member from Estevan what the election 

platform of the New Democratic Party was.  He's got this copy.  

I'm sure he's read it.  I'm sure he's read it with some care 

because he talks about what was said about the provincial GST.  

"First Things First -- Common Sense Financial Management"  

Now wouldn't that be refreshing?  And it is. 

 

 Open the books.  A public, independent audit of the 

province's financial affairs to cut government waste and 

mismanagement.  (Done, Mr. Chairman.) 

 

 A comprehensive review of all PC privatizations and 

business deals, to determine if they are in the public interest.  

(All of them are under way, Mr. Chairman.) 

 

 A balanced budget in our first term of office, and a 15-year 

plan to eliminate the accumulated Devine Deficit. 

 

All of that has started, Mr. Chairman, with this budget.  What 

did we say?  And this is the election platform:  "New 

Directions, New Priorities, Jobs, Fair Taxes, and Wealth 

Creation".  What was said about the provincial GST so that it's 

for the record very clear?  There was a commitment made that 

the expanded 7 per cent PST will be repealed.  In other words, 

and to quote it to be more correct, "We will repeal this unfair 

tax." 

 

That was the extent of the promise, Mr. Chairman.  That 

promise, we kept.  That promise was kept.  The member should 

refer to the card, which is the platform, which was distributed 

to every household, including the household of the member 

from Estevan, which laid out the platform of the party. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Look, Mr. Minister, in the public debate that 

most people watched on television, the Leader of the NDP 

Party said, the PST is not going to be around after October 21 

if we're in power.  And did he say anything except tax cuts? 

 

And I quote the Leader-Post: Romanow is promising a 

government that will live within its means, spend no more than 

the current budget Estimates of 4.5 billion.  No new taxes will 

be imposed in Saskatchewan.  That's on television.  That's in 

debates.  I say the people of the province are fed up with taxes 

and we're going to change 

that -- this is Romanow in March of 1990. 

 

Now what we've got . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I'm 

reading verbatim from the Leader-Post . . . Star-Phoenix . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well I am so.  Quote . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . We can dig up newspapers for you if you want 

to go back and look at.  But the debate, and I'll read verbatim of 

this.  This is verbatim, and this is in the debate, which is in 

public record: the PST is not going to be around after October 

21 if we're in power.  That's live television and everybody saw 

it. 

 

And the NDP leader promised no tax increases and to reduce 

the PST.  And you're here tonight asking for a 15 per cent raise 

on thousands and thousands and thousands of items.  So you 

broke your promise and you got elected and you've been 

ducking and running ever since. 

 

You want now to renege on farmers.  You said we will have 

more money for farmers, cost of production for farmers, a 

better GRIP, more protection, cut taxes.  And the member from 

Quill Lakes says, call an election.  Well wouldn't we love to 

have an election.  The public would say, let's do.  Half of the 

members opposite wouldn't be here and you know it. 

 

The Star-Phoenix, September 21, 1991, quote: Romanow says 

he would cut, not increase taxes, end of quote.  Now, Mr. 

Finance Minister, your leader told the people to vote for him 

because he was going to cut taxes.  Fair enough.  You said, on 

top of a $265 million deficit that we forecast you said, we'll not 

only do that, we'll give away 200 million net and we'll cut taxes 

some more.  And now you're in this House and you have to 

raise taxes.  You didn't harmonize, so you're out a couple of 

hundred million dollars.  And you've raised the surtax, you've 

raised fees, you've raised the deductible from 125 to 375.  

You've cut off senior citizens.  You've reneged.  You didn't tell 

the truth in October and now it's coming back to haunt you. 

 

And I'm asking you tonight, how many thousands or tens of 

thousands of items have you raised taxes on and you're afraid 

to admit it.  But we'll dig up the number, and before we're 

finished here tonight or the next week we'll know that you have 

raised taxes on thousands and thousands of items in this 

province when you reduced taxes in a handful.  And you stood 

up and you said, but look at the exemptions.  He's proud of the 

exemptions, can you imagine this.  He's oh, but there's these 

exemptions. 

 

And he didn't read all the others and everything else in the 

province that you've stuck the poor with not to mention 

utilities.  You've got $400 million coming in from net profit 

and retained earnings from the three big utilities and you've 

raised the rates.  And now you're raising sales tax and you're 

raising the surtax.  And I'm just asking you so it'll be on the 

record, won't you acknowledge that you're raising taxes on 

literally thousands of items in the province of Saskatchewan 

when in fact you promised to cut taxes eight months ago?  Will 

you acknowledge that there's thousands of items that are going 

to be subject to this tax increase you're asking for tonight? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to talk 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1887 

about broken promises, as the member from the opposite did.  

I've talked about the commitment of the New Democratic Party 

in the last election to sound financial management.  Everything 

in this first budget speaks to sound financial management.  It 

speaks to the future of our children.  It speaks to the future of 

our families.  We've kept those promises and we intend to 

continue to deliver on those promises. 

 

But let me bring to the attention of this Assembly and the 

people of Saskatchewan some other promises.  Here's Bob 

Andrew, the former minister of Finance, the first minister of 

Finance under the member who just spoke, quote: we believe 

that all governments must work in concert to reduce budget 

deficits.  Failure to accomplish this will force harsh financial 

penalities on our children.  It is inevitable that mounting 

deficits will result in unwanted reductions in government 

services and tax increases -- March 21, 1984 budget speech of 

the former Conservative government.  Every budget after that 

until 1991, there were mounting deficits that were brought 

about by the former government -- broken promises and bad 

management. 

 

Member from Rosthern, Mr. Chairman, member from 

Rosthern, I quote from the Star-Phoenix, June 24, 1987: the 

alternative is just to let the deficit grow. And that would not 

take courage, it would just put your head in the sand and say I 

don't have the money and I have a deficit now but I will just 

continue to borrow and it won't matter.  It's too bad that the 

member from Estevan and the member from Rosthern didn't 

listen to their own advice.  That's a commitment they made; 

they broke the promise.  Every year since, after 1987 when that 

comment was made, mounting deficits that were created by the 

former government. 

 

What did the member from Estevan say, Mr. Chairman?  What 

did the member from Estevan say?  Well Moose Jaw This 

Week, August 25, 1988, here's what he said, and I want the 

House to listen to this carefully, he said, I quote: Saskatchewan 

is on the right track to reaching a balanced budget, he said.  

Next year without further cuts, Premier Grant Devine said 

Wednesday. 

 

He was going to balance the budget in 1989.  That's a promise 

he made.  Guess what?  1990 there was a huge deficit.  In 1991 

there was a deficit of $960 million -- speaking of broken 

promises; a betrayal of the trust of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Then he said: deficits are just a deferred tax that must be paid 

by future generations.  Well, Mr. Chairman, here we are, here 

we are.  All of those deficits which he accumulated because of 

his bad management and his determination to support the Prime 

Minister, a Conservative Prime Minister in Ottawa, rather than 

the people of Canada, have now caused the need to have taxes 

increased in order to pay for those deficits. 

 

You can't live on the credit card without eventually having to 

pay it back.  People of Saskatchewan know that the time has 

come to have pay it back.  None of us like it, but it's either we 

deal with it now or we totally jeopardize the future of our 

children. 

Now what's the approach by the members from the opposition, 

the Conservative opposition?  Are they dealing with this 

problem?  Do they show some humility and are prepared to 

accept this and say, yes we have to deal with it?  No.  They 

continue to filibuster in this legislature, make the kind of 

irrelevant speeches that the member opposite has just made, 

trying to delay the legislature for no good reason except just to 

delay. 

 

Well let me remind the member what the former government 

said about that kind of a delay.  In 1989, July 25, quote from 

the Qu'Appelle Times, Mr. Gary Lane, a former senior 

member of that administration said the following: the estimated 

cost to the taxpayers was 30,000 to $40,000 per day to keep the 

legislature idle and put the business of the people of 

Saskatchewan on hold.  He went on to say: the business of the 

people of this province cannot continue to be ignored because 

of the antics of the radical members of the opposition. 

 

Well, well, well, what's changed?  Why does the members 

opposite not follow their own advice?  Why do they continue to 

break the promises as they did in all of the quotes which I have 

given you today, Mr. Chairman?  I'll tell you why.  Because for 

all of the years that the Conservative government was in power, 

they did not believe in government, and they don't now.  They 

don't believe in this institution of the legislature, and they don't 

believe it now. 

 

They believe in something else.  They believe in the greed of 

certain people who are close to the Conservative Party and 

support them.  That's what they believe in.  Mr. Chairman, 

that's wrong.  That serves not the public interest.  That serves 

the interest of a very few people who in the 1980s became 

wealthy because of the special privileges which they were 

granted by an administration who didn't believe in government 

for the public good.  They just believed in government for the 

private good of some selected individuals who were close to 

the member from Arm River, close to the member from 

Estevan, close to the member from Thunder Creek, close to the 

member from Rosthern. 

 

(2115) 

 

The newspapers are full.  The newspapers are full of stories of 

money wasted.  They're full of stories of cabinet ministers 

living high on the hog; $19,000 of free booze, liquor supplied 

by the Liquor Board to cabinet ministers' offices.  I ask the 

member from Arm River: how much of it did you get?  I ask 

the member from Estevan: how much of that did you get? 

 

Not a word.  They don't like to admit to it.  Now the member 

from Estevan, the former premier, went further.  Many people 

who were paid by various departments actually worked for the 

premier, but he hid their employment by having them stationed 

and paid in Crown corporations, in various departments, 

wasting taxpayers' money.  You know, Mr. Chairman, those 

people gained in the 1980s because they were part of the 

privileged few.  They were some of the privileged few who got 

wealthy at the expense of the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 

 

Mr. Guy Montpetit got a lot.  He got a lot because he was 



1888 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

able to say to the premier and to the now senator from 

Souris-Cannington:  just load my briefcase; buy my outdated 

computers which will not work, and boy have I got a deal for 

you.  He was one of the privileged few. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, the time has come to change all that.  The 

time has come to change all that, and we're going to change all 

that.  We're going to govern in the interests of the people, in the 

interests of the people today, and in the interests of the people 

of the future because there is more to governing than thinking 

about your own self-interest today. 

 

We have an obligation to think about our children and their 

children and their future.  And I know some members opposite 

believe and agree with what I am saying.  It's too bad that the 

member from Estevan will not agree that that is the correct way 

to govern. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- So, Mr. Minister, what we're at here tonight is 

your tax increase Bill.  And we're just pointing out, and I know 

you don't like it that much, that you promised to cut taxes, and 

now you're increasing them.  And you're not just increasing 

them on meals; you're increasing them on thousands and 

thousands of items.  And you didn't campaign on that.  You 

didn't tell the truth, and it's coming back to haunt you. 

 

So that you have got a serious credibility problem because here 

is some of the quotes from the debate where the announcer 

says:  that that was right after the NDP leader, Roy Romanow, 

said he would scrap the provincial sales tax if he formed the 

next government.  And it goes on to say:  here's the Leader of 

the NDP; we have always got to take a look at fair taxation; 

that means doing away with the question of the PST. 

 

And tonight you're raising the provincial sales tax on thousands 

of items when you took it off a handful.  And you won't even 

acknowledge that you have done this flip, that you've increased 

the taxes on all kinds of items that were there.  And you 

campaigned that you would help farmers, and you say that is 

there any issue here that is relevant. 

 

The first for this afternoon . . . this afternoon and tonight we've 

been talking about the crisis in agriculture and whether you had 

any sort of support for farmers.  You said, we've got all kinds 

of time for farmers.  We'll give you increased help.  And what 

are you doing for farmers?  You've cut their budget by 50 or 

$60 million.  You won't come up with money in the Crop 

Insurance.  And then you turn around and tax them 15 per cent 

increase on the thousands and tens of thousands of items, and 

they're in a farm crisis. 

 

And you expect to walk in here with a Bill, after not telling the 

truth to the public, and say, well we just need the money.  And 

by the way -- so that all the people know that are watching 

television -- on top of all this, this Minister of Finance has a 

$517 million deficit.  On top of this. 

 

And a combination of things that he is doing tonight -- 

and they don't like to hear that across there, Mr. Chairman.  

They speak; the member from Quill Lakes can hardly stand 

this.  Do you hear them talking?  Well we'll have to remind 

them again.  They have campaigned on lower taxes.  They 

campaigned on helping seniors; then they cut the heritage 

program.  They campaigned on helping people in health care 

and they raised all the deductible.  They campaigned on more 

health care facilities and they're closing nursing homes and 

hospitals.  They campaigned on helping farmers and they're 

raising taxes, cutting their programs, ripping up rural roads, cut 

the FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment program), took away the 

support for gasoline.  And he's in here tonight and he's got 

thousands and thousands and thousands of items that he's 

raising the taxes again and he's saying, oh but I have to do it. 

 

And then on top of it he said, well all my government was 

involved with was just friends, just friends of the party.  For 

Heaven's sakes, Mr. Minister, I think you know it was a good 

idea that we built the Co-op upgrader here in Regina with all 

kinds of friends of Conservatives that happened to belong to 

the co-op movement.  That was fair enough. 

 

Build a new agricultural college at the University of 

Saskatchewan with our friends the ag grads, university faculty.  

Was all that bad?  A second upgrader so we could process 

Saskatchewan's heavy crude and create economic activity and 

have that opportunity to make our own gasoline.  Make our 

own fertilizer.  And that's a good project -- profitable, 

according to the Gass Commission.  We're going to make 15 or 

20 per cent on the money on that. 

 

Build a new paper mill.  Thousands of people work across the 

province -- that's good.  And these people that work in industry 

apparently are just our friends.  A Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

for low income people, particularly women, and they just 

happen to be Conservative friends. 

 

A 13 to $15 million heritage program for the native and Indian 

aboriginal community so they could be shareholders in our 

resources, just with our friends in the native community. 

 

Our program to help seniors and students and people on 

welfare, people that have low income, and farmers and rural 

people -- and you say, we just dealt with our friends.  Well for 

Heaven's sakes. 

 

And you, Mr. Minister, and you mention, well we're not going 

to do this thing, like GigaText that cost almost $5 million.  By 

not harmonizing you leave $5 million on the table every year, 

built in, locked right in.  You know and the officials know 

when you say $5 million, if you put the two systems together 

and have one government collect it and distribute the benefits, 

that's 5 million a year. 

 

And you say, nope, we're not going to do that.  We're going to 

raise taxes on thousands of other items, because we 

campaigned that we would reduce the PST.  And as soon as we 

get elected, we'll go and increase it. 

 

So when you talk about well we only helped our friends, we 

changed Crop Insurance with the salvage program; 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1889 

we helped low income people.  The Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan was for seniors and for women and for pensioners and for 

people who are single parents and students.  Eighty per cent of 

them were women.  And we provided that. 

 

And you stand up here and say, I have to raise . . . The NDP 

have to raise the tax because we didn't care about farmers.  We 

had drought after drought.  We had 18 per cent interest rates.  

We had 22 per cent interest rates.  What did you do?  Not a 

thing.  We cared. 

 

And when we went to help them, you were in opposition and 

you said, but you got to give them more.  If you'd only elect an 

NDPer, we'd give you more help, more protection, more jobs.  

We'd get more money from Ottawa.  We'd lower your taxes.  

We'd balance the budget. 

 

What have we got?  We got more people on welfare.  We got 

longer lines for food banks.  We got higher taxes.  We got 

people leaving the province.  You've reneged on all kinds of 

projects.  And tonight you're in here saying we got to raise 

taxes some more. 

 

Well the public is asking, well what in the world did you 

campaign on my boys?  Why did you do that?  You told us 

you'd help us and reduce taxes and balance the budget, and do 

all of those things. 

 

So we're just asking the question: how many thousands of 

items are you going to raise the tax on?  And you're afraid to 

tell us.  How many thousands?  You won't tell us.  Well I'll tell 

the public.  They've taken it off a handful of items, a handful, 

and then they've raised it on everything else that you buy. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, that's going to raise you something like $65 

million.  Tonight you're asking for this House and this 

Legislative Assembly to let you go do that.  Well I want to tell 

you, Mr. Minister, before we let you go and renege on your 

campaign promises, we want you to at least break down that 

sales tax.  Can you tell us the categories of that sales tax that 

are the most significant?  You say it's going to raise $65 

million.  Could you break it down and tell us what categories 

are going to raise the most money?  What parts of industry, 

what parts of various sectors in the economy, are you going to 

get this $65 million, because you've put it on everything? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, as soon as the 

member from Morse settles down and listens I'll be able to give 

him the answer. 

 

Mr. Chairman, some of the items that the member asks about 

are retail sales.  We anticipate the . . . This is the total revenues 

from the E&H tax, not the increase but the total revenues.  

Vehicles and supplies, 85.1 million -- these are the projections 

and the Estimates.  Household furnishings and home 

entertainment equipment, 29.2 million is what the estimate is; 

household supplies, 21 million; personal care supplies and 

equipment, 15.8; recreation equipment, 16.5; tobacco products, 

22.6.  There's miscellaneous, non-retail sales, capital 

equipment, 85.2 million; repairs to capital equipment, 24.1 

million; construction materials, 125.3 million; and 

then there are some smaller items. 

 

That's generally the kind of categories that are there, nothing 

new.  That's what the categories have always been there under 

an education and health tax.  What the expanded education and 

health tax, which was a provincial GST, would have done, is 

added everything except prescription drugs and groceries.  If 

you built a house you would have had to pay a provincial GST.  

If you repaired your home as a senior citizen you would have 

had to pay a provincial GST.  If you went and did some other 

kind of work on a service, you would have had to pay GST. 

 

If you went to a restaurant to eat, even though it may be part of 

your job, you would have had to pay a GST.  If you wanted to 

buy books for your children to go to school, you would have 

had to pay the GST.  Mr. Chairman, that's been eliminated.  

That was a commitment of this party before we were elected.  

We delivered to that commitment and I don't think that 

anybody can question that at all. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, would you send over that item 

you just read, when you broke it down, and the millions per 

category?  Could you do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We'll get it prepared for you and I'll 

send it over. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well I noticed, Mr. Minister, and I think you 

make my point quite nicely, that you have raised the taxes on 

all the automobiles.  We didn't do that, you did.  On household 

furniture, you raised all the items on household furniture.  And 

the hon. member says the used-car tax.  You've raised it on not 

only used cars, but all the new cars.  You've raised it on all 

cars, all vehicles. 

 

Mr. Minister, so the average person in Saskatchewan knows 

tonight that you have raised all the taxes on all vehicles -- 

trucks and cars, you've raised them 15 per cent.  Household 

furniture, is that pretty necessary?  Household appliances, 

household furniture, on everything you buy for your household, 

you've raised it 15 per cent.  Isn't that nice?   And if you look at 

capital equipment, and this industry, this province runs on 

capital equipment.  We're in agriculture, we're in mining, we're 

in processing, we're in oil and gas.  On all those supplies you've 

raised it 15 per cent.  Hey, the hon. member says, look it 

doesn't matter; it doesn't matter. 

 

If you would have looked in the mirror when you were 

campaigning and told the truth, you wouldn't be sitting there, 

and you know it.  If you would have said all the vehicles in the 

province of Saskatchewan are going to go up by 15 per cent, do 

you think they'd have voted for you?  Because we can go 

through item by item by item, and you can take five years to go 

through all this stuff. 

 

Imagine the campaign on television.  The Leader of the NDP 

says, I'm going to reduce the PST, but I'm going to raise it 15 

per cent on all cars.  How does that go over?  And he said, in 

fact that won't be enough.  I'm going to raise it 15 per cent on 

all your household supplies.  Everything you buy for a home, 

I'm going to raise it 15 per cent.  How would that be in a 

debate?  And all the capital 



1890 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

equipment in forestry and mining and manufacturing, I'm going 

to raise all that 15 per cent.  You get no deductible; you just 

have to pay.  And that's what we're up against here.  You're 

raising the sales tax 15 per cent on everything people have to 

buy, and you're telling me a few exemptions over here are 

going to make you fine. 

 

(2130) 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I want you to send us that list so that we 

can go out and tell the people when they go into stores and 

when they buy their vehicles and they buy their capital 

equipment and their repairs . . . Imagine you've raised it 15 per 

cent even on repairs.  So you're into manufacturing, creating 

economic activity.  You're into retail.  And you've got a 

category, repairs for capital goods; it's up 15 per cent.  Do you 

know what the rate of inflation is?  Virtually zero, and you're 

raising taxes 15 per cent on somebody that's in business. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, you can't slip this one by.  The public is 

going to know that you raised taxes on everything in the 

province, and they're going to remember it.  And they're going 

to get a chance to watch on television that every time they go 

out and buy things, they'll say, now the NDP said they were 

going to reduce the PST but oh, oh they increased it.  They 

increased it.  And we're going to just go through the categories, 

because now you're in a situation, you're in a situation where 

everybody that buys a truck or a car, as a result of the new 

NDP Finance minister, his costs went up 15 per cent. 

 

You buy a fridge, a stove, a table, a chairs, dishes -- up 15 per 

cent . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you just said 

automobiles and vehicles are $85 million.  How do you get $85 

million if you don't raise it on automobiles? 

 

Capital equipment.  What's capital equipment?  Would you 

want to take the items in capital equipment and itemize what 

you've raised the taxes on here this evening?  Because you 

know under the harmonized system that the capital people got 

it all back.  They only paid it once. 

 

Everybody's a consumer but you didn't have to pay it twice if 

you're a farmer or a business or a retailer or manufacturer.  You 

want them to pay twice. And it makes no economic sense.  You 

just said, well politically we'll make them pay twice.  You'll 

pay once as a consumer and then if you need it for business, 

we'll make you pay twice. 

 

So there's a disincentive to create economic activity.  Because 

like the editorial -- I think might have been Eisler -- today or 

yesterday said, these people don't know about creating 

economic activity and wealth. You want people to pay the tax 

twice in Saskatchewan. 

 

You could have raised this. Not even raised it -- they just put 

them together and they got it back.. Imagine, all the 7 per cent 

federally and all the 7 per cent provincially that you would pay 

on automobiles, household goods, capital equipment -- you get 

that all back under a harmonization system. 

 

Well you know it.  And the minister says, boloney.  He still 

doesn't understand it. He still doesn't understand it.  You would 

get all of that back as a farmer and business, and 

any economic activity is sales tax free in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And you have packed that up so that you can just raise the 

taxes on vehicles -- 15 per cent, no rebate.  Up 15 per cent.  

Capital equipment is up 15 per cent -- no rebate. 

 

So now the people in Saskatchewan not only have to live with 

your untruth but they got to pay more taxes.  They pay more 

taxes than under the other system, the old system, and they 

have to live with the situation where they voted for one thing 

and got something else. 

 

Would the minister care to itemize some of the capital 

equipment that you have to pay 15 per cent on this increase?  

Could he give us . . . as well as the general categories, could he 

go through some of the significant household goods that you'd 

pay 15 per cent on, some of the additional capital equipment.  

Some of the . . . maybe even the vehicles that you pay 15 per 

cent on and then we can get an idea of where he's raising this 

tax. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I've already 

provided that information to the member opposite.  I've given 

them a photocopy of the legislation which provides all of those 

items which are exempted. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Not exempted -- what you taxed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Those items which are not 

exempted are taxed.  Now he can make up his own list.  I don't 

have a list.  If you buy drapes, you're going to pay tax.  That's 

the way it works. 

 

But obviously what . . . I don't know what the point he's trying 

to make here except take up a lot of time of the House.  But I'll 

tell you this, that under the E&H tax, senior citizens don't have 

to pay the provincial GST.  Under their provincial GST senior 

citizens would have had to pay it.  Waitresses working at 

minimum wage in a restaurants would have had to pay the 

provincial GST.  Oh, but the Potash Corporation, which could 

pay $760,000 salaries to president Chuck Childers, it would 

have got a big break.  Several tens of millions of dollars or 

maybe several millions of dollars, I don't want to exaggerate.  

They would have got a break. 

 

That, Mr. Chairman, as that tax was developed and proposed 

was not a fair tax.  It was not a progressive tax.  We have done 

away with it.  We said we would do away with it.  We're going 

to stand by that and we're going to be prepared to be judged by 

the people of Saskatchewan on that move just as the people of 

Saskatchewan judged you on your move.  That's the way it 

should be.  And okay, the member says fair enough.  Fair 

enough -- I am prepared, when the election comes, to be judged 

by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, all we're trying to point out here 

is that, under the system you promised to reduce, a 

small-business man or woman and a farmer -- and I'm sure 

you'd support them -- would be sales tax free in their 

operations.  Will you acknowledge that, Mr. Minister?  A 

farmer or small-business person would be sales tax free.  You'd 

get all your GST back and all your PST under harmonization.  

Would the minister acknowledge that. 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1891 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, Mr. Chairman, as consumers 

they would pay. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, you said, as consumers would 

they pay.  As producers and manufacturers and retailers, small 

business and farmers would get all their GST back and all the 

PST returned.  Is that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, they would have, at the 

expense of the low income, minimum-wage waitress, at the 

expense of children who would have to pay for their school 

book taxes.  Because the total tax load would have been moved 

onto the consumer. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Is it also true . . . Mr. Chairman, I got him to 

acknowledge that the farmer would be sales tax free and small 

business would be sales tax free.  Is it also true that there was 

an exemption for low income families?  For low income 

families, they got money in the bank, money in their pockets so 

that they could purchase items which would cover all kinds of . 

. . much more than a few hamburgers, or indeed a few books.  

Would he acknowledge that that was the case, that there was a 

low income exemption or a top-up? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, low income families 

with no children, senior citizens living on minimum pensions, 

would have got no rebate at all. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Would the minister acknowledge that if you 

had children, and you're low income children, low income 

family with children, you got a top-up and you got money in 

your pocket.  On top of that, if you're a farmer and a small 

business, you were sales tax free.  You got it all back.  Now 

would you acknowledge those two points? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm glad the member 

asked that question, and he asked that question the last time we 

were in committee.  That's why I'm beginning to question the 

repetition here.  In fact he asked it two times before that in 

committee, and the answers have been provided.  Clearly the 

only thing that happening here is that the member from Estevan 

is trying to kill more time in the legislature rather than getting 

on with the work because he's already got the answer which I 

gave him the other day, and I will give it to him again today. 

 

If you take a two-income, $40,000 earner with the surtax -- 

which is another Bill which we're going to be considering in 

the House -- and the E&H tax, the tax increase is $170.  Under 

the provincial GST which the member opposite introduced, 

even after the tax credit, the tax increase would have been 

$650.  That's what the difference is, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I hope that the hon. member will acknowledge 

this evening, as he provides us with all the information that 

we're asking for, that the farmer is sales tax free.  The business 

is sales tax free.  There is a low income tax credit for families 

and that the tax increase on the harmonization mechanism 

would save the government 5 million a year -- just in 

administration alone.  Nobody acknowledged that.  And on top 

of that, 

the increase was only on a handful of items, and tonight he's 

increasing it on everything in the entire province. 

 

That combination of things, Mr. Minister, is extremely 

important for the public to recognize exactly what they're up 

against as they face this 15 per cent increase on household 

furniture, on vehicles.  Well when you go from 7 to 8, what's 

the percentage increase? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- One per cent. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Oh 1 per cent, yes?  What is the per cent of 7, 

how much?  If it went from 1 to 2, is that a 1 per cent or a 50 

per cent increase.  The minister can't even count tonight, Mr. 

Chairman.  He doesn't know a 15 per cent increase.  He doesn't 

know a 15 per cent increase.  And if you go from 5 to 10 per 

cent, would that be a 50 per cent increase or a 100 per cent 

increase if you've doubled it.  You double the tax, Mr. Minister.  

If you double the tax from 2 to 4 per cent, don't you think that's 

a significant increase if you've doubled it? 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, what I want you to acknowledge tonight is 

that there's a 15 per cent increase on everything in the province 

including vehicles, household goods, items that are there for 

farmers in capital expenditures, and they could have been sales 

tax free under harmonization, and tonight you're asking us to 

say, all right give you the credit, give you the approval to raise 

taxes 15 per cent on everything in the province.  And, Mr. 

Minister, would you acknowledge that this is a hefty and a 

healthy tax increase for low income people and farmers and 

people like single parents and public like seniors and low 

incomers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I truly hope that 

everybody in Saskatchewan is watching cable TV today who 

has it because they would clearly get an indication of the kind 

of weird mathematics that the member from Estevan continues 

to use which he used in the past.  He says there's a tax increase 

on goods or some item that he might buy or somebody might 

buy of 15 per cent.  Well let me illustrate.  I would do this in 

my class-room of grade 7 and 8 when I was a teacher and I'll 

do it for the member opposite. 

 

Mr. Chairman, if the member from Estevan buys an item worth 

$100, at a 7 per cent education and health tax he would have 

paid $7 of education and health tax, 7 per cent.  There's a 1 per 

cent increase from 7 cents to 8 cents.  Well, Mr. Chairman, that 

increase would be $1.  Now, Mr. Chairman, that increase 

would be $1.  That's 1 per cent, not 15 per cent as the member 

from Estevan is trying to state in this House. 

 

Is it any wonder, is it any wonder with that kind of capability to 

count and multiply and add, that he took a province from a 

surplus of $139 million and brought us to a deficit of $960 

million in 1991, a deficit of $1.2 billion in 1986, and an 

accumulated debt of $15 billion?  I rest my case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, the people, when they buy 

everything in the province of Saskatchewan, go into retail 



1892 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

stores, are going to make up their minds, year after year, as 

you've raised their taxes.  And you promised them not to. 

 

So and there is a 15 per cent increase.  And you know it.  It 

went up to 8 per cent.  And that increase is 15 per cent.  And 

you know it and I know it and they know it.  And you 

campaigned on the opposite.  So while you took the PST off a 

handful of items, you put it on everything else.  And that's the 

point here tonight. 

 

And you promised to send the list over of the major categories.  

So you're going to be picking up $85 million just on cars.  And 

you're going to be picking up -- I forget the number, and you're 

going to send it over here -- tens of millions of dollars on 

household goods.  Imagine.  Tens of millions of dollars for low 

income people who have to go buy furniture and blankets and 

tables and chairs.  You've raised the taxes 15 per cent. 

 

And on top of that you're charging them more if they're a senior 

because you've cut out their seniors' heritage program.  You're 

charging them more for health care.  You're charging them 

more for gasoline.  And if they live in the country it's even 

worse than that. 

 

And all these low income people from a so-called socialist 

government are getting taxed more and more and more and 

more.  And the reason that you're doing that is, you say well we 

promised to reduce the PST.  Well you took it off on a handful 

of things and you put it on everything else.  Whether you're in 

northern Saskatchewan, southern Saskatchewan, whether 

you're poor or whether you're not, you pay all of these 

increased taxes.  And I'm just making the point again, is it . . . 

you've number one, promised not to do that.  Number two, it's a 

sillier tax than if you put the two together, save 5 million a 

year, and let all of the creative part of the economy be sales tax 

free. 

 

And the business people want it, the co-ops want it, the 

chamber of commerce agreed.  Everybody I talked to said: 

that's a really good idea, to create that economic activity.  And 

they said: well if the NDP can do it without it and also cut 

taxes and balance the budget, I'll vote for the NDP. 

 

Well you're back here tonight and you can't do it.  You have to 

raise all these taxes and you've given up a very productive 

system, that whether you're a fisherman, a farmer, pulp and 

paper, no matter what you're into, mining, you could have been 

sales tax free in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So we just make this point, Mr. Minister, that tonight when 

you're asking for this 15 per cent increase in sales taxes on 

everything, that it's a heavy hand of taxes on all Saskatchewan 

people, whether you're low income or not.  And you can 

acknowledge tonight, Mr. Minister, that even the poor in 

Saskatchewan have to pay 15 per cent more for their vehicles, 

their home supplies, their furniture, the tables and chairs, their 

blankets.  All of those things, Mr. Minister, are increased as a 

result of this Bill. 

 

(2145) 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, let me try to 

get the member understanding on another issue.  First of all, I 

want to simply ask this one question.  Well I want to ask this 

question:  if the member from Estevan is so convinced that 

what they were doing is right, the question is, why is he and 

nine other members seated on that side of the House as a rump 

opposition rather than on this side of the House as a 

government? 

 

You know why, Mr. Chairman?  Because the people of 

Saskatchewan said they wanted a change.  People of 

Saskatchewan said they wanted some integrity.  People of 

Saskatchewan said they wanted accountability, so they changed 

the government. 

 

Now I want to say something to the member on straight fact, 

and I want him to listen carefully.  And I don't want to 

exaggerate or pretend.  There is a tax increase in this budget.  

There is no denying that.  It's necessary to get the debt and the 

deficit under control. 

 

And because of the measures we took in reducing expenditures, 

and because of the measures we took on the revenue side, we 

have reduced the deficit by $800 million in one year.  We 

reduced the deficit by $800 million in one year, from 1.3 

billion, which it would have been, to $517 million, which it is 

going to be. 

 

What happened in the case of a family with two children, two 

income-earners, making $40,000 a year between them?  Well 

I'll tell you, Mr. Chairman. Believe it or not, they actually will 

have a tax decrease because of the way the tax system is set up.  

Because under the former administration, the provincial GST, 

they would have had to pay an increased tax of $650 on 

everything that they had to be.  They would have had an 

increase of $650 in their tax load. 

 

Under the tax regime which we're proposing, including the 

surtax and the E&H tax, their tax increase is only $170.  

Therefore if you compare the provincial GST, which was their 

taxes, with the proposal taxes that we have, they are getting a 

saving of $400, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, if you believe that and you think 

it's true, why didn't you tell the truth and campaign on it?  

Whey didn't you just come out and say, we're going to reduce 

the PST, and we're going to increase all these other taxes, and 

you're going to be better off?  Do you know what? You don't 

believe it now, and you didn't believe it then.  You said, why 

are you sitting there and we're here.  You told people that you 

were going to cut taxes and balance the budget and have more 

help for farmers and low income people.  And you promised 

that.  And people said, well by gosh that sounds pretty good.  

I'll vote for it.  And then what happened?  You got elected, and 

you've done the opposite.  You've done the opposite. 

 

And you said, well the people must have been right.  The 

people believed that you were telling the truth, and now we 

find out that that wasn't the case.  You didn't campaign on what 

you've just said.  You didn't tell them that you were going to 

raise taxes on everything else.  You didn't tell them that you're 

going to cut off the farmers, raise the deductible. 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1893 

Second point, Mr. Minister.  What we did and was honest with 

the people . . . and you're right; they don't like tax increases.  

We said harmonization is a fair tax recommended by even your 

people, saves us $5 million, and it's necessary there because of 

the economy to balance the budget. 

 

And we campaigned on that.  And people said, well I don't like 

it; maybe there's a better way.  And you said, yes we can cut 

that.  So we had the courage to go to the people and say we'll 

bring in a budget with harmonization.  We'll campaign on 

harmonization which is a tax increase, and it's the most 

effective way. 

 

And people had to look at that and then they said, no these 

people promised.  The NDP promised no taxes, tax cut, and 

they'll balance the budget anyway.  And guess what they got.  

They voted for you, and you gave them the opposite: more tax 

increases than they've ever seen in the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

That's why we're debating this tonight because you didn't tell 

them the facts.  So if you had to do this all over again, if you 

went to the people today with what you said tonight, do you 

know what would happen?  The people would reject you and 

say I don't buy that because I don't want the sales tax up on my 

appliances, and I don't want the sales tax up on all these things. 

 

And they're telling you that in the country.  They're telling you 

that in the cities.  And you're plummeting like this.  So what 

we're pointing out, Mr. Minister, is you've got yourself a 

problem, an economic problem, a $500 million deficit. 

 

And you've got yourself a political credibility problem because 

you didn't tell the truth, and we're catching you on it. 

 

We're reminding people that you're in here asking for 15 per 

cent tax increase on everything we got in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and you campaigned on the opposite.  So I 

campaigned on tax increases to balance the budget, and you 

said no, we don't need them, and you're back here saying you 

now have to flip-flop. 

 

So we're just drawing to your attention, Mr. Minister, that on 

all of these items you have raised taxes, and you have raised 

them 15 per cent plus a surtax, and you've cut the support for 

seniors, and farmers, and people all across the province at the 

same time. 

 

You've cut the Agriculture budget by a very large per cent, 50 

or $60 million, and on top of that you're raising taxes on 

farmers, and you're foreclosing on farmers, and you're 

foreclosing on people who are losing their homes, and senior 

citizens who had a heritage program, you're cutting it off.  And 

then you're going to those people and say, if you shop for 

blankets we're going to raise the tax.  And you call yourself 

what, a socialist, a protector of the low income? 

 

You've got them lined up at food banks, you've got more and 

more people on welfare, the low-incomers are hurting, and 

you're raising their taxes.  And then if they go to pay for their 

telephone bill, their SGI insurance, or their 

power bill, that's up to 30 per cent increase.  Thirty per cent 

increase.  And you're sitting there saying you would have won 

the election running on that? 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, we are just going to make sure the 

public knows, if they're watching television tonight, you've 

raised utilities 30 per cent, sales tax on everything 15 per cent, 

cut their programs, closed their hospitals, cut their roads up, 

cancelled the pension plan, took away the FeedGAP, wrecked 

GRIP, and at the same time changed the entire nature of 

Saskatchewan and cancelled the AECL (Atomic Energy of 

Canada Ltd.) agreement so we can't have economic 

development, cancelled other projects, backed out of saving 5 

million a year, and you're in here for more tax increases. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, it's a beautiful opportunity for the 

opposition to point out to the public the hypocritical nature of 

your entire campaign.  So we're going to keep doing it.  And 

the minister says keep doing it, and keep doing it.  Well, I'll 

remind the minister the people expect some degree of honesty 

in a campaign.  And when you said that you were going to cut 

taxes, they believed you.  And now, Mr. Minister, they're going 

to hold you accountable because every time they go to shop, to 

buy something and those taxes are up, they're going to say, well 

now I remember what the NDP did. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you tell this Assembly tonight what 

percentage of this increase that you're asking for from all the 

public in Saskatchewan, you're prepared to contribute to the 

farmers of Saskatchewan and the crises they're in today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the budget is clear.  

There's a budget for the Department of Agriculture which is in 

the budget. The former premier has it.  There's money allocated 

for the GRIP program.  There's money allocated for the crop 

insurance program.  The budget is there. 

 

This Bill is not dealing with those items, but it is in the budget.  

All the member has to do is pick it up and read it. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, would you give us any idea 

tonight, after this huge tax increase, where you might be 

allocating the majority of that money.  And if you go back and 

say that there's no crisis in agriculture, where it might be going, 

so that in fact we know where your tax increases are being 

allocated to, and then we can go back into how you drummed 

up this deficit number or we can go back into those figures, so 

that in fact the public can have some idea of what you're up to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- All the revenues that the 

government raises go into the Consolidated Fund and then 

they're allocated by department according to their needs.  The 

budget speech outlines very specifically where that money is 

allocated. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to ask the 

member how much the tax is going up on the manufacturing of 

mobile homes and the payment of homes that are movable.  

How much of that tax is going up? 



1894 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Going from three and a half to four 

per cent. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I have a letter here from a 

gentleman not in my constituency.  Although he lives in my 

constituency, his manufacturing plant is in Swift Current and 

he manufactures the metal for mobile homes in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  I think we only have one manufacturer in the 

province -- maybe not even that, I'm not quite sure.  But what 

he does, Mr. Chairman, is that he provides employment for a 

number of people in the city of Swift Current. 

 

What he wrote me a letter about, and he wrote the Minister of 

Labour a letter, is that he said if the labour laws change to the 

extent that they are, coupled with the increase in his economic 

impact on the manufacturing in his small business . . . He sells 

his metal into Ontario, British Columbia. That comes back and 

the people of Saskatchewan have to pay that increased tax.  

Where are they going to buy the metal to supply their mobile 

homes from?  That's the question he asked me.  On the bottom 

he has this very simple statement in PS (postscript): Havre, 

Montana is calling me.  And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly what 

we're talking about.  He becomes non-competitive in 

complying with the taxes that he has to pay in dealing with 

manufacturing.  He can't get any of those taxes back. 

 

Under harmonization all of the inputs that he would have in his 

manufacturing he would be able to get back.  And now you're 

going to take and say:  no sir, you're not; you're going to 

increase the costs in labour; you're going to increase the costs 

in manufacturing; you're going to increase his costs in doing 

business, in his insurance, and his telephone, and his power. 

 

And how is he going to stay competitive?  He can just pack up 

his business and leave and move into Medicine Hat; and he has 

got one better -- free trade.  Free trade with the province of 

Saskatchewan.  He will put that into manufacturers in 

Saskatchewan cheaper out of United States than he will out of 

any part of Canada.  So why is he choosing Havre? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Is that what you're promoting? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'm not promoting it.  You're promoting it, 

Mr. Minister.  And the member from Humboldt is promoting it.  

And that's what's wrong with the whole program and the whole 

process.  That, Mr. Minister, is exactly what we're talking 

about. 

 

Well I want to point out, why is there a problem in Impact 

Packaging?  If you'd have given them an opportunity to deal 

with some costs back to them in their manufacturing costs, they 

would be able to start doing business.  If you'd have done it 

with Saska Pasta, they would do the same thing.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, is a fact. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is why we argue that harmonization in 

manufacturing would have provided jobs.  You, Mr. Minister, 

are responsible and accountable for 18,000 jobs lost in the 

province of Saskatchewan in one year.  Last year date 

_to-date it's 18,000 jobs less, Mr. Minister, 2,000 in agriculture 

and 6,000 in young people.  That, Mr. Minister, is a fact.  And 

that is why we are 

complaining about the fiscal responsibility that you have in 

presentation in your budget to this Assembly.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, is exactly why we have a problem with your 

government. 

 

And as the people move out, Mr. Minister, you will have less 

and less tax-paying people in the province of Saskatchewan 

each day as we go.  And I want to say one other thing.  Each 

day as you make the people of Saskatchewan pay more taxes, 

as they leave, your payments from the federal government are 

reduced on a per capita basis every day they leave.  And that, 

Mr. Minister, is a fact. 

 

And that's why we say your economic plan in the province of 

Saskatchewan is absolute garbage.  And that's why we are 

arguing the case for harmonization in dealing with the concept.  

And that, Mr. Minister, is why the member from Churchill 

Downs said over and over again, that he was in favour of 

harmonization.  In fact he stood right over here, speaking on 

the fact of harmonization being a benefit to all of . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  Order.  Order.  

Order. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:02 p.m. 

 

 


