




















































Hansard: August 17, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2555 

 August 17, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 9 a.m. 
 

Prayers 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Bill No 84 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 84 -- An Act to 

amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, we're prepared at this time to allow 

Bill No. 84 to go to committee.  There are a number of 

questions that we will have . . . be able to raise.  We feel that 

we can address them just as well, if not more conveniently, in 

committee.  So at this time I move they allow the Bill to 

proceed. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 85 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 85 -- An Act 

respecting Fire Prevention and Certain Consequential 

Amendments resulting from the enactment of this Act be 

now read a second time. 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, this Act as well, Mr. 

Speaker, we feel that the questions that we would raise or have 

for the Assembly can be dealt with just as effectively in 

committee as well.  And, Mr. Speaker, we allow this Bill to 

move forward to committee. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

(0915) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 53 -- An Act to amend The Farm Financial 

Stability Act 
 

Clause 1 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I 

understand and the minister has indicated a number of 

questions were posed in second reading regarding the Act that's 

before us.  And he indicated that he has some responses he'd 

like to give.  And that might be appropriate in allowing us to 

consider further questions.  But as well, I wonder if the 

minister could just take a moment as well to elaborate on the 

purpose and the full intent of the Act at the same time. 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  The Farm Financial 

Stability Amendment Act is an Act that has to do with the 

clarification of the existing rules around breeder and feeder 

loan guarantees.  As the members opposite 

may be aware, there have been some difficulties arise as a 

result of the application of that program.  It's generally been a 

very positive program.  So some clarifications to the Act and 

procedures around the financial record-keeping and the holding 

to account of people relative to those loan guarantees is 

clarified within the Act to strengthen and maintain a program 

that has very well served the industry. 

 

That's a general statement and I can . . . we can come to 

specifics later. 

 

I want to raise with you now the questions that were asked in 

second reading and the answers to those questions.  And if 

there are further questions following on those, I will try to 

answer them.  Or if they are of a technical nature, I'll wait until 

our officials get here and we'll answer them later at another 

day. 

 

The first question that was asked of us in second reading was: 

will the amendment to section 53 require more branding of 

cattle purchased by the association than was previously 

required? 

 

The answer is no.  The amendment to this section only clarifies 

that the association brand must be on the animal purchased 

before payment is made.  Only one of the association's brand is 

required on the animal.  A brand is necessary to ensure that the 

security on the loan provided through the cattle purchased 

remains intact, that animals purchased can be moved to the 

member's location before being branded with the association 

brand. 

 

That was one of the early questions that was asked.  Do you 

want to respond with further clarification on those, one at a 

time?  And I will record the questions if I can't answer them. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  One of the things 

that I think is required of the Act, and it deals with section 53, 

and it concerns not necessarily the branding but the timing of 

the branding.  It deals with: a producer association shall cause 

any commodity purchased by it that is required by the 

regulation to be marked, to be permanently marked for the 

identification in the prescribed manner. 

 

And what it suggests is that before the association makes 

payment for the livestock, they have to be branded.  And I've 

had representation made to me that that means that they'll 

likely have to brand them in the stockyards before they take 

them home and that's not convenient for the majority of 

producers.  If you have cattle at major stockyards that's one 

thing, but if you buy some cattle at a place where they don't 

have any facilities for branding, if you go purchase them from 

a neighbour or some other person, you don't have those 

facilities. 

 

You don't have the time to make the payment . . . or to brand 

them and then go make the payment and then go haul them 

back home.  And so that concern has been raised.  And because 

I'm a member of an association I also understand a little bit 

about the process.  I think I know why you want to get them 

branded -- it leaves less risk involved in transfer of ownership.  

But I think that there 



2556 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

needs to be some flexibility in this area, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, while I do not have 

clarified before me the process by which that flexibility will be 

put there, it's my understanding from the description of the 

procedures that it says that animals purchased can be moved to 

the member's location before being branded with the 

association's brand.  I don't know what the technical detail of 

how that will be worked around the requirement to pay before 

branding . . . or that the brand must be on before payment is 

made, but the clarification that I have from the department in 

terms of their procedures is that in fact members would be able 

to move the cattle to their home location before the brand is 

placed.  And I will ask for the technical detail of how that is 

made possible when the officials arrive. 

 

Mr. Chairman, another question that was asked by the members 

opposite in the second-reading debate was: will the amendment 

to subsection 52(3) result in all loans and advances taken out 

by the association on behalf of all members having to be repaid 

before any equity can be released to a member whose loan has 

been paid down?  And the answer is no. 

 

The amendment is intended to clarify that returns from the sale 

of cattle purchased on behalf of a member must be used to 

repay the loan or advance for the purchase of the cattle before 

any equity can be released to that member.  Once that 

member's loan is fully repaid, along with interest and other loan 

charges, then the lender can release the balance of returns from 

the sale of cattle purchased on behalf of that member.  This 

release of equity to a member can be made even though other 

loans and advances made on behalf of other members are still 

outstanding. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I guess, Mr. Minister, this gets into a technical 

part where the difference between a feeder association and a 

breeder association exists, in that you still have a loan 

outstanding as it relates to the breeder association because you 

pay it one-fifth at a time.  So I guess what I need to know is 

whether that loan outstanding is the loan that is dealt with as a 

payable loan or whether it's the whole loan that is in demand at 

that time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, we'll more clearly define 

the relationship between loans, between the two types of 

associations, when one of the other officials gets here.  We'll 

take note of that question and answer it as soon as he arrives. 

 

I should at this point introduce the deputy minister of 

Agriculture, Mr. Stuart Kramer, for the purpose of officials. 

 

Yes, I'd like also to introduce Ross Johnson, the acting director, 

on my left here. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the third question that was asked said: will the 

amendment to clause 59(2)(b) result in each member's 

assurance fund deposit being held for a longer period of time 

than was required previously? 

 

The response is no.  The amendment to this section only 

clarifies that the assurance fund cannot be used to pay for any 

debts that the association may have with the lender except 

those debts resulting from the purchase of cattle.  A member's 

assurance fund deposit, or balance remaining in the event of a 

claim, will continue to be refundable 90 days after the 

member's loan is repaid. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the fourth question asked in the second-reading 

debate was: why are calves born to cows under the breeder 

program required to be branded even if they are less than two 

weeks old? 

 

And the response is that calves born to cows are required to be 

branded with the association brand before being moved to 

pasture or before reaching three months of age, whichever is 

earlier. 

 

The calves are the source of income for making the annual 

repayment for the loan for the cow purchase, consequently 

branding is required to ensure that this security on the loan is 

identifiable.  To avoid having to brand a calf that is less than 

two weeks old, a member could delay moving those cattle to 

pasture until the calf is older. 

 

I believe, Mr. Chairman, those were the questions that were 

asked in the second-reading debate. 

 

They may be in a position to answer the subsequent question of 

the member opposite on the relationship between the loans on 

feeder associations and breeder associations at this point. 

 

Yes, Mr. Chairman, with respect to the question that was asked 

earlier by the member from Morse with respect to the 

relationship of outstanding loans and the impact on a farmer or 

a producer with respect to having loans in two associations -- a 

feeder association and a breeder association -- as long as the 

member is current in their commitments to one or the other, 

they're fine. 

 

So that the fact that they may have an outstanding loan in a 

breeder association, as long as they are within the terms of the 

original agreement, having that loan will not restrict any of 

their activity in joining another feeder association or any of 

their involvements in the one they're in. 

 

So the only time that there becomes a difficulty with respect to 

financing for one kind of association is if in fact a member is in 

default or is in some personal operating difficulty with respect 

to their involvement in another association. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- In section 52(3) the association has to provide 

all of the assets or the value of the sale of the commodity to the 

association, and the interest on all of the outstanding liabilities 

against that are taken off. 

 

What I guess I need to know is, if you're in the breeder 

association, is that inclusive, that it restricts the flow of cash, 

that all of the loan has to be paid off and that the . . . as of this 

year probably, four-fifths remains for next year?  And that's the 

question that I really have on that section. 

 

(0930) 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2557 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, if I've correctly understood 

the question, the benefits from sales will only be applied to the 

extent of that year's commitments, and the rest will be released 

as equity to the owner. 

 

I might now, that the officials are all here, introduce them all so 

that you have them all in perspective.  Again on my immediate 

right, deputy minister Stuart Kramer; to his right, Merv Ross, 

the manager of the livestock incentive programs; behind Merv - 

Hal Cushon, manager of market analysis, economics branch; 

and to his left, Ron Eley, assistant secretary of the agri-food 

council; and behind me, Ross Johnson, acting director of 

administrative services branch. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- In section 50(2)(5) it's: 

 

 "(5) No producer association shall make a payment to a 

vendor for the purchase of a commodity, by the producer 

association from the vendor on behalf of a producer, until a 

producer agreement has been completed by the producer 

association and the producer on whose behalf the commodity 

is being purchased". 

 

The question I have in relation to that is this: when you start 

up, is that the focus that you have before a new individual 

comes into the association, he must have all of the agreements 

from the bank and all of those items completed before any 

purchases of livestock can be made on his behalf? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the purpose of the addition 

there is only to clarify what was already the practice, and to 

make it clear that before payment could be made to a member 

that there would have to be in place an agreement between a 

member and the association to which she or he belonged. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The next question I have -- and I'm not sure 

that I necessarily agree with your explanation and maybe we 

can visit about it a little bit -- is that: 

 

 No producer association shall pay for a commodity that is 

required by the regulations to be marked until the commodity 

is permanently marked for identification in the prescribed 

manner. 

 

I did have . . . what I did do is I sent this Bill to a number . . . 

quite a number of producer associations, and they came back 

with that as a concern because they felt that the marking was 

done in an inconvenient place.  And so could you elaborate a 

little bit more on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the discussion we had 

before is -- I would just again reiterate it -- that the timing of 

branding and location of branding is only a matter relative to 

the payment of the cattle.  It's my understanding from the 

officials that it was never intended that associations should be 

paying for cattle without a brand being in place. 

 

The difficulty is that once payment has been made and the 

procedures are in place, there are not many tools for enforcing 

the placement of the brand and therefore the 

security of the program. 

 

So the vendor does have four or five days to make . . . or the 

purchasers do have four or five days to . . . the association, to 

make the payment to the vendor.  And the release, the authority 

for paying will be made once the brand is seen to be in place, 

and that branding can take place at the site to which the 

member is moving the cattle. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I'm not sure that you'd be able to move 

any cattle out of a livestock Wheat Pool facility without paying 

for them before you move them out.  So then you've got the 

problem that you have to move these cattle to your residence or 

pay the Sask Wheat Pool to have them branded in their 

facilities.  And I'm not sure that that's what the intention should 

be. 

 

And I know that on a licensed dealer there would be some 

flexibility but I'm not sure that you'd get out of a yards -- 

whether it's Sask Wheat Pool or Swift Current livestock or 

Maple Creek livestock -- I'm not sure you'd get that flexibility 

in making the payment.  So I wonder why you would be doing 

that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the question 

the member opposite asks.  Apparently this is a reality that, as 

he describes it, has been one which is already presently one 

which is being worked around without the amendments.  The 

understanding I have is where a breeder or feeder association 

has established a relationship with a vendor, these relationships 

result in the kind of flexibility that would convenience the 

purchasers, the associations. 

 

Where that reputation has not yet been established, then the 

vendor may well require the branding of the livestock so that 

they can have the payment before they leave.  That's a practice 

which I understand has also been taking place before the 

regulation changes, or before the changes here. 

 

The object clearly is to protect the public investment in terms 

of their guarantee of these associations, because as you're 

aware it's been a very effective tool for feeders and breeders, 

and to protect the public interest so that this tool can continue 

to be used.  My understanding is that it is a manageable 

problem and one that has been managed in the past in much the 

same way as it will be managed now after the regulations, or 

after the Act is more specific about its requirements. 

 

I would appreciate comments from the member opposite if 

there are solutions, additional suggestions, about how this 

might work with even greater convenience to all parties. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe that there was 

sufficient flexibility the way it was.  This, in my view, 

seriously impairs the normal practice. 

 

Now I did talk to some people in the feeder associations that 

they do brand in the livestock yards, but the majority of those 

people that do that don't have the facilities at home.  So then 

they pay for that work in those facilities, whereas I would say 

more than 50 per cent of them have those same facilities at 

home.  And why should they buy 



2558 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

that service at someone else's place when they can get it 

legitimized at home?  And that's the reason that I have a 

concern. 

 

I recognize the risk has to be reduced in relation to the 

guarantee.  I don't have a problem with that.  But I'm not sure 

that this inconvenience is going to do anything but irritate at 

least 50 per cent of the people that are using it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to bring to 

the member opposite the discussions that resulted in the 

solutions as presented coming forward.  As the member 

opposite may be aware, there was difficulty with one of the 

feeder associations which had its root in the fact that cattle had 

not been identified and where the lack of careful attention to 

detail with respect to making sure brands were in place before 

payment was made resulted in a substantial risk and cost to the 

public purse. 

 

A committee of the feeder associations has met with 

representatives of the lending institutions and representatives of 

the department.  And these solutions as proposed in the Act are 

the solutions that were jointly proposed by them, recognizing 

that in order to maintain the integrity of the feeder and breeder 

associations that a strict discipline around the administration 

was necessary. 

 

(0945) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I understand that as well, Mr. Minister.  I still 

think that if you adopted a process whereby an individual who 

bought and sold in his own feedlot and through a licensed 

dealer, which it talks about earlier in the Bill, if the licensed 

dealer is a part of the association and he becomes involved in a 

transaction that deals with a feedlot where cattle are moved 

from pen to pen on the basis of ownership, then I think you're 

right with this kind of logic.  And I would get a sense from the 

feeder association that that's what their logic is.  And I think 

that that's what was the problem in relation to the problem that 

you had. 

 

Now let's take those feeder and breeder associations that do 

business in a different fashion -- those that run a single 

operation and have to deal with it on their own.  And they buy 

cattle from a vendor that is not a part of the association or isn't 

even close.  Then they run into a problem in relation to this.  

And that's the part that concerns me in relation to this. 

 

And I would have a serious argument with those feeder 

associations understanding what it is that happens, because I 

know the background of the feeder association group that are a 

part of the associations, and they are the larger feedlot 

operators and not the small, independent individuals who have 

to deal with this on a regular basis. 

 

They already have a standing relationship with a vendor -- Sask 

Wheat Pool or Jameson Gilroy in Moose Jaw or someone in 

Saskatoon -- they have that arrangement already in place.  But 

many producers don't have that and will go there and purchase 

their own cattle and then they have to brand them there and 

then haul them home before they can make the payment, and 

that's not necessarily a typical arrangement. 

So what this does is it deals with those feedlots that are on an 

ongoing, full-capacity cycle, and that I believe is necessary 

under those . . . this rule is.  But under other circumstances, I 

don't believe it is.  And that's the concern that I have. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the dilemma that's arising 

in this discussion, I think, is that the three-party agreement that 

was made under the previous circumstances was still to be so 

that members were to have branded their cattle before payment 

was made.  It was the understanding that that identification be 

there even though it allowed a 10-day period for that to happen, 

which is beyond the time that vendors feel comfortable 

receiving payment or protected. 

 

So even to leave it as it is, I think the understanding would be 

the same as what is more clearly specified now in the Act.  So 

in the accurate administration of what was in the three-party 

agreement, the impact of what's in the Act would still be 

followed. 

 

So I'm wondering if there are suggestions about flexibility that 

could be considered, even at another time, even if we proceed 

as we are here now, in the light of the facts as I understand 

them, that in fact the three-party agreement would have 

suggested that the practice now being put into legislation 

should have been followed. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I'll only raise it as an observation, Mr. 

Minister, that I think you'll get some serious criticism in this 

area.  And I like the program, and I believe in it.  And I don't 

want to see people get irritated by it, to be excluded from 

taking that opportunity.  And that's the point I want to make. 

 

Again I'll say that I think this needs to apply to the feedlot 

operators.  I believe that.  I also believe that it needs to apply to 

those groups who mix cattle within their own operation.  I 

believe that.  But I don't . . . And that's when an individual who 

has partners in a company, or whatever, makes decisions to 

purchase from one individual to another individual or a 

company name.  And that has merit in those circumstances.  

But when you're buying it from a vendor to have it brought into 

your place, I don't believe that that should apply.  And so I will 

make that point. 

 

If the provincial supervisor has some flexibility in determining 

what can happen here, I think the program can work.  And I 

know that he has been flexible on other occasions.  And I think 

that that's what we want to see happen. 

 

But I want to identify that as a concern that has been raised 

with me.  And that's not the concern that's been developed out 

of my own situation.  But it's been . . . Some others have told 

me about that too. 

 

If you want to respond, you may. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, again I appreciate the 

points raised by the member opposite.  It's clearly all of our 

collective objectives to have within our programs facilitating 

circumstances that make it easy for people to participate. 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2559 

I want to again say that the circumstances, as described in the 

Act here, have been brought forward by the industry.  And I 

understand what the member opposite has said with respect to 

the group that sits on that committee.  But it is also consistent 

with the present circumstances where theoretically there should 

not be payment processed until a brand is identified.  And the 

practice has sometimes happened that while brands were 

named, the brands were not placed on the livestock which 

created the difficulties that . . . I know the member from Morse 

does not want to plague the program any more than I wanted to 

plague the program. 

 

What I will say is that we will monitor the implementation of 

these Act changes and go back to the industry with them to 

monitor for difficulties.  And I'll ask the department to 

demonstrate sensitivity and flexibility if it does start to create 

problems while we review any difficulties it may cause, and we 

would bring forward future amendments if in fact there are 

difficulties caused by the circumstances as you've raised them.  

And I appreciate the point you made. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- If I could, Mr. Minister, just get you to add 

that you'd deal with the Saskatchewan Stock Growers on the 

breeders' side of this because the functions are considerable 

different than they would be for the feeder associations and the 

feeder association of the province.  And so if you deal with that 

in that respect, I think you'll find out how the cow-calf program 

is working. 

 

I have another question on section 5, that's 50(2.2).  Would you 

give me an explanation of the reason why you want to 

challenge the licensed dealer?  Is this the place to challenge the 

licensed dealer?  Or is the place to challenge the licensed dealer 

in his licence? 

 

(1000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, to respond first to the 

question with respect to the kind of input that's received into 

review, there is some history which the member opposite I 

think is aware of, that in fact with the advent of feeder 

associations before breeder associations, the committee was 

originally struck through the cattle feeders' association without 

any necessary representation from others.  We'll be bringing 

forward a process to assure broader representation both 

regionally and between the two kinds of associations to make 

sure that we have balanced input.  And I appreciate the member 

raising those concerns. 

 

With respect to the use of dealers, the Act requires that licensed 

dealers must be used.  There are circumstances where licensed 

dealers have either been careless in the application of the rules 

or sometimes not been forthright; and sometimes that 

circumstance may happen when they're the only dealer even in 

the area -- sometimes, and often that wouldn't be the case. 

 

This is intended to establish that the use of dealers who have 

not facilitated the ongoing stability of the program could be 

terminated.  In fact it's done in the interests of the program.  

Those with whom we consulted agreed with 

this approach.  And it's certainly no attempt to, any 

broad-brushed sort of way, identify certain dealers who should 

be used.  It's meant to identify dealers who have not served the 

program well in the past. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I agree with that.  I also want to compliment 

the feeder association group and your department.  They had 

meetings all last winter and I attended them, and I think they 

did a good job.  And there was a lot of active discussion, and I 

think it is in the interests of the associations that you do that. 

 

I want to go back to the branding.  And Mr. Ross and I have 

had lots of discussions about this sort of thing.  If you take . . . 

I'll give you an example, and I think Mr. Bailey was at the 

meeting we were at dealing with branding.  If you take the 

program in the breeder association, and only the breeder, you 

can buy 25 . . . $25,000 buys you 25 cows.  Okay, they have 

calves, you brand the calves.  So you got 50 calves . . . or 50 

livestock branded.  You make your payment, those 25 should 

really be . . . the brand should be erased, but you can't erase the 

brand.  Okay, you go to the next year, you've got the 25 cows, 

you got 25 new calves with brands, and you got these 25 that 

you had last year with brands.  And you go with that, and then 

the second year . . . the third year you can spend $50,000, so 

you got 50 cows that you can put in this program.  In four years 

you're going to have 475 branded cattle in this process.  And I 

might be out 25 or so, but give or take, that's a lot. 

 

So you've got the potential across the province to have every 

livestock in a feedlot in every farmer's and rancher's yard 

branded with the shelter when they aren't necessarily the 

animals belonging to the association.  And so what you have . . 

. And that's my point that I make in having the calves branded 

in this kind of a process.  Because the security is in the cows 

not in the calves, although the payment is made in the calves, 

and I agree with you there. 

 

But when you deal with this in its potential -- you take that 

over five years, you'll probably add another 50 calves to that -- 

you could have 425 . . . 525 calves.  In five years that's the 

amount of livestock that are branded with that brand.  So they 

go out into the country and that's the kind of thing that exists.  

Now whose ownership is that?  And that's the kind of thing that 

I think we have to be aware of when we deal with this. 

 

I think that there needs . . . If I was making suggestions, I'd 

suggest to you and to your veterinarian branch to go out and 

take some ADF (agriculture development fund) money and put 

an identification process in place that would be acceptable to 

the people and acceptable to the individuals doing that, and 

make it easier to accommodate the actual identification of the 

animal besides a brand. 

 

Now I don't have anything against branding, but this little . . . 

this animal either before he goes to pasture or three months of 

age has to be branded.  Well they don't all get born on the same 

day on your place nor on mine.  So you've got this process that 

starts in spring and by the time they go to pasture in the middle 

of May they have to be branded.  They could be two days old, 

they could be a day 



2560 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

old by the time this process evolves. 

 

And just speaking in a practical sense, from where I come from 

that little gaffer is going to have five brands on him before he's 

. . . he could be two days old -- two of the ones that identify 

him as my livestock and three that identify the feeder 

association.  And that's the kind of thing that I don't think is 

practical in the sense that it gives, I believe, an opportunity for 

those people who want to get rid of all of it a leg to stand on. 

 

And so I raise it from that perspective, that I don't believe that 

you should be identifying them as calves in that sense.  

Because the ranchers already do that to protect themselves 

from theft, and it significantly reduces theft.  And I think that 

there needs to be another way used to identify them.  And it's 

not necessarily an ear tag because I think that that has a lot of . 

. . there's a lot of error in there because they get torn out and 

hooked on and whatever and they can be lost too. 

 

So I think that there has to be a different way of doing it and I 

would suggest that you do it.  And that's the point that I want to 

make in this discussion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, again I appreciate the 

sensitivity to the process and to the livestock.  As you're aware, 

people have been researching alternate identification schemes 

for livestock for a long time and none have yet adequately 

replaced the brand.  Research has been done into the electronic 

identification, and still not enough security felt around that 

process to use it.  And again the industry in discussion through 

the preparation of this legislation has again favoured the brand 

as the mechanism for identification. 

 

Again it's a question that can be put to the committee as it's 

restructured and as we look at this legislation in the future.  

And I appreciate the points raised. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- One other point I want to make.  I've visited 

with Canada Packers people prior to their change-over and 

dealing with some of the things that they come across.  And 

every hide is worth $2 less for each brand that appears on that 

animal and therefore it has a significant impact as it later goes 

through the system.  If it has five of them in different locations, 

like that's locations of the brand, and if they have three or four 

or five -- and you'll get that -- the hide a lot of times doesn't 

have value. 

 

So I think you need to take a look at it from that perspective as 

well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the question of how 

many calves are needed for security, relative to a loan, is an 

issue that might well be dealt with with lenders with respect to 

individual operators, where if the stock is still on the farm 

some adjustments might be made in that over time.  And I look 

forward to a good and sensitive discussion between the 

industry, as broadly represented by both breeders and feeders, 

and the lending institutions with respect to the required 

security.  And we will pursue that discussion this winter. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 59 -- An Act to amend The Agri-Food Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, this Bill does a number of 

things that I want to ask some questions about.  If the minister 

would agree to go through the different sections, I believe 

down to section 3 -- the bottom of section 3 -- if we can go 

through that up to that point, and then I'd like to have some 

discussion about that section.  And then we'll go to the next 

one. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, just for clarification are 

you asking for a brief overview of the first three sections or just 

to begin at section 3? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- If the chairman would like to he can go 

through and do section 1 and section 2, and then we'll deal with 

section 3. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

(1015) 

 

Clause 3 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, would the minister identify 

what these two sections under section 3 deal with? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, to very simply state the 

purpose of this provision, it is to allow development or 

marketing agencies the power to own shares in companies.  

Presently these agencies, for example the SPI (Saskatchewan 

Pork Producers International) -- used to be the Pork Producers 

Marketing Board -- or any of the other agencies that are 

involved in sales in Saskatchewan, could be full owners of 

facilities under the Act, processing facilities, but they couldn't 

be shareholders. 

 

This creates an opportunity for them to be shareholders where 

others also have an interest in processing facilities so that we 

can best promote the development of new products and markets 

for our products here. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Does that deal with both section 1 and section 

2 of the Bill?  Is that what it includes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, yes.  Essentially it does 

deal with both sections. 

 

I just want to clarify a little bit the circumstances.  What's 

clarified in the second section is that, while these powers are 

granted to marketing and development agencies, they must be 

approved through regulations by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council.  So they can't do it independently. 
 

As the member opposite I think is aware, there had been 

substantial heartache and pain in the Alberta industry 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2561 

with the industry being . . . taking on initiatives that may not 

have been agreed to be in the public interest.  And so this does 

provide a mechanism by which government can participate in 

the planning, before those kinds of events take place, to 

confirm the public interest of those kinds of initiatives. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Do you have an idea of what kind of 

regulations that you're going to have there?  For example, are 

you going to ask for a producer vote if in your opinion the size 

of the venture is significant enough to put perhaps the industry 

at risk? -- as you mentioned, Alberta.  What have you got in 

mind there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the cautions the 

member from Morse raises are real and reasonable ones.  As 

you're aware, the agri-food council does monitor the 

functioning of development of marketing agencies in the 

province.  They have an interest in the stability of the ventures 

and the public interest as well. 

 

I think what we will do is consult with the agri-food council 

with respect to required regulation to make sure that we have 

reasonable checks and balances in the public interest.  Whether 

producer votes in the end become practical or reasonable, the 

right answer may be a question that should be discussed with 

them in advance of a specific case.  Clearly the need to provide 

a measure by which the interests of both the producers and the 

public is dealt with soundly is important, and that we'll be 

asking the agri-food council to work with us in guiding 

regulatory processes from here on. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Section 5 deals with section 7 under the Act.  

And would you give me just an overview.  And then the last 

part of section 6 deals with the producer shares and items 

similar to that.  Would you give me kind of an overview of 

what you're talking about there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could ask for 

clarification in both cases.  In section 5 was it 7(c) or (d) that 

you wanted clarification on, or like subsection 7(c) and (d)?  

And on section 6 was it 12(c) or is there a specific point? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- It's on section 6, dealing with that . . . it asks 

for I believe changes in the share structure or . . . well the 

explanation says that this clause will enable the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council to place terms and conditions upon 

acquiring or handle shares, bonds, debentures, or securities for 

development commissions that are elected by the producers. 

 

And this will give you regulating-making power in handling 

and determining what happens.  And I think that's section 7.1, I 

think. 

 

Under the item in your explanation points, page 5, it says new 

provisions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Right. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And those are the ones I'm referring to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the question the member 

asked has to do with clarification of the terms 

and conditions for what we had been discussing earlier, where 

an agency acquires shares.  This describes the circumstances 

under which that can happen.  It could include limiting the 

amount of ownership or describing the nature of others who 

participate or the processes by which they're acquired. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay.  I have one other . . . or two other 

questions -- one dealing with the percentages.  Why did you go 

from 50 to 60 per cent on the percentages on the vote? 

 

(1030) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the provisions with respect 

to the percentage for approving establishment and amending 

conditions is returning in this legislation to a practice that was 

there before. 

 

The difficulty that arises with the present circumstances is that 

it requires 50 per cent of all producers to participate and be in 

favour of changes in that regard.  And as the member is aware, 

often there are people who participate in a minor way in an 

industry and don't get involved in the voting procedures.  So 

that making decisions in an industry is very difficult. 

 

The option that's been chosen here, consistent with that chosen 

in many other provinces, is to go to 60 per cent of the 

producers who vote as opposed to 50 per cent of all producers, 

believing that those who vote are those who have the . . . a 

serious interest in the future of their industry.  So that's the 

nature of the change and the reason for it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, there was a lot of discussion in 

relation to this 60 per cent versus 50 per cent of producers, or 

60 per cent of those who vote.  And the reason being that 

traditionally very few people have voted in . . . like we could 

use examples of the establishment of the sheep board.  You 

could say, okay, let's take another one.  The canola, when they . 

. . and they're the ones that initiated this discussion, and the 

process that we did in getting it to where it was.  It was the 

canola association that we really went through the hoops in 

establishing how it should be done. 

 

The concern always was raised by those people who don't want 

to be involved and yet get included.  I just want to point out 

that the risk is there.  I've had a letter and I think you've 

probably had a letter from the sheep people saying that if 

everybody isn't going to participate like we said we were going 

to in a check-off, then I'm not going to participate either.  And 

that's the risk that you run when you deal with it on this basis.  

Then you go send the policeman out to check that all up.  And 

that's the difficulty that arises when there aren't sufficient 

enough of these people involved.  And I don't know whether 

you'd ever get the small sheep producer involved in this 

discussion. 

 

So that's a point that I want to raise in relation to this.  I'm not 

sure that you're going to gain this way because people are 

going to get, again, a little irritated by the fact that you're doing 

that. 



2562 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to identify for the 

member opposite that that is a concern, and we've attempted to 

address it in the legislation by saying that . . . by placing in the 

Act, in conjunction with this change, the requirement that the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council would have the power to fix 

minimum numbers of votes required to establish boards and 

amend their plans, so that we hopefully do not allow this to 

happen in a fashion where a small group of producers 

misrepresents the industry through an action as a result of a 

change in the voting requirement.  Clearly there is a need to put 

some protection in there against the point the member raises. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'll raise it just from this one more perspective 

and that is the Milk Control Board, as I understand it, is now 

going to put into place -- and they're not under this Act, but it 

gives me the example to use -- they're going to exclude, in one 

year, cream producers, as of August 1.  That's what I've teen 

told, at least. 

 

And what has been raised with me is these people who have 

these small cream quotas are now going to be pushed out of the 

business when, in a lot of cases, that's their grocery money.  

And it has been for, in some cases -- one instance was brought 

to my attention -- probably for 40 or 50 years.  And in another 

case that I know of, this individual is using that to establish his 

farming. 

 

So what sometimes happens, the big ones push out the little 

ones, and in view of progress and all of those good words, but 

in light of progress on the individual's farm, it doesn't do that.  

So that's why I raise it with a concern that you really have to be 

careful on what the minimum requirements are in relation to 

the volume of people. 

 

I'll give one more example, and that is the broilers.  I think 

there are 16 broilers in the association as it exists today.  And 

that's not a significant number in relation to those people that 

perhaps would be interested in getting involved.  And yet the 

control is there by those 16 individuals.  And they can . . . Well 

in some ways they're jeopardizing an increase in production in 

this province. 

 

Because of the national quota, we have to get our chickens and 

chicken products into Saskatchewan from other places.  And I 

know that there are people that have moved out of my 

constituency, for example, who had chicken wings and couldn't 

get a supply, so they moved to British Columbia.  And there 

they could supply the market.  They had a good market here, 

but they moved out in order to accommodate that. 

 

And that's the kind of thing that I think you have to be very, 

very careful of in dealing with these items.  Because what 

you're doing is you're measuring the control of not only the 

product but also the increase and decrease in expansion and 

compaction of the industry.  And so you have to be very careful 

there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The member from Morse raises legitimate 

concerns.  I've had those concerns expressed to me, I think 

probably from the same individuals in the same letters.  And as 

an industry evolves and changes as a result of changing 

circumstances, we need to be sensitive to everybody's interests. 

With respect to the issue of supply management in Canada, 

there are historic quotas established that may not necessarily be 

fair or related to local consumption or local needs.  One of the 

great dilemmas within the supply-management sectors in 

Canada right now, is the rigidity of the national rules and the 

difficulty finding a process to make reasonable adjustments.  

And in the end, it's often national rules and inflexibility that 

impacts on the producers for whom a small enterprise is very 

important to their establishment and their survival. 

 

So I very much appreciate the concerns you raise.  And 

hopefully with appropriate consultation beyond those with the 

largest interests, we can maintain some sensitivity in our 

policies.  Thank you very much. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 4 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like at this point to 

thank my officials for coming over this morning and providing 

support to this discussion, and appreciate the contribution of 

the members opposite in raising some sensitive areas in both 

pieces of legislation that need to be addressed.  Thank you very 

much. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to thank 

you and your officials and also convey my thanks to Merv Ross 

and the people that were here with him.  Thank you. 

 

Bill No. 30 -- An Act to amend The Corporation Capital 

Tax Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

The Chair: -- Would the Associate Minister of Finance please 

introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  I think 

members opposite will recognize, sitting beside me, the deputy 

minister of Finance, John Wright.  He has spent some time in 

this legislature.  Seated on his right is the assistant deputy 

minister, Len Rog.  We'll commence. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, just a 

few comments, and I'm not sure how many questions we'll be 

actually placing before the minister this morning regarding Bill 

No. 30. 

 

But back on June 4 when the Minister of Finance introduced 

the corporate tax before us, the corporate capital tax, he made a 

number of comments regarding choices that the government 

was forced to make at this time and referred back to previous 

years and some of the choices that may or may not have been 

made by the former government.  And I just want to clarify a 

couple of points. 

 

Firstly, back in '90 and the springs of '90, 1990 and the springs 

of 1991 the government of the day introduced a number of 

changes as well regarding taxation structure 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2563 

and making suggestions to try and overcome the deficit 

problems that the province of Saskatchewan was facing, the 

deficit problems that were being faced by taxpayers and 

certainly by the government. 

 

And back on June 4 of this year the indication was given that 

the former government just spent willingly and really didn't 

attempt to try and address the issues.  And certainly if we 

would take the time to review Hansard we would be aware of 

the fact that indeed attempts were being made. 

 

But the present government, then opposition members -- and 

certainly the member from Regina Churchill Downs -- I think 

will be quite familiar with a number of the speeches and a 

number of the comments that were made by then members 

suggesting that the government was not doing enough to help 

the poor people, helping those who were facing difficult 

situations, where they weren't doing enough to address the need 

for spending in health care and education and continuing to 

support the programs and support the funding that was needed 

to maintain programming. 

 

And the Minister of Finance went through quite a debate back 

on June 4 condemning the former government for not making 

the right choices, indicating that what the choices they were 

making now were appropriate.  And yet when the former 

minister of Finance introduced some restrictive measures, 

introduced some measures of trying to bring forward added 

revenue to address the financial problems the province was 

facing and in fact in some cases took away from the services, 

tried to cut back or put restrictions on so that we could place 

responsibility . . . more responsibility at the feet of taxpayers 

and at the same time raise money, we were criticized at the 

time. 

 

One of the areas that was and continues to receive a fair bit of 

criticism is the harmonization of the provincial sales tax or the 

education and health tax with the federal GST (goods and 

services tax). 

 

(1045) 

 

Now I understand the corporate capital tax that we have before 

us today is increasing the burden on corporations -- if I 

understand that correctly -- going from 2 per cent to 3 per cent.  

Now I think, with all due respect, most people have no problem 

in suggesting or bringing forward the fact that corporations 

should not pay their due portion of the tax. 

 

What I would like to know of the minister is, when we're 

talking of corporations under this tax, what kind of 

corporations?  Is it all businesses or all companies in 

Saskatchewan?  Or is it just . . . Are we dealing with just 

specific corporations?  Which businesses and corporations 

would this tax specifically be addressing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  The Act itself 

affects about a thousand corporations.  It is those corporations 

in Saskatchewan whose paid-up capital exceeds 10 million -- a 

fairly exclusive club. 
 

These amendments only affect . . . One of the amendments 

affects financial institutions.  The other affects resource 

companies.  There would be fewer than 

200 corporations affected by these amendments. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- You're saying fewer than 200 corporations 

affected by the amendments?   And you're saying that it's 

corporations in the neighbourhood of . . . was it $10 

million-plus?  And is that . . . did you call that . . . say capital 

assets that are affected, Mr. Minister? 

 

When we're talking of corporations, what type of revenue or 

what amount of revenue does the government expect to 

generate by the increases?  I notice in one case is an increase 

from 3 to 3.25 per cent, and in another situation it's going from 

2 to 3 per cent.  Maybe you could just mention the total 

revenue and then we can address what the 3 to 3.5 and the 2 to 

3 per cent means, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The total revenue which we 

anticipate these amendments will . . . The total additional 

revenue which these amendments will garner we anticipate 

would be 27.4 million, of which 25.1 million comes from 

resource companies, the balance from the amendment which 

affects financial institutions. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- You talk resource companies and financial 

institutions.  Would the financial institutions be . . . the increase 

that they're facing, is that the 3 to 3.25 per cent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- When we're talking of financial institutions, we're 

talking of the banks and any institution that is providing 

funding or lending of finances to whether it's consumers or 

government or businesses, whatever.  Is that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It applies to banks, trust companies, 

loan companies.  The major exclusion here is it does not apply 

to credit unions. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, why would credit unions be left out 

of this Bill or this clause at this time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There are a couple of . . . two 

explanations.  The exclusion occurred in 1980 actually, and 

remained unchanged since that time.  There are really two 

explanations.  One is that at that time co-operatives were 

treated -- and it's still true to some extent -- co-operatives were 

treated differently under The Income Tax Act than private 

corporations were, and this Bill reflected that distinction. 

 

In addition, they're structured differently.  Most credit unions 

would not have . . . in 1980 few credit unions would have had 

$10 million in paid-up capital.  Rather than include some and 

exclude most, and because they at that time were treated very 

differently under The Income Tax Act, they were excluded 

from this Act. 

 

As I recall the discussion at the time, the banks and financial 

institutions were not happy with this legislation.  I don't recall 

them having been particularly critical of the exclusion of the 

credit unions.  I don't recall them having suggested that was 

somehow discriminatory.  Credit unions have been treated 

differently. 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Talking about credit unions, Mr. Minister, 



2564 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

would there be any credit unions that would, if the Act 

included them, that would fall under the perusal of the Act and 

the $10 million limit, that would be forced to pay under this 

Act? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We don't know with precision.  It's 

not relevant to the legislation.  If you were to ask us to venture 

a guess, we believe there would be Credit Union Central -- 

perhaps three, four others as well.  But that's something of a 

guess. 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Here's another question that a lot of taxpayers 

would have.  And of course whenever we talk about 

corporations, people view large corporations and resource 

companies as organizations or individuals or groups of 

individuals that are deriving a fair bit of revenue from the 

province and certainly should be paying their fair portion of the 

tax. 
 

And no one will argue the fact that we . . . I believe and I 

believe my colleagues believe, we all believe, that people 

should indeed be paying a fair portion or their portion of the 

tax.  And as we indicated last spring regarding the 

harmonization of the provincial E&H (education and health) 

with the sales tax, it would have indeed put an onus on all 

individuals to have a part.  And certainly people with a lot 

lower income, a lot lower needs that they're spending, they 

wouldn't have been paying as much as, say, large 

organizations. 
 

The question I'd like to ask of the minister: we've gone from 3 

per cent to 3.5 per cent.  And I'm not sure what kind of 

response has come from the industry at this time, whether they 

feel that's excessive.  I'm wondering if maybe the corporate tax 

could have been even increased, say, to 4 per cent.  And I'm 

just wondering for your views of what the impression may be 

as far as deriving the appropriate share of revenue for the 

province. 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's a good question.  Your 

question is whether or not we might have gone higher.  That's a 

good question. 
 

We increased it from 3 to 3.25.  The member's stated 3 to 3.5; 

it's actually 3 to 3.25.  We didn't hear a lot of criticism from the 

financial institutions and resource companies.  Perhaps the 

member might suggest that's a reason to suggest we should 

have gone higher.  There were those I suppose in our caucus 

who might have lent some support to your proposition in that 

regard, but we felt these were reasonable in the circumstances. 
 

I could give you the explanation of why we thought the 

increases, the more modest increases, were reasonable, but I 

won't.  Unless you specifically ask it I won't take up the time of 

the Assembly.  We haven't had a lot of criticism of . . . they 

seem to accept the increases.  They may have been expecting 

worse.  The question as to whether or not we might have gone 

higher and still enjoyed relative calm, who knows?  That's a 

difficult question to answer. 
 

Mr. Toth: -- I guess another question that comes forward, Mr. 

Minister, is the corporate capital tax and the structure and the 

amount we have in the province of Saskatchewan, is how does 

this compare with other jurisdictions across the country?  And 

indeed does it now create . . . or is Saskatchewan seen as 

having a playing-field that is not as level to work with or to 

build upon in comparison to other sectors across Canada? 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd ask to have leave to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Chairman, and fellow members of the 

legislature, I'd like to introduce to you and through you to the 

members, a constituent of mine, Mr. Reinie Kirsch and some 

guests from Middle Lake.  Mr. Kirsch operates . . . owns and 

operates a road construction company out of Middle Lake.  

He's in Regina this morning on official business.  I'd ask all the 

members of the legislature to give him a warm welcome.  

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 30 (continued) 

 

Clause 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The response to the hon. member is 

that our tax rate is the highest, both with respect to financial 

institutions and resources, is the highest in Canada.  And that 

suggested some caution to us when we were setting the rates, 

that perhaps they shouldn't go an enormous amount higher. 

 

I should add as a qualification that our base is also narrow.  We 

exclude anyone under 10 million.  Not all jurisdictions do that.  

So while the rate is high, the base is narrow, and it is difficult 

to compare different jurisdictions.  The structures are so 

different. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying, that indeed the corporate 

capital tax structure in this province is higher than other 

jurisdictions, across this province.  Has it to date created a 

problem regarding corporations taking a view of maybe 

looking at elsewhere to provide the business or run their head 

offices or, Mr. Speaker, have you had indication that these 

corporations are looking at other, alternative ways of doing 

business in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's always a consideration, setting 

taxes.  Not only corporations but people as well are relatively 

mobile.  That's always a consideration, and it was here as well. 

 

I think probably a summary of the position the corporations 

took on this is that while they didn't like the increase in taxes, 

and both with respect to the financial institutions and the 

resource companies it comes at a difficult time  

_- commodity prices are low and the banks have their problems 

abroad -- in both cases I think they saw this as their fair share 

of debt reduction and putting the province on a sound financial 

footing. 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2565 

I think it's true corporations prefer to do business in a 

jurisdiction which manages its affairs sensibly and in a 

business-like fashion.  So I think while the taxes went up, they 

approved of what we're doing and genuinely approve and like 

that fiscal regime. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, what effect did the changes in this 

Act have to corporations like Saskferco, Weyerhaeuser, and 

NewGrade?  I think they're three of the major resource sectors 

in this province or, if they aren't, will be.  And I'm just 

wondering, in light of the fact that they would probably be 

three of our major employment resource bases as well, is there 

any major impact in what . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It's been the policy of all 

administrations in Saskatchewan and elsewhere not to discuss 

specific clients.  It would reveal some highly confidential 

information if we were to tell you what the impact was on 

those three companies.  So it's the kind of information which 

governments everywhere do not release at all, much less in a 

public forum such this before a television camera. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, thank you, Mr. Minister, I 

can appreciate that.  Certainly I wasn't looking for a lot of 

in-depth information; just kind of wondering whether these 

corporations were consulted.  You had talked about it and I 

believe you had indicated some kind of consultive or intensive 

process that was taken in conferring with major corporations 

and lending institutions across the province about the Bill, 

about the implications of the Bill and the increase in corporate 

capital tax.  And I trust, Mr. Minister, that that process was 

indeed followed through. 

 

And I'm just wondering if the minister would give his 

assurances that the process was followed and that everyone has 

been informed of the changes appropriately so that they could 

make the proper business and financial changes that they would 

have to make regarding their businesses. 

 

(1100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We did consult.  Within the limits of 

budgetary secrecy, we did consult with the corporations in both 

areas.  They were aware we were planning changes; weren't 

aware of the specific amounts until budget night. 

 

But we did consult both with financial institutions and with the 

resource companies, informed them we were thinking of tax 

increases and got their reaction.  So the consultation process I 

think was relatively sound, within the limits of budgetary 

secrecy as it's now practised in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- The other question I did pose, Mr. Minister, and 

probably the most important one is: did indeed the department 

or the minister inform the corporations of the changes so that 

appropriate business decisions could be made by these 

corporations regarding the Act and the budgetary changes 

taking place? 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes.  Since the budget we've 

certainly taken steps to inform all corporations who are 

affected as to the changes.  I think they're virtually all familiar 

with it now and no doubt I think have probably made the 

appropriate adjustments by August. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 46 -- An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We are, Mr. Chairman, just being 

joined by Kirk McGregor and Nancy Wright.  It will be 

obvious which is which without, I guess, me introducing them. 

 

Clauses 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, would the minister give us an 

explanation of 5 and 5.1. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I have a written explanation here.  I 

will read it, then I think I will send it to the member.  It's 

somewhat technical and it might be of assistance to you if you 

got it. 

 

But I will read it into the record: Section 3 sets out the 

calculation of basic Saskatchewan tax for individuals.  The 

section makes reference to the sections dealing with the flat 

tax, section 3.1; the Saskatchewan tax reduction, section 4; and 

the high income surtax, section 5.  The section is being 

amended to also reference the new deficit surtax which is 

introduced to the new section 5.1. 

 

I'll ask the page to give you that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, what revenue 

are you expected to generate from the change in the flat tax? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There is no increase as such to the 

flat tax.  There is additional revenue raised to the deficit surtax.  

The figure there, if the member was asking about it, is $62 

million is the additional revenue.  That is offset by a loss of $2 

million through the low-income reduction provisions. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is that how the $200 on your first page comes 

into play, and the 300 on the second page, and the $10,000 -- is 

that how that balances itself out? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, that's the relevance of those 

numbers.  That's right. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is there any provision for the child tax credit 

in this Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, if the member can find his copy 

of the budget address, the printed copy, page 32, contains an 

explanation for that.  It says: 



2566 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

In addition, to protect lower income families, the 

Saskatchewan Tax Reduction will be increased by $50 per 

child . . . commencing July 1 . . . 

 

So it is in fact a $50 increase in the child tax credit. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is that where you suggested the $2 million 

was going? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That's over and above . . . That's the $50 is 

equivalent to $2 million, right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How much is being given back to the families 

for the $200 . . . so we've got . . . Give me the total that is being 

provided back. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Again I would refer the member to . . 

. And I'm not suggesting there's any reason why . . . Your 

question's quite proper.  But if you want the answer in writing, 

you would find it on page 39 of the printed copy of the budget 

address. 

 

And I'll read the answer into the record.  The Saskatchewan tax 

reduction, the $200 sales tax reduction raises in '92, $30.9 

million.  The $300 spousal tax reduction raises $6.3 million . . . 

costs, I'm sorry.  The $200 dependent child tax reduction costs 

15.3 million.  And the $200 per senior citizen reduction cost 5 

million.  The total there is $54 million. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'm not going to debate with you a long time 

about the value of this tax and moving the corporate capital tax 

and the surtax, but I just want to point out to you that my 

personal view is still that the harmonization, which you 

promoted when you were in opposition, was still probably the 

best way to deal with this problem. 

 

You may have had a different view of what should be taxed 

than what we did.  But I think that your assessments earlier on 

were accurate and that that's what you should have done.  And I 

think that you need to have brought that into consideration and 

dealt with that in a more substantive way, and not only to 

protect your reputation, of course, but to also enhance the 

reputation of the Department of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member is suggesting I have not 

grown in stature and wisdom since our days in opposition. 

 

These are subjects about which honest people will disagree.  

You've had an extensive and I think a useful discussion with 

the Minister of Finance on the subject.  I won't repeat our 

reasons why we decided not to go with the GST in the income 

tax, why we decided not to go with the GST but instead chose 

our own provisions.  As I say, they're subjects about which 

honest people would disagree, and we probably will continue 

to disagree for some time. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

Clause 4 
 

Mr. Toth: -- The minister had indicated that the child tax 

credit is going to be increased from 200 to 250.  Now 

according to the budgetary expenditure . . . or the budget 

address, it indicates that the 250 for a dependent child is 

effective July 1, 1992, whereas the explanatory notes regarding 

this section indicated that it increases to 225 for '92 and 250 for 

1993.  Can the minister explain what the difference is there or 

if indeed the explanatory notes are wrong and it's going to 250 

as of July 1, 1992? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, the explanatory notes contain a 

more precise description than the budget address did.  Because 

it is only a half year, it's only half an increase for this year.  So 

the explanatory notes are correct and the explanation is you're 

only increasing it for half a year.  Next year you'll get the full 

$50 increase. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- So I take it that the $25 is from July on and 

the next $50 will be 25 and 25, right?  It's paid on the quarter, I 

believe, is it not? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It's $50, but it's only half a year.  Yes, 

you follow me.  It is paid out next year when you file your 

income tax return; you get the effect of it then. 
 

Clause 4 agreed to. 
 

Clause 5 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, in this clause we see . . . and here I 

take it's the same scenario that's taking place.  As of July 1 we 

have a 5 per cent increase and that's basically taking in the last 

six months of the year; but technically if you were to look at 

the full year, it's a 10 per cent increase in the surtax. 
 

Another question I have is -- it's entitled: a deficit surtax on 

basic Saskatchewan tax.  What does the minister or the 

government mean regarding deficit?  Is the government 

specifically taking these funds and talking about putting them 

in some form directly against the deficit, which I think when 

the public out there hear about deficit surtaxes or taking money 

to put against the deficit . . . And we've run into the situation 

with the federal government, I'm sure the same question arises 

on the GST, the fact that they brought forward the GST to 

attack the deficit.  And I think a lot of the public have the 

perception that you can just take funds and put it directly 

against the deficit. 
 

But the only way to really attack the deficit is to attack overall 

spending.  And it's pretty hard to just go around and say, well 

we're attacking the deficit and so we're going to, say, drop the 

deficit from the 858 million, we're going to drop it 25 million 

this year directly. 
 

But still the taxes . . . the interest accumulates so I guess when 

it comes back to it, I think that we must be careful when we 

talk about deficit financing and the fact that if we're attacking 

the deficit we have to look at the overall tax burden.  And it 

might be more appropriate to use another term there, Mr. 

Minister, so that people realize that there's only one way of 

doing it. 
 

(1115) 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2567 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member's accurate.  In Canada, 

all Canadian jurisdictions have a single fund, the Consolidated 

Fund.  The names we give taxes are often signposts which 

governments use to point in a direction which their policy is 

taking them, but don't indicate a particular dedication. 

 

The same has been true of The Education and Health Tax Act.  

It's not dedicated to education and health.  At the time, the 

Douglas government was emphasizing health and education 

and chose to use that name.  So these names are really 

signposts pointing in a policy direction.  They do not indicate 

that the taxes are dedicated to a particular purpose. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The deficit surtax is an interesting name to 

call it in light of a direction, because your deficit went to 517 

million more this year.  And I would suggest that perhaps, 

although it's not a part of this Bill, there's other places that you 

haven't looked at for reducing deficit. 

 

You've increased the SaskPower when you had $118 million 

surplus last year.  You increased the telephone rates when you 

had a 40 or $50 million profit last year.  I think you had a 15 or 

$18 million profit in SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance).  There's definitely other places where money could 

have been as well allocated to deficit, if that's what you were 

prepared to do.  I just want to point that out, that it's not really a 

deficit surtax.  It's just what you called it.  That's all. 

 

Clause 5 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 6 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 62 -- An Act to amend the Fuel Tax, 1987 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, as we have seen this morning, we 

have a number of Bills that have been introduced to legitimize 

the budget that was presented by the Minister of Finance back 

in May or almost June, I guess, when the budget came forward 

-- a budget which, Mr. Speaker, I think a lot of people across 

this province had not quite expected from the government at 

this time, in light of the fact that over the period of the last two 

or three years the government, while in opposition, indicated 

that $4.5 billion was more than adequate for the government to 

run its operation and to live within. 

 

And many people felt that certainly if the opposition really 

believed that -- and we heard the phrase that had been coined 

over the past three years about getting control of waste and 

mismanagement -- that indeed if an NDP government was 

elected to form government in this province, that they wouldn't 

increase taxes, that the services would be maintained, and that 

they would find a way, if in fact it was true, that they could live 

within that $4.5 billion revenue that was being generated. 

 

However as we've seen this morning, Mr. Speaker, there have 

been a number of areas where the government has 

indeed increased taxation.  And the Bill before us right now, 

the Bill No. 62, the fuel tax amendment Act, is another form of 

increasing taxes that are going to affect many people across 

this province. 

 

And not just . . . One of the major problems that The Fuel Tax 

Act creates, Mr. Speaker, is -- and it's addressed at the 

agriculture and the business sector -- I believe, is that many 

small vendors across the province who are going to be faced 

with . . . and I'm not quite sure, but maybe we need a 

clarification on this.  The government talked about 

reintroducing a colouring program for purple gas and . . . or is 

it purple diesel, I believe.  I'm not sure.  That's where the 

clarification must come in. 

 

But it also . . . What we find, Mr. Chairman, I think is fact that 

over the years the department certainly talked about slippage in 

The Fuel Tax Act, and the fact that maybe many residents of 

the province weren't paying their fair share of tax at the time.  

And so at this time I would just ask the minister what the real 

purpose is other than to collect more taxes, and how the 

government is going to bring this under control. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The changes in the fuel tax 

themselves were intended to raise revenue.  However the 

changes to the farm fuel situation were intended to avoid 

evasion.  Public servants in the Department of Finance refer to 

it as leakage.  It isn't the fuel that's leaking, it's the revenue.  

There was a fair amount of evasion. 

 

I would again point to the comments made in the printed copy 

of the budget address, page 35.  I'll just read this; it's worth 

reminding ourselves: 

 

 Since the re-introduction of the Fuel Tax on individuals, the 

Province has seen a significant escalation in the consumption 

of farm gasoline, which is currently exempt from the Fuel 

Tax.  This increase is, in part, attributable to the use of this 

exempt fuel in non-farm operations, where fuel consumed is 

subject to taxation. 

 

 Within three years of the re-introduction of the Fuel Tax on 

individuals, the amount of tax-free gasoline sold in 

Saskatchewan rose by 32%, while the consumption of 

tax-paid gasoline over the same period fell by 21%.  A 

similar change in consumption occurred with diesel fuel.  

This shift is causing a decline in Fuel Tax revenue of . . .  25 

million . . .  

 

It was apparent that the regulations as they were structured 

encouraged abuse.  And these changes were designed to ensure 

that honest farmers were not penalized, which was one way of 

characterizing the former regulations. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  One of the things 

that has been brought to my attention, Mr. Minister, and that 

deals with disparities between producers who use diesel fuel 

and who use gasoline for the same function. 

 

And I'll just use as an example, the bale wagons that you've got 

can be diesel or gas, and those that have gas 



2568 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

have serious problems in relations to this, because the diesel 

can be exempted and the gasoline cannot.  And I would say 

that, just from experience, that better than 50 per cent of them 

are gasoline.  And that is a significant negative in dealing with 

the balance that will provide for individuals who have to 

compete because they have to buy, first of all, more expensive 

fuel, and now the tax is going on. 

 

I also want to point out it is significantly different also in the 

area of the small to medium farmer who hauls his grain with a 

gas truck and the very large farmer who has diesel engines 

running his business.  What I see happening now is that there's 

a trend to move to the diesel rather than to the gas, and I'm not 

sure that that's going to benefit in the long run because they're 

going to have to pay the additional costs in dealing with that. 

 

And those are two areas that people have raised a concern to 

me about in this area. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member's accurate.  These two 

fields are not treated the same.  It is . . . I suppose in some ways 

it may appear more attractive to use diesel fuel. 

 

I would point out -- I think the member's aware of this, and this 

doesn't quite answer his comments -- but I would point out that 

the $900 per year rebate will compensate farmers for a total of 

1,000 acres of farm land.  So it's intended to be an average.  

The gasoline, they are rebated on some sort of an average for 

1,000 acres.  Diesel fuel -- the member's correct -- it is exempt.  

And they can use an unlimited amount of it, which is exempt.  

The member's correct. 

 

These things are always a matter of balancing a convenience 

for administration and the expense and convenience to dealers 

versus equity in treatment.  There's always a trade-off between 

convenience of administration and the expense to which we put 

people -- and particularly the business community -- by 

complex regulations versus equality.  You always have a 

trade-off between perfect equality and simplicity.  The two are 

often mutually exclusive. 

 

But with gasoline, because it is of limited use . . . Now the 

member's correct.  In some particular operations, it's used more 

extensively than others.  But these are always a trade-off 

between simplicity and absolute equity.  This is where we 

choose to draw the line.  The line is not chipped in stone and 

found on the side of Mount Sinai.  These things can be . . . This 

will be reviewed.  If this appears to meet general satisfaction, 

we'll leave it as is.  If not, we'll adjust it. 

 

I will just point out to the member that we've received quite a 

number of comments about the budget.  We've received very, 

very few comments about the treatment of gasoline.  That may 

indicate that they're not aware of it, or it may indicate that it's 

not in the scheme of things a large and serious problem.  

Perhaps the member from Morse, perhaps your experience has 

been different.  I'm told by the . . . I wouldn't receive a lot of 

comments in my constituency in any event, no matter what you 

did.  But the member from Morse and the member from 

Moosomin 

might have had a different experience in their ridings.  But the 

officials tell me they've received very, very few complaints 

about the treatment of gasoline. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I do have . . . in my constituency I have 

more irrigation than they have at Outlook, in the Outlook 

irrigation project.  So I have a significant amount of investment 

that people have made in providing water to develop irrigation.  

And that lends itself to the things that I'm talking about as it 

relates to hauling bales and bale wagons, automatic bale 

wagons.  And the farmer that has a bale wagon and has to deal 

with it that way, 1,000 acres is of no significance in relation to 

this.  Because it's not what 1,000 acres on dry land can 

produce, it's what 300 or 400 acres of irrigation can produce. 

 

And we have a significant amount of people who have that 

kind of investment.  And then they get the additional costs of 

this sort of thing, and that is seriously impacting on them.  And 

I think that if you want to make it available to farmers -- and I 

don't believe in purple gas either -- but that's where you 

measure the benefit that these individuals will get. 

 

And then you come to the second point that is raised.  And I 

guess I'll ask the question first.  In a farm of a certain size, with 

three people or four people in a partnership or whatever, how 

many of them can qualify for the $900?  Or are you going to 

take it that if you have three people, they have to have 1,000 

acres?  Or how are you going to do that? 

 

(1130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The specific example you mentioned 

I think was a case of brothers who were running a partnership.  

They would be entitled to separate exemptions.  They would be 

entitled to separate rebates. 

 

The definition which has been used by the department is that if 

the people are related, they don't get separate rebates, if they're 

not related they do.  Related is given very narrow definition; it 

means immediate family -- husband, wives, and children.  

Beyond the circle of the immediate family, people are treated 

as unrelated and they would be eligible for separate rebates.  I 

see the member looking sceptical. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The reason is, Mr. Minister, that we have 

fathers with sons who farm together with them and then they 

would . . . would they be exempt or included?  And when 

would that definition exclude them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm informed that if the son, to use 

your example, is over the age of 18, they're entitled to a 

separate rebate.  It's only if they're under that age they they are 

considered related. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And then he would have to qualify for having 

some farm land or a permit book or some other documentation 

of involvement in the farm? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, the member's correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I think that one of the things that I would like 

the minister to deal with in relation to this, and 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2569 

understand that what's going to happen is, you're going to have 

divisions occur. 

 

And I'll just use the example, 900 is equivalent to what used to 

be called a units in the permit book.  As soon as you got units 

in the permit book, you could haul 300 bushels, and I think it 

went up to 500 bushels, you immediately got five permit books 

in a family and dealt with it that way. 

 

What you're going to have happen here is that you're going to 

get what is traditionally been a single farm unit just split into 

numerous investments.  And it isn't going to take long and 

you're going to have the equivalent amount flowing back out of 

that treasury, as you had before.  That's my estimation of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, the member's correct.  Each of 

these provisions becomes an added inducement to set up 

separate units and have separate permit books, whereas a farm 

might run more efficiently if there were only one, were it not 

for taxes. 

 

Again I would say to the member two things: one, the officials 

have been listening to your comments, and obviously born out 

of practical experience, and this will be taken into 

consideration in future years.  Again we have the problem of 

trying to balance perfect equality and simplicity.  It's never 

possible to do both.  And often simplicity in administration -- 

which is a benefit to the farmers as well as the officials -- 

simplicity in administration comes about at the expense of 

perfect equality. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I also want to point out that I 

believe that there are added costs going to incur because of this 

tax to rural Saskatchewan.  And I just know that there is a 

significant amount of value that is, in a general economic way 

in the . . . not necessarily in Regina and Saskatoon, but in cities 

like Swift Current, Weyburn, Estevan where their primary 

focus is agriculture and rural, that the added costs of all of this 

gas and this increased cost is going to further erode the income 

of producers in the province of Saskatchewan who have had a 

significant cut already in some of the programs that have 

occurred.  And I just want to point that out, that you're not just 

dealing with an expenditure of 3,000 or $5,000.  In many cases 

you could be looking at an expenditure of a significant amount 

more than that because producers do buy a lot of products and 

they come in . . . whether it's fertilizer or repairs or whatever.  

And most of them have to be delivered at an increased cost to 

the producer. 

 

I want to ask a specific question.  It talks here about the marked 

diesel fuel and unmarked diesel fuel.  And a person, a farmer, 

for example, is going to have to have . . . I'll ask the question 

this way.  Would a farmer who had a slip tank on the back of 

his truck with diesel fuel in, unmarked diesel or clear diesel or 

whatever you want to call it, would that individual have the . . . 

have to carry along with him the purchase slip that he had to 

identify not only himself but the fuel that he bought? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- As long as . . . I'm informed by the 

officials that as long as there's an F licence plate and as long as 

the tank -- the slip tank, as you refer to it -- is 

not directly connected to the fuel system of the engine, it is not 

considered part of the vehicle and you can use the . . . you can 

carry whatever type of diesel fuel in it you want, actually. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So the local contractor who has road 

construction or whatever, he will have to have either . . . if he 

has clear diesel on there for some reason or other, he will have 

to have a slip of paper along with him to prove what it's for. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm not entirely sure I understood the 

member's question.  If he's a contractor working on a 

contracting business, he shouldn't be using an F licence vehicle 

for that.  And then if he's . . . okay, if there is not an F licence 

plate on it, then I guess you're correct.  Yes, he would have to 

have the documents relating to the purchase of it, yes. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I guess, and Mr. Minister, I guess 

one of the problems that has really been . . . confronted the 

agricultural sector is the fact that over the years farming 

seemed to be a fairly simplistic business operation, but over the 

past number of years we've seen more and more paperwork has 

become just an everyday part of farming progress. 

 

And the changes in the fuel Act, Mr. Minister, I believe we will 

see that it is going to be more complex in the fact that farmers 

are limited in the amount that they can apply for.  Now I realize 

in Saskatchewan farmers had to apply for a rebate, although I 

believe you did have the . . . For farm fuels it was deducted at 

source and it's just recently that the rules were changed and a 

form was sent out indicating that, where you would indicate if 

you had indeed used farm fuel for personal use, and then either 

submitted or else submitted claims to . . . if you didn't quite 

receive the total amount of tax reduction or refund that you 

would be qualified for. 

 

And certainly there are many farmers . . . one of the major 

things that confronts us is the fact that farmers are forced to 

travel greater distances to pick up repairs.  And they . . . and at 

times it may necessitate fuelling up a vehicle at a local vendor 

versus from a bulk dealership.  And I can see . . . And I don't 

think it makes it any easier for the department trying to go 

through all these forms that are coming in. 

 

And I'm just wondering if there isn't a simpler or a more 

economical way of addressing the problem.  And I realize it 

creates a difficulty that we face out there.  But maybe the 

department would have another answer rather than just 

purpling . . . colouring gas, or even setting a limitation so that 

indeed the producer out there who was receiving much less for 

his product than it's costing him to produce it isn't faced with 

added costs indirectly, as he's got enough direct increases that 

he's facing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member accurately describes the 

system.  In setting the system we were conscious of the paper 

problem and attempted to simplify it as much as possible -- 

conscious, however, that we were dealing with a situation 

which had been abused.  And a few bad apples . . . A few bad 

apples, by abusing the system, have made a lot more work for 

everyone else. 



2570 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

We attempted to simplify it so far as was possible.  But this 

was the best we could do.  We will be reviewing the matter 

over the upcoming years and perhaps something simpler will 

suggest itself.  The farming community may come up with 

something simpler. 

 

The member's right, however.  Farming's becoming . . . 

Farming's gone a long ways since the days when I was on the 

farm.  It's gotten much more sophisticated and complicated. 

 

I was interested in a statistics the other day which suggested the 

number of farms with computerized accounting systems is 

significantly higher than the number of businesses.  The 

percentage of farms with computerized accounting systems is 

significantly higher than the percentage of businesses with 

computerized accounting systems.  I think it again suggests the 

relative sophistication and complexity of modern-day farming. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I think, Mr. Minister, you are accurate.  Because 

it just seems every time you turn around, there's so much extra 

paperwork, excessive paperwork a farm business must be 

involved in to just remain viable these days. 

 

My colleague from Morse had indicated and brought into 

relationship the difference . . . the added costs that a producer 

out there who is producing hay and certainly running a 

gas-operated machine versus a diesel-operated machine -- one 

of the major areas that can be seen when you're trucking grain, 

the producer with the diesel-operated truck is certainly going to 

come in a lot more efficiently than gas. 

 

But another area that runs is swather.  Self-propelled swathers 

and combines is a big factor.  There are many . . . The 

individuals out there, even that 700-acre producer, if you're 

running a gas-operated swather and a gas-operated combine, 

you may be consuming above the $900 limit that the 

Department of Finance has set out.  And I'm wondering if 

anything has been done to address some of these concerns or 

the problems that may be confronted by the producer out there 

who has a number of gas-operated machines on the farm that 

would put them into a much higher fuel-consumption bracket 

which would face higher taxes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes.  I recognize the accuracy of 

what the member says.  There will be some with haying 

operations -- I guess is a good example -- who will use 

relatively more fuel.  Some will use very little.  And that, 

again, is the trade-off.  This system has a good deal of 

simplicity but doesn't produce perfect equity in every case. 

 

We'll be reviewing the matter as the time goes on, and we'll be 

seeing if the discrepancies are too large to be tolerated.  This 

however we thought was a reasonable effort for the first year. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 

Minister.  I've received a number of phone calls concerning this 

issue from people in my constituencies.  And the first ones that 

called were the co-op associations 

with their larger bulk facility plants.  A lot of them are 

marginally . . . their economics are just marginal on it and 

when they have to expand and put in new tanks, it makes those 

operations no longer viable.  And so there's large concern with 

all of those small plants around in my area.  So what they're 

going to have to do is they're going to have to amalgamate into 

one larger unit.  And that takes away jobs from all of those 

other small towns which does create a problem. 

 

But one of the concerns they brought up to me was, rather than 

actually putting in new tanks to hold coloured diesel, would it 

be possible to run a line off of their outlets and colour the 

diesel as it goes through those lines.? 

 

(1145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I thank the member for that 

comment.  In fact we have been working with all of the retail 

oil sector, including the co-ops, and we are attempting to avoid 

the very expense which you referred to, the expense of the new 

tanks.  We are considering the system that the member alluded 

to, colouring after the tanks. 

 

Let us say that we are optimistic that that will be possible.  It 

looks as if we may able to reach an agreement which will 

provide the treasury officials with the assurance that the system 

is fair and cannot be abused and at the same time minimizes the 

expense to the company.  So we're optimistic we're going to be 

able to do just that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  One of the 

other problems that has arisen with the co-ops and some of the 

other bulk agents in my area is they run a key-lock system.  

And right now their key-lock system is set up to deliver clear 

diesel to everyone in the community -- farmers, the various 

trucking companies and, including in one of them, the 

Department of Highways. 

 

Now because the farmers make up the bulk of their purchasers, 

they're going to colour that diesel.  So what happens is now the 

Department of Highways is no longer going to be able to get 

diesel from this key-lock system.  So the Department of 

Highways is going to have to go out now and buy it from the 

pumps and pay a much higher price because they're going to 

pay the full retail price at the pump, rather than buying it 

through the key-lock at a cheaper rate. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, have you looked at what it's going to cost the 

various other departments of government when this change 

takes place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, interesting morning.  I'm 

learning a great deal about the fuel business this morning. 

 

I'm informed by the officials that that problem has been 

considered.  And we have favourable consideration being given 

to a fuel-injection system which permits fuel from the same 

tank to go into a farmer's tank and be coloured purple, or go 

into the Department of Highway's vehicles and not being 

coloured.  It's a system -- and I don't understand the technology 

well -- but there is a fuel-injection system which apparently 

will allow those 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2571 

retailers to accommodate both farmers and users of clear diesel. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think in the case of 

the key-lock system it would be fairly expensive, because you 

would have to have it keyed into that card when you put it in 

the slot that identifies it as clear or coloured.  And therefore 

you'd have to have a computer hooked up to it to figure this 

out.  And then it would have to switch which lines it goes 

through, because your colouring will stick inside of the 

injection lines where the fuel will run through, and if you had a 

portion that's coloured in that fuel line, it's going to discolour 

the rest of that fuel that goes through there. 

 

And so at some point a highway traffic officer can come 

around and say, well you've got purple in your tank.  And if it 

gets to that certain point, somebody can get into trouble.  What 

kind of considerations are you giving for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes.  There will be some additional 

costs.  I'm informed, however, they will be modest given the 

value of what you're accomplishing.  I don't have any 

completed analysis I'm able to share with the member, but I'm 

told the cost of such a system is relatively modest compared 

with what you accomplish. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Is the department giving any 

consideration then to aiding in financing this kind of change? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes.  The answer to your question is 

yes, in a roundabout way.  When we -- although I think the 

retailers were satisfied with it -- when we changed the tax, we 

did not require them to collect the tax on what they had in 

storage.  And they were . . . sorry, we did not require them to 

remit the tax on what they had in storage.  That meant that 

there was some income which they got, and by and large, that 

was intended to compensate them for the equipment. 

 

I'm informed by the officials that this was done previously, and 

a few years ago seemed to work out fairly well, and the 

retailers are not dissatisfied with the system whereby they do 

not have to remit the tax for the fuel they had in storage.  That 

windfall, if you like, goes to pay for the cost of the equipment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, I beg 

to differ on your term "windfall".  There's very little windfall 

available when a tax change takes place within the system.  

Because what happens out in the rural areas -- unless that 

change takes place without anyone being forwarned about it -- 

what happens is all the farmers phone up and say I want my 

tanks filled before July 1 because the tax is going to increase 

on July 1. 

 

So what happens is those bulk dealers really have very small 

supplies on hand when that change takes place because they've 

already delivered it all out to the farmers in the previous few 

days.  So there was very little extra in there for them to have a 

windfall for which to pay for any changes to their equipment. 

 

And what's going to happen down in my particular area 

right along the U.S. (United States) border because of fuel 

supplies profits being very tight -- because they have to 

compete with people across the border because it is possible to 

bring fuel back into Saskatchewan -- their margins are very 

narrow and by increasing this cost to them with increased 

storage or with going to a fuel injection . . . a colouring 

injection system, it's going to make it very precarious for some 

of those businesses along the border. 

 

And in fact I know of two or three bulk agents that will likely 

be closing down between the increased costs for going to 

coloured fuel and the increased costs due to the environment 

legislation.  And they're going to be going to two or three large 

bulk dealerships in the whole area and that will be supplying 

eight or ten towns. 

 

And so this is a burden to rural Saskatchewan because it means 

less jobs available in that area.  And that is just another nail in 

the coffin for those communities. 

 

So I think, Mr. Minister, that when you're planning your tax 

changes you need to give some considerations to what the 

overall effect is going to be in rural Saskatchewan.  We've seen 

quite a number of things come up from your government that 

have been tax increases, that have been seemingly aimed 

directly at rural Saskatchewan. 

 

When you look at the power rate increases, the telephone rate 

increases -- all these type of things -- while they have an 

impact in urban Saskatchewan, they have an even greater 

proportional impact in rural Saskatchewan, especially at a time 

when farmers are being squeezed with costs. 

 

Farmers are going to have to put in new storage to handle 

coloured diesel.  They don't have an injection system on the 

farm.  And I would find it very strange if you would allow 

them to have an injection system on the farm to colour clear 

diesel. 

 

But most farmers, when we went away from the coloured fuel 

system, got rid of those tanks.  In a lot of cases they had tanks 

that were split.  Half the tank was for coloured fuel; half the 

tank was for clear fuel.  What they did was knock a hole in the 

tank between the two portions, so now they had one tank.  Well 

now they're going to have to go out and buy a new tank, or 

they're going to have to put up new storage facilities to keep 

coloured diesel in.  That's an added cost, Mr. Minister.  And I 

believe that some place in the system there should be some 

compensations paid to farmers, to the businesses that are going 

to have to do this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Going back to the member's initial 

comment, the value of the tax collected but not remitted is 

about a million dollars over the system as a whole.  Now we 

admit that is only partial compensation.  And it's kind of a 

rough-and-ready system as well.  Some dealers might have 

more than others in storage, and thus the compensation isn't 

spread out entirely evenly.  Again it has the advantage of 

simplicity at the expense, I suppose, of perfect equity. 

 

The member's right.  Farmers were put to some additional 



2572 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

expense.  We were conscious of that.  There was no real way to 

eliminate that and eliminate the abuse.  And this was the policy 

decision that was made.  But the member's comments are 

accurate.  There will be some additional expense to farmers.  

Unfortunately the other system, which really was an honour 

system, proved to have unacceptable faults in it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Did you do any analysis that the increased 

cost that the bulk fuel dealers were going to have to have in 

order to have the storage in clear and coloured? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There was no . . . Certainly there was 

an analysis in the informal sense.  We knew it was going to 

cost them additional revenue.  We didn't have that quantified in 

the form of a report, but there was certainly some analysis in 

the informal sense. 

 

Subsequent to the budget, discussions have been ongoing with 

the bulk dealers.  It was initially our expectation that there 

would be separate storage tanks.  It now appears that'll be 

unnecessary.  That's cut the cost very considerably -- I gather to 

something like a quarter or a third of the original cost to the 

industry. 

 

But there was no analysis done by a consultant which formed a 

separate report, if that's what the member was alluding to. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  It being near to 12 o'clock, the 

committee will rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 

again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 53 -- An Act to amend The Farm Financial 

Stability Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move the Bill be now read a third 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 59 -- An Act to amend The Agri-Food Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move the Bill be now read a third 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 30 -- An Act to amend The Corporation Capital 

Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move the Bill be now read a third 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 46 -- An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 

 


