




















































Hansard: August 06, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2045 

 August 6, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Education 

Vote 5 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  As we were 

discussing before the supper hour, we were discussing the 

student aid program and we got into some discussions on some 

reciprocal agreements.  We're working towards some reciprocal 

agreements, or helping local school boards trying to overcome 

the problems they have regarding interprovincial schooling. 

 

A question I had . . . and I'm not sure.  I don't think I got to 

posing this question prior to the break at supper time.  What I 

was wondering, if the department has given any consideration 

in allowing families to take the tax dollar that they would pay 

to a local RM (rural municipality) or a local community, that 

tax portion, and allow families to use that in the tuition portion 

that they have to pay to send their student for schooling in 

another province. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the arrangement I think 

that the member opposite is suggesting would be redundant 

really in lieu of the arrangements that are currently in place 

where the whole tuition is paid, the amount being negotiated or 

established through the funding formula; and then that tuition is 

a recognized cost in the third-party grants that are paid by the 

government, through the department, to the school board, and 

is fully refundable.  So there is not a cost . . . there's not any net 

cost to the school unit. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Okay, and that's maybe the thing I didn't quite 

catch and understand before.  Are you saying then the parent 

doesn't have the added cost to that -- that extra cost that the 

tuition they would be required is refundable.  They applied at a 

unit board because the Department of Education would 

recognize that student's education and would be paying that 

local board.  But if the child is going to school in Manitoba and 

they have to pay that tuition, is the parent refunded that amount 

of money? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, this is not a direct 

cost to the parent.  This is a cost to the transferring school 

division, so that if there were a school division in Manitoba, 

where the destination of the resident student is in Saskatchewan 

in a school division, that the arrangements would be that the 

school division would pay the tuition on behalf of the students 

so there wouldn't be a cost to the parent.  They would pay the 

school portion of their property tax to the appropriate body and 

then arrangements would be made with the school division to 

recognize the tuition. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Okay.  Madam Minister, how many private 

schools do we have in the province to date and do they receive 

any funding from the department? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we may want to 

ask for some clarification of the question in terms of private 

schools.  There is six historical private high schools in the 

province that have a funding arrangement, but I'm not sure 

whether the member's question included such things as private 

vocational schools or some of the other K to 12 private 

arrangements that there are.  I would need, before I could 

answer the questions clearly, is a definition of what he means 

by private schools. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  What I'm talking 

about, Madam Minister, there are a number of church 

organizations that have set up their own K to 12 schooling 

program.  And certainly the question has been raised regarding 

the amount of tax base and the taxes that they are paying, and 

to my knowledge a number of these schools, the total of tuition 

cost is borne by the parents or the parent body. 

 

I'm wondering if there are any schools that are recognized or 

what the criteria would be and if there are any of these private 

schools that do now receive funding. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, if I understand the 

definition of private schools in the context that the member is 

asking, those private schools are not funded.  The balance is 

that they are exempt from local property tax but that they are 

funded through tuition fees and that they are not funded by the 

government. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- What exactly do you mean, Madam Minister, 

when you say exempt from local property tax?  Are you talking 

of the facility that they are operating out of is exempt from 

local property tax or are you talking of the parents themselves 

being exempt from the educational portion of their property 

tax? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, no.  What it is, is that 

there is provision in the taxation provisions for property tax for 

those facilities to be exempt. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Now if parents were looking to and asking, 

seeking for some financing of the educational program and 

were asking . . . would come to the department, I suppose the 

department would suggest that the parents should be 

approaching the local school board regarding the taxes that 

they asked and would like to have their local tax assessment, 

educational portion, available to them to use and the 

educational facility that they are sending the students to. 

 

Does the department have any guidelines on that or would a 

parent body have to go, or a group have to go, to a local school 

board and ask for them to give them that ability? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, these . . . the schools 

that I understand the member is referring to are set up in 

co-operation with the school division in which they are 

established.  So the arrangements may vary from one situation 

to another.  And then there is the provision in the taxation 

portion of the urban and rural municipal Acts to exempt the 

properties from which they operate from taxation. 

 

But the policies for some of the associate schools, the 



2046 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

Christian schools -- for instance, the Valley Christian Academy 

at Osler with which I'm familiar -- those policies are still in 

transition and have not been fully developed as yet.  Because, 

as the member opposite could understand, there are significant . 

. . there could be significant implications for the public school 

system and the property tax . . . the local tax burden for other 

parents and property owners in the division with respect to 

these schools. 

 

So the arrangements that are in place at the moment in the 

various jurisdictions appear to be operating satisfactorily and 

don't seem to be a hindrance in the establishment of new 

schools like this. As I noted, there is one proposed for the 

Melfort area just recently that's being developed.  So the 

transition and the establishment, I think, is not hampered by the 

current rules.  But there is a recognition that because of the 

impact on the public school or separate school system, 

whichever may be affected in the existing divisions, that these 

policies have to be worked out in consultation with the 

established school system, and that's being done. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well I'm glad to hear, Madam Minister, that there 

are some policies being worked on, that you are discussing 

some alternatives.  Because I believe there are many parents 

across the province . . . And I agree with you that if parents had 

the ability to take that tax portion of their property tax, the 

educational tax portion, and transfer it automatically to the 

school of their choice, you would no doubt find a substantial 

portion of that funding would indeed go to a number of the 

private schools. Or there may even be more private schools, as 

I find that a number of parents have a very grave, great concern 

regarding the public school system. 

 

And in some cases . . . It's not all areas of the public school 

system.  I think it depends a lot on the working and the ability 

of the public school system to meet the needs of the students 

and the wishes of parents.  It has a lot to do with the 

involvement of parents and in some communities parents have 

taken . . . been very diligent in becoming involved in their 

school system, becoming involved in the educational system, 

expressing their views and their opinions, and certainly letting 

the educators know that they have some values and they have 

some aspects of education that they feel are very fundamental.  

And if the educational system, that local district or board or 

local school, is meeting those requirements, parents are more 

than willing and happy to leave their students there. 

 

But I would suggest in a number of areas there are parents who 

are also very concerned that the school is not meeting the 

educational requirements and the values that they are 

establishing and would like to have.  And I believe that's the 

reason a number of parents are taking . . . making the choice, 

even if it's costing them more money out of their own pocket, 

to send their children to private schools.  So I think it . . . I trust 

the department will take a close look at this. 

 

And I guess I can only encourage parents as well to get more 

involved in the educational system and let the school boards 

and the teachers know of the values they have and the reasons 

what they're looking for in an 

educational process. 

 

At this time, Madam Speaker, if you'd like to respond I'm 

going to turn it over to one of my colleagues. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  My 

colleague brought up the question of student loans, etc.  And, 

Madam Minister, how many student loans would you estimate 

that you will be receiving this year, applications? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we will endeavour to 

break down the figures.  We have the numbers for the total 

portfolio but that would include returning students.  So I guess 

I would ask for some clarification of the member's question, 

whether he means new applications from applicants this year 

that are just entering the post-secondary system.  If that were 

the case we wouldn't have those numbers complete as yet 

because we're still four or five weeks away from the first 

semester of people that are beginning a term in 1992.  So there 

would be some applications that haven't been received and 

perhaps haven't been processed yet.  But if he means repeat, 

like we would have a number of applications that would be 

initiated in 1992 that would relate to repeat students -- students 

that have had one, two, three years already in a post-secondary 

program that would be reapplying for this current year. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, why don't you 

give us the repeat applications?  How many applications you 

have received for the summer school program at the two 

universities and what is your estimate for new applications 

coming in for students who wish to attend post-secondary 

schools this fall? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, obviously in preparing 

the budget, we do have to make some projections based on 

Estimates of students that will be entering the system.  And we 

would estimate that the total number of applications being 

processed in mid-year 1992 would be from 12 to 13,000, and 

the number of approvals would be somewhat less than that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, how many of 

this number will be repeats? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, that would require . . . 

the answer to that question would require a slightly different 

analysis than what we've done.  It would be difficult to be 

exactly precise because we would have some people applying 

this year for the upcoming term that have been previous 

students but maybe have been out in the work force for a year 

and are returning, and that kind of thing.  So it's hard to be 

definitive, but the previous numbers that I give in global would 

hold. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, how many students 

applied for student aid for the summer semester at the 

universities or at any post-secondary school? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, it may be possible to 

break that down but it would be difficult because, for instance, 

in last year's total there would have been 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2047 

students who included in their application a projection of their 

intentions to go to summer school or intersession in this 

calendar year.  So like those numbers would be difficult to 

break down.  We could attempt it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I would 

appreciate it if you could, and any new applications that weren't 

part of a previous session.  They may have had student loans 

prior to this but at the time had not indicated any intention to 

attend summer school but have done so this summer, have 

applied.  Would it be possible for you to supply me with that 

information? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the 

member opposite for some clarification of his question 

because, if I understand its current context, to give a definitive 

answer would take some considerable analysis and also some 

consulting with the universities in terms of student numbers 

and the timing of the programs. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I know that 

students apply for the summer session of the schooling, 

because I was contacted by a young lady and I contacted your 

department about this young lady from North Battleford who 

was applying for a student loan.  A day or two after she 

contacted me, you stood in the House here, in Estimates, and 

said that your student loan applications were going through 

very quickly, that you had only a couple of day turnaround for 

applications, and yet this young lady's seemed to be dragging 

on and dragging on.  And at the end of the time she did not get 

a student loan. 

 

Now is it your department's requirements that these students 

find some employment, at some period during the year, before 

they are entitled to any student loan funds? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there is no requirement 

for a student to take a job, a summer job, to interrupt their 

program to take a summer job.  But if they do, or if they have a 

part-time job during the year, or they have interrupted their 

program with a semester of work, then that income is taken 

into account.  If there's a specific case that the member 

opposite feels warrants a review, then we would be glad to take 

a look at it if it was referred to our office. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I will indeed 

bring this back to your attention.  But I think that it's important 

that the people of the province, the students, know exactly how 

the procedure is supposed to work. 

 

This young lady was to start her semester the first week of July, 

so she was out of school at the end of April.  She had May and 

June in which to find some employment; she's from rural 

Saskatchewan; she was unable to find any employment locally.  

But when she applied for the student loan, she was told that she 

was going to be accredited as having worked a certain period of 

time and that she had to have funds based on that period of 

time.  And that she did not qualify because she supposedly had 

this opportunity for employment and should have generated a 

certain number of funds. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, is that indeed the case?  Do you 

have to work a certain period of time to generate a certain 

amount of funds before you qualify for a student loan? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, much like the 

qualifications to receive unemployment insurance, the student 

has to demonstrate and document that they have attempted to 

obtain employment.  And they have to be able to provide 

documentation that they've made at least three efforts to obtain 

employment and been unsuccessful.  But we don't penalize 

students income-wise who have not been successful. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So, Madam Minister, as I understand it 

then in these particular circumstances, that if this young lady 

can document that she indeed did seek employment for that 

two months, that she applied at a minimum of three locations, 

she may qualify for some assistance? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, that would be my 

interpretation, that if this person can provide that 

documentation, that she should definitely do that and ask for 

the student aid department to review her case.  And they would 

be most pleased to do that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  I'll 

contact her and ask her to do that. 

 

Madam Minister, in the student loan applications, how many 

do you estimate . . . or how many have you rejected for the 

coming session or for the 1992?  What would be your estimate 

of rejections as opposed to applications? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, as I've stated 

earlier, for 1992 the figures are as yet in no way complete 

because we're in the midst, if you like, of the approval process 

and the application process for the upcoming semesters.  So 

we'd certainly be able to provide a summary for the period that 

relates to the fall semester, which is what applies to most 

students, later.  But we wouldn't have those figures at this time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- What percentage would you estimate, 

though, would be a potential rejection? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the average over all 

years of the program has been a rejection or a decline, if you 

like, of applications at the rate of approximately 20 per cent.  

And these would be those applications where the means test is 

not met in terms of parental or student ability to make a 

contribution. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, in the total amount of 

funds that you supply to students for student loans, has that 

amount to the individual student who would receive the 

maximum, increased or decreased or remained the same from 

last year? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as I indicated earlier, 

the numbers of students in Saskatchewan who are attempting 

entry into post-secondary education of all types is increasing 

rather dramatically.  And the percentage of student loans 

applied for would very likely be increasing approximately in 

proportion to that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam, my question is: is 



2048 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

the dollars given to each student, the individual student, the 

dollars that they would receive, if they were receiving the 

maximum amount, has that increased, decreased, or remained 

the same? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as with the Canada 

student loan program, the maximum limits, weekly limits and 

so on, haven't changed but if the maximum student loan 

amount allowed reflects increases in tuition so those increases 

in costs would be recognized. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So, Madam Minister, based on the fact 

that you cut funding to the universities by, I believe it's -- 

what? -- 2 per cent this year and 1 per cent next year or 1 per 

cent this year and 2 per cent next year, the fact that the 

universities have been forced to increase their tuition fees by as 

much as 13 per cent, will those increases be reflected in the 

amount of student loans that an individual student would 

receive? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, certainly in the long 

run, if tuition fees are raised and students are in a position 

where they are borrowing the maximum where the average 

repayable loan in a one-year program is about $4,500, the 

increases in tuition would be reflected at the end of the day in 

the total amount that the student has borrowed and has to 

repay.  But it wouldn't be reflected by immediate financial 

burden on the student because increases in tuition are 

recognized in the amount that is available for a student loan. 

 

So in other words if the tuition fee for a certain course this year 

was $300 more than it was last year, the amount of student loan 

would be increased in a commensurate amount. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, thank you, Madam Minister.  Has 

the amount of money available to student loan funding 

increased this year enough to offset the increased costs of those 

tuitions? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the draw on the 

Consolidated Fund is projected to be the same as last year -- 

but I will say this, that that's a projection only, and there is no 

student that has ever been declined access to a student loan, 

who was eligible, because of a cap in the amount available. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- How much money, Madam Minister, 

would you project that might be needed in excess of what 

you've already budgeted for? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, even with a growth in 

the student population . . . The allocation in the previous fiscal 

year was budgeted to be 45 million, of which only 42 million 

was drawn.  So this year we have allocated the same amount 

again so as I say, even with an increase, if there was an 

increase in applications, that this should be accommodated. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So, Madam Minister, you expect that an 

additional $3 million that was in the budget for last year -- 

you're saying your budget is the same this year -- will cover the 

additional costs of tuition fees, the 13 per cent increase in those 

tuition fees, to students. 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, the response is 

that there will not be a student who meets the criteria to receive 

a student loan, even including whatever increases in tuition fee 

there are, who will be declined.  Every post-secondary student 

who meets the criteria will receive the maximum student loan 

that they are eligible for. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, your Finance 

minister has given you a budget with which to operate your 

department.  You say that there is an ever-increasing demand 

on the number of applications for student loans, therefore 

there's going to be a greater number of students which qualify.  

You're saying that the amount of the student loan available to 

the student will increase to take into account a percentage of 

the increase in the tuition fee.  Will you then, based on your 

information, come in with your budget balanced as to what the 

Minister of Finance has given you? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, this can only be done 

on the basis of projections.  And the member opposite will 

realize that the student aid program, the Saskatchewan student 

aid program, which is a supplement to the Canada student loans 

plan, was initiated in 1986. 

 

So for people that are in a four-year program, which are the 

major clients of that loan portfolio, the portfolio wouldn't have 

really started to mature until 1991, because people that went 

into a four-year program at the onset would have access to the 

four years.  Then they would have the grace period before they 

have to start repayment. 

 

So it's been a difficult thing to project until now because the 

number of entrants have been increasing.  The number of 

repayments have really just started to develop in the latter 

years. 

 

So now, although we're allocating the same amount to be 

available in this current proposed budget as there was last year, 

we also anticipate a much larger number of loans that will be in 

repayment by people who have completed programs that they 

started in 1986, '87, and '88. 

 

So while the amount available hasn't increased -- it's stayed 

level -- that the repayments or recovery to the plan or the net 

cost to the provincial treasury will actually be the same or less. 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, when I look at 

vote 5, item 21, subvote 4, in 1991-92, there were $36.257 

million allocated for that item and that is grants to the 

Saskatchewan student aid fund.  This year your Estimates for 

1992-93 are $30.566 million.  That's a decrease of 

approximately $6 million, slightly less than that.  You're saying 

that the maturity of those student loans that should be coming 

back in will provide you with approximately a total of $45 

million included with your 30 million. 

 

You've dropped your funding from the department by $6 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2049 

million.  And yet all through the years when your colleagues 

were in opposition, they were demanding more and more 

funding for student aid.  During the election the promises were 

for more funding for students to attend university and you've 

cut the program.  You're saying that there's going to be more 

applications this year than there were previously.  The tuition 

fees are up.  You're saying that your student aid will take into 

account that increase, and yet you're cutting funding, Madam 

Minister.  How so you square that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I really have to correct 

the member opposite.  The amount . . . the $45 million that is 

available as a fund to draw on, as an estimate, is a 

non-budgetary item in the very same way as the capital costs of 

school construction is a non-budgetary item. 

 

It would appear, if you look at '91-92, vote 5, subvote 21, but 

that is simply a more refined estimate in the recovery in how 

much forgiveness programs will cost, in how much remission 

will cost, and the interest's write-down.  So, there was an 

interest write-down program that was available for the first . . . 

at the onset of the program. 

 

So, it's simply a difference . . . it's not a difference.  There's not 

one cent of difference in the amount that is available for 

students to borrow.  The difference in those two figures simply 

represents an increase in the amount of repayments and 

adjustments in the amount of forgivable loans.  But there is not 

any reduction whatsoever, and not any post-secondary student 

who qualifies under the criteria that will be turned away from a 

post-secondary institution or the student loan department for a 

lack of funds. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, thank you Madam Minister.  I'm 

sure that there are a number of students out there that will 

appreciate hearing that, because when they would have looked 

at your budget that you presented, they're looking at a $6 

million decrease in the funds available from reading your 

document that you have presented or that the Minister of 

Finance presented to us here. 

 

So I'm glad to hear that you're saying there will be the same 

amount of funds, that no student will be rejected because funds 

are not available.  But, Madam Minister, that will mean an 

increased demand on your budget that you haven't allowed for.  

Well, Madam Minister, I'll come back to this one after a bit. 

 

I'd like to go now to the final report from the SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 

committee, review committee.  I wonder if you would mind 

giving us the names of those members that sat on that review 

committee. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the chairman of the 

review committee was Stan Green from Saskatoon. The other 

four members of the five-member committee that is mandated 

by The Institute Act is Ross Giles from Regina, Marguerite 

Gallaway from Estevan, Connie Phenix-Burrows from 

Saskatoon, and Donovan Young from Regina. 

 

Their report was received on July 27 and made public at 

that time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  What was 

the cost of this review? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the accounts are not 

quite all in yet for the committee's activities as their last 

meeting would have been within the week.  We had budgeted a 

total of $125,000 for the costs of the review panel and we 

expect that certainly it will come in well within budget. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, what would the 

individual board members that participated in this review have 

received for compensation? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we can certainly 

undertake to provide that information.  I don't have a copy of 

the terms of reference here.  But certainly the remuneration on 

a per diem basis for the members of the committee would have 

been within the guidelines that are paid to boards and 

commissions in the public service, and of course they would 

have received compensation for their out-of-pocket expenses. 

 

But there certainly wouldn't be any costs that were out of the 

ordinary and we'll be glad to provide you with the exact 

information. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I wonder 

if you mind also providing when you provide that information 

-- or maybe perhaps you can do so now -- the qualifications of 

each of these board members to participate in this kind of a 

review. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I could do it off the top 

of my head if you like because these are all extremely 

well-qualified people in the education field and in the business 

community as well, which is very important to the relationship 

of SIAST and post-secondary technical education and the 

relationship to the business community.  But I wouldn't want to 

be remiss by leaving out any of the long lists of qualifications 

that all of these members have. 

 

So I would prefer, with the member's indulgence, to provide 

him with a complete and detailed version, with my assurance 

that he will be quite satisfied when he receives the answer, that 

these people were very well qualified for the job. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  For this 

review were there any staff or any researchers hired to aid the 

panel members? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the Department of 

Education provided some clerical support and support staff, but 

a very limited amount, to the committee, and they did engage a 

typist and writer to produce the final report, on a very limited 

basis.  It was a low-budget operation.  But there weren't any 

other external consultants engaged by the review committee, 

and a very small amount of external staff, support staff, to 

them. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay.  Thank you, Madam Minister.  I 

wonder if you could also provide me with the 



2050 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

names of the board of directors for SIAST. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we would be pleased to 

do that.  We do have it here, if the member wishes me to read 

them out, or we certainly could table it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, when were these 

people appointed to the board?  Perhaps that is included in the 

information you are supplying me; I'm not sure.  Madam 

Minister, when were these people appointed to the board? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, now that I've tabled the 

entire page of notes that I have, I don't recall the date.  But I 

believe it was fairly early on in the year.  It might have been 

formally by order in council about February.  I think it would 

have been during the month of February. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I believe it says here a 

three-year term, February 26, 1995. So that, I would assume, is 

when they were appointed. 

 

The previous board, were all of their terms expired, or were 

some of them released or fired? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as we stated publicly at 

the time and in the form of a press release, that we felt that it 

was required to have -- to work in conjunction with the review 

committee and to establish a new direction for post-secondary 

technical information in this province -- that we should have a 

new board of directors. 

 

So I don't recall exactly the range of terms that were left in the 

membership of the previous board.  But we made that decision 

to start with an entirely new board at the same time as the 

review committee was announced.  So all of the terms of the 

previous board were terminated and a completely new board 

was put in place at that time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I find that 

somewhat surprising that you would start a committee up to 

review the operations of SIAST, and at the same time you 

would replace the entire board.  If you're going to review the 

total operation of SIAST, why would you not have waited until 

that report came down, to find out what they had to say about 

the operation of SIAST rather than terminating the entire board 

and starting from scratch before the report's even come in? 

 

The people who were operating SIAST, the board, may very 

well have been doing a good job, and it may have been 

reported as such by the report that you commissioned.  And yet 

you terminated that board before that report even came down.  

Had you already made up your mind what you wanted to do 

with SIAST before the report came down, and just used this 

report as a method to rubber-stamp your own decisions? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

member, it was quite the opposite.  In fact, we felt that the 

existing board might be biased towards the previous kind of 

operation and that we should have a completely neutral board 

in place.  So that was why we made the decision to have a 

completely new board, in conjunction 

with the striking of the membership of the review committee. 

 

It certainly didn't represent any non-confidence in the board.  

But it's to be remembered that there was continuity in the . . . 

complete continuity in the administration of SIAST, the 

administration of which is rather large.  So we felt if continuity 

in the method of operations and that kind of advice was 

necessary, it would certainly be available through the 

administration. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you bring up the 

administration of SIAST.  In what terms would you describe 

that administration? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman, I didn't 

understand the question. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you brought up SIAST 

administration.  What terms would you use to describe that 

administration and the personnel that are in the administration 

of SIAST? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the administration of 

SIAST and the personnel that are there are engaged by the 

board of directors which is an entirely independent board 

pursuant to the provisions of The Institute Act of 1987 under 

which SIAST was established. 

 

I might also add, in response to the previous question with 

respect to the direction given to the review committee, that the 

review committee, the chairman of the committee at the time -- 

we made the report public just a bit over a week ago on July 27 

-- said that, at the press conference, that he had never been 

engaged in an exercise where he felt so independent because 

there was absolutely no interference from government or 

elsewhere, that it was an entirely independent exercise on 

behalf of that board of review. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'm glad that the 

people on the board felt that they were independent.  But in 

looking over some of the board appointments that we have seen 

coming up lately, such as the Liquor Board where four or five 

of that number, either they or their spouses, have been 

contributors to that New Democratic Party, or when we look at 

the Privacy Commissioner that was just appointed here 

yesterday or the day before was a contributor to the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) Party, it makes us wonder just how 

independent the boards that you appoint truly are. 

 

But you still never answered my question, Madam Minister, as 

to what you think of the people that are administering SIAST at 

the present time.  What terms would you use to describe their 

administration and their capabilities? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, my views of the 

competence of the administration in SIAST or any of the 

education institutions of this province would not be relevant 

because the administration of SIAST is hired, appointed, and 

reports to the independent board, in the very same way that the 

administration of the universities, 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2051 

the private vocational schools, and the regional colleges apply 

to independent, autonomous boards. 

 

So we have, perhaps, unlike the previous administration, not 

attempted to influence the decisions of those independent and 

autonomous bodies.  And my personal views certainly have 

absolutely no bearing or no influence in the decisions of those 

autonomous bodies and the way that they engage their 

administrations or run their operations. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, the final report from 

the SIAST review committee, has it been presented to the 

employees of SIAST that they may know what is going on?  I 

was contacted by an employee a few days ago, and said that the 

morale around SIAST was terrible because nobody knew what 

was going to happen around that institution.  Everything was 

up in the air.  Nobody knew what programs were going to be in 

place.  Nobody knew who was going to be hired or fired. 

 

When will your department determine what is going to happen 

to the SIAST programs and to the SIAST system? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the recommendations 

of the review committee have been referred to the board which 

is responsible for the operations and for any changes in the 

administration or discussions with the administration about 

changes that might be forthcoming.  We understand that the 

board of directors of SIAST did hold a meeting last week in 

which they . . . and I'm not sure what the membership is, I don't 

have the minutes of the meeting or a formal report from it -- 

but I did ask them, the board of directors that is, to consider the 

recommendations and to select a team, a management team or 

an action team to manage the changes within whatever 

recommendations the board of directors decided to adopt. 

 

This is not within my purview.  We haven't adopted the report 

or any parts of it.  We have referred it to the board of directors 

to, at their discretion, manage.  We know that in order to avoid 

disruptions in programs and problems with staffing, that any 

changes that the board does decide to undertake in the 

operations will have to be phased in over time, but that will be 

within their purview and certainly not at the direction of the 

ministry or the department. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So, Madam Minister, I'm to understand 

that this report has been completed, presented to you, and now 

you're going to turn it back over to your newly appointed board 

at SIAST to make a determination whether to implement this 

review as its recommendations are.  If that is the case, will 

people be allowed to make presentations then to that board if 

they have some concerns about parts of this report? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman -- just as within the 

review process and we have to make sure to define there was a 

review committee and now there's a board of directors -- the 

review committee was temporary and ad hoc if you like.  

They've completed their work.  They've given their report.  

There will be a highly identifiable action team that will be 

known, the membership of which will be known to all of the 

faculty, staff and students of SIAST.  As the member opposite 

will be aware, one of the 

recommendations of the review committee was that basically 

the structure shouldn't be changed; that there should still be a 

central office, although it should probably be down-sized, 

which means in their interpretation I think that some of the 

positions wouldn't necessarily be eliminated, but be devolved 

back to the various regional institutions. 

 

So we also . . . at the press conference there were 

representatives there from faculty, from the union representing 

the employees.  Three hundred copies of the report were 

printed to be available on that day for distribution to any 

interested parties and an effort was made to make sure that 

within the SIAST organization itself that there was access 

immediately, that the report was released by any stakeholders 

or people that could be affected by any of the 

recommendations. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good 

evening, Madam Minister and your officials.  I have 

approximately 9 or 10 short questions regarding SIAST, so I'd 

think it's most appropriate that I ask them now. 

 

Madam Minister, how much money is expended on SIAST's 

central administration office in Saskatoon? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we have a number of 

figures here but I don't have the annual report or the operating 

statement from SIAST itself.  I have a number here which 

indicates 2.4 per cent of overhead is attributed to the central 

office.  But I know that's not the number.  That's not the right 

percentage of the global budget.  So I would certainly 

undertake to provide that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  Madam Minister, 

while you're doing that, I'd like to know how many personnel 

are employed at the SIAST central office and what is the size 

of this office's total payroll?  You may not have that at this time 

either, and I'd be more than willing to have you provide that to 

me in writing. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we did table the annual 

report of SIAST, and I'm probably remiss in not having a copy 

of it here with me.  Their year end is June 30 and their report 

was tabled, I think, in July.  But the numbers that I have here in 

terms of, not dollars but personnel, would indicate that there is 

a total of 251 staff supporting the centralized administration, of 

which 40 are located at the Avord centre in Saskatoon and 211 

are located at the four campus locations. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, I'm interested in things being broken down even more 

than that.  Specifically I'd like to know how many 

vice-presidents and senior administrators there are, and what 

the salaries of these individuals are, as well as a description of 

their roles. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we certainly can 

provide names.  In fact I have a copy of the list of the people in 

the executive office, but I wouldn't have the other information 

that the member requests at the moment.  I can certainly table 

this list of the executive which would be located at the central 

office, with the exception of the principals that would be 

located at the respective institute locations.  And we'll certainly 



2052 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

undertake to have the rest of the information, at least on a 

global basis.  I'm not sure about the salaries of individual 

people, but on a global basis, the executive salaries, we can 

certainly provide that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Madam Minister, I'm hoping 

that what you will do -- and I'm not the least bit interested in 

individual's names -- if what you would do, would be to 

provide first of all . . . The first question, how much money is 

expended on central administration office alone in Saskatoon?  

Secondly, how many people are employed as personnel at that 

central office, the size of the office's total payroll?  And then, 

not by name, but perhaps by number, the vice-presidents who 

are employed there, the senior administrators, and you can 

indicate them by number, their salaries, and a job description 

for each one of those individuals, please.  And if you would, 

describe how many persons are employed in the administration 

at the individual campuses, and does their role involve any 

duplication with the work done at the central office? 

 

I would imagine that most of this information would be not at 

your fingertips this evening, and I quite understand that, but if 

you would provide that to me, I'd be most appreciative. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we can certainly 

undertake to provide that information. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Madam Minister, would you 

tell this House please whether any of those involved in the 

administration are receiving benefits such as housing or car 

allowances, and if so, what is the value of these benefits and 

how many senior administration are currently receiving them? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, because the 

engagement of and the terms of engagement of staff of SIAST 

would be the responsibility of the board of directors of that 

institution, we wouldn't have that information readily at hand.  

But we can certainly undertake to provide whatever it is that 

we can legally disclose. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  Again I'm not 

interested so much in any individuals, but I'm interested in the 

information as far those involved in administration and the 

kinds of benefits they're receiving, and if in fact there is a 

specific value attached to these benefits.  If you could provide 

them to me, I would be very pleased. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, given the cuts to technology 

and industrial programs, I'm wondering if there have been any 

accompanying reductions in expenditures on administration? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the budget for the 

current operating year, and I assume the member is referring to 

SIAST, was tabled fairly early in the year, early into our term.  

Our response to it at the time was to approve it but to, in the 

light of the 3 per cent decrease to the third-party grant that was 

expended to SIAST, there was one other notable adjustment 

made, and I'm not sure I have the figures at hand, but it was a 

reduction in the amount of the rent that SIAST was paying to 

SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) which 

partially offset the reduction in the total grant.  So they would 

have had for 1991-92, $80 million; and in '92-93, a budget of 

$73 million. 

 

Then in the . . . as the member knows, the SIAST review 

committee was critical of the balance between amounts 

expended on administration and amounts available for 

programming at the student level.  So that will be -- and it 

concerned us as well -- that will be one of the areas that we'll 

be scrutinizing closely in the budget for SIAST for the '93-94 

year. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Madam Minister, 

Saskatchewan ranks number one among the provinces in the 

proportion of post-secondary students that attend universities as 

opposed to those who attend technical schools.  And given the 

need to remain economically competitive, I'm wondering -- this 

is really an opinion question -- do you not find these declines in 

admissions to be inconsistent with the need to encourage 

excellence in science and technology? 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, indeed we do.  And 

this is one of the reasons why, in the context of all the reviews 

that we're doing in the educational system, that our very highest 

priority, as indicated by the first exercise that we undertook, 

and the first one to be completed with recommendations to us, 

was the review of SIAST. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  This is my final question, Mr. 

Chairman, on SIAST, and then I'll move to another area if 

that's fine.  The Estimates state that the province will provide 

$70,370,500.  Does SIAST receive any additional funding from 

other sources, such as co-operative training with business, and 

tuition fees?  And if so, what is the value of these additional 

sources of revenue? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, this information would 

likely, I think, have been broken down fairly well in the annual 

report of SIAST that was tabled recently.  But there would be 

numerous other sources of revenue, for instance some of the 

Manpower, the CEIC (Canada Employment and Immigration 

Commission) programs.  Of course the obvious one is tuition 

fees by individual students, which represents a fairly 

substantial percentage of the income to the institutes.  Then 

there are a number of CEIC programs, a number of seats 

purchased by various federal and provincial trade organizations 

in specific training programs.  And this extends to the regional 

colleges as well.  So there would be a substantial amount. 

 

In the absence of having the report, the annual report, in front 

of me, I couldn't be definitive; but while the government 

funding represents a major portion, there certainly are other, 

many other, sources of substantial income.  And potentially, 

with co-operation and building better partnerships with the 

business community, there's certainly a potential for more 

revenue and more co-operation and better outcome for students 

in that respect. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Madam Minister, would you be able 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2053 

to collate the information regarding the value of the additional 

sources of revenue, and provide that with the other material 

that I've requested this evening? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we certainly could 

undertake to provide that information. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  Madam Minister, 

I'm wondering if you will tell us what the faculty-to-student 

ratio is at our two Saskatchewan universities. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there is a breakdown of 

the distribution of full-time university faculty, and as the 

member from Greystone will be familiar with, there are a 

number of categories.  There's full professors, associate 

professors, assistant professors, and other.  There is at the 

University of Regina a total of 372 persons as a total in those 

categories.  And at the University of Saskatchewan there would 

be 1,036.  Those would be full-time university faculty in those 

rankages. 

 

The student count, although I haven't got the ratios worked out, 

but there would be at the University of Saskatchewan, 

including St. Thomas More and St. Peter's at Muenster, in 

1991-92 -- obviously I haven't got the current year's figures yet 

-- 15,556.  At the University of Regina, which of course 

includes Campion, Luther, and SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian 

Federated College), be 8,450; this is the total head counts, not 

the full-time equivalents.  So the total full-time equivalents for 

all campuses would be 24,006 students. 

 

So it would be . . . if you take the total head count, which 

probably isn't quite accurate because that's not all full-time 

equivalents, but the total head count would be 24,000, and that 

would be about a 5 per cent ratio of faculty to students. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I think rather than ask a couple of other 

questions that go along with this, I'm going to get to my point.  

And that is to indicate to you that while in opposition, your 

colleagues condemned the previous government -- endlessly, in 

fact -- for allowing the faculty-to-student ratio to decline at our 

universities. 

 

Since I was teaching at one of them during some of that time, I 

did hear these concerns expressed, and of course very much 

agreed with the fact that there was concern that declining 

teacher-student ratios would mean an erosion of the education 

system, and the quality of not only teaching but the quality of 

learning. 

 

I'm wondering what implications you expect from the decline 

in funding on the quality of education at both the University of 

Saskatchewan and the University of Regina, given how very 

explicit both of the presidents have been, the faculty have been, 

and the students have been, particularly when it comes to 

student-teacher ratio. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, this is a part of, I 

guess, a much larger question, if you like, that's being 

addressed in a number of different ways, including the 

discussions we had earlier about the student aid program and 

accessibility -- the social policy with respect to accessibility of 

students of all ages to post-secondary 

education in Saskatchewan. That's one of the reasons that we 

have struck, and expect them to start working very soon, the 

universities review panel.  And we want them, and their terms 

of reference indicate that they will be, addressing these kind of 

questions.  And we certainly have concerns -- and I guess that 

that's where the review panel has arisen from -- of very large 

class sizes, particularly in the entrance years at university, 

which doesn't contribute to a good atmosphere, and perhaps has 

an effect on the long-term success rate of students.  There are a 

number of very fundamental problems. 

 

I think that in many ways, and to not be critical of the 

institutions, that during more prosperous years that we did 

build up a great many practices, including zero-base budgeting, 

which means like you just can't carry on unless every year you 

get more.  And we're just simply not in that mode.  We know 

that we can expect the co-operation of the universities with the 

review panel, in hopes that we can address some of these 

problems with the paramount objective of a better outcome for 

students in this province who would attend those institutions. 

 

We also did reduce the budget or the third-party grant to the 

regional colleges by only 1 per cent, which is less than the K to 

12 system, less than the cut-back to SIAST, on the basis that 

with the fiscal realities that we face, there are numbers of 

students who simply can't afford to leave home and pay living 

expenses and have access to the major centres in Saskatoon and 

Regina.  That they should be able to have access to 

technological education, to the maths and sciences, through the 

regional colleges at the local level without incurring those 

expenses. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I'm actually 

going to save the whole area of post-secondary education as it 

involves the University of Saskatchewan and the University of 

Regina to a personal conversation with you.  I think I would 

like to explore that, and I don't think that much of what I have 

as major concerns would be any different from what will be 

raised by your committee that you'll have looking into this. 

 

So I shan't take up your time this evening and the time of your 

officials with my comments about it.  And you did mention 

regional colleges which was going to be my next question.  I'm 

wondering if you have considered ways of making the regional 

college system more effective by ensuring that it co-operates 

more closely with the K to 12 system in terms of services?  

And if so, what progress has been made in that regard? 

 

Because I very much concur with you, given the enormous 

expense involved with university education, the regional 

college system is something that I think can be utilized more 

effectively and with perhaps the kinds of results that we are 

looking for for many, many people and at less cost. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question about regional colleges, we expect within a very short 

time to have approval for and be announcing a review of the 

regional college system which is mandated under The Regional 

Colleges Act, very similar to the SIAST review committee. 



2054 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

And we will be asking them, within their terms of reference, to 

specifically address those issues: is the relationship with the K 

to 12 system . . . to communicate with the people who are 

doing the distance education review and the review of the high 

school curriculum and the relationships of regional colleges to 

SIAST and the universities and how they can play a fuller role 

in bringing post-secondary education into rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Madam Minister, over the last 

several years -- and this was actually raised, I believe, by the 

member from Moosomin a bit earlier.  If in fact you've 

provided him with the specifics on this then I'll get the 

information from him -- over the last several years funding for 

scholarships at our universities has been on a significant 

decline and I'm wondering how much funding has actually 

been cut from scholarships and grants? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, part of the bursary 

program is within the decision-making purview of the 

university's board of governors in terms of their budgeting 

exercises.  But that concern about this issue and others in the 

financing and accessibility of students to post-secondary 

education is the reason that we have established the student aid 

review committee; to try and look at a balance between the 

amount of bursaries that are payable to students that are 

prepared to work hard and that have high academic 

achievement but not access to financial resources, so that 

they're not leaving the post-secondary institutions with a huge 

debt load. 

 

I have some numbers here that indicate what provincial 

scholarships were.  It shows that the increase between '91 and 

'81 at a fairly steady pace and then in '91 started to fall off 

again very substantially.  And this was in reaction to financial 

pressures. 

 

But I don't have the exact numbers here -- well not in 

percentages.  It fell from 6.8 million in '90-91 to 5 million in 

'91-92, which is 1.8 million. 

 

But I would like to point out that notwithstanding the 

universities' decisions to raise their tuition fees by more than 10 

per cent and so forth, that the total cut-back in third-party 

grants of government funding to the two universities at 1 per 

cent was 1.7 million, which -- to both universities -- in the 

context of their total income, their income from tuition fees and 

other sources and the government grants, that 1 per cent, or 1.7 

million, really is a very small amount and is . . . the bursaries 

are non-repayable scholarships, were cut back in the year prior, 

more than that. 

 

So I think it points out the reasons why we want those 

institutions to look very closely at their administration and the 

way they do things and where the money . . . how the money 

goes through the institution, through the administration; and 

why, when there are reductions or cut-backs, that it seemed that 

they seemed to come at the level of the student and not 

elsewhere in the institutions. 

 

(2015) 
 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I think one 

of the things we have to keep in mind here is that there are a 

combination of issues that are being faced at 

universities and particularly when it comes to students who 

stay there for some time and are trying to go through graduate 

work, and in some cases, post-graduate work. 

 

The issues include such things as a lack of opportunity for 

employment, not just employment that is out of the university 

circle but as monies tighten at the university with less pay 

increases for faculty, faculty actually choose to be teaching 

such things as intersession classes and summer school and 

taking on the kinds of things that previously some graduate 

students were able to receive extra monies for.  That's one 

issue, is that there are far less dollars available to people who 

are students who are needing to have money to continue in 

their education. 

 

A second area is that we are getting further and further behind 

as far as our competitiveness in providing scholarships and 

research grants, even the kind of lab provisions that are 

necessary in the natural sciences for people at our universities.  

And therefore some of our very best students, who are the ones 

who can compete for scholarships across the nation, are going 

elsewhere. 

 

And I think that it is really tragic what is happening.  In my 

own case, I was very blessed to be able to have my funding at 

the doctoral level provided through federal fellowships.  And 

that is not something that is available to many people, given the 

competitiveness now across the nation. 

 

What concerns me a great deal here is, we should be able to 

look specifically at how we can ensure that we provide for the 

very best minds to stay in this province and to be able to let us 

be the beneficiaries of their education and their knowledge.  

And that's one of the things that I'm very much hoping that you 

will be able to address with your post-secondary committee or 

your committee on universities. 

 

But we should be able to know in this House how funding cuts 

at whatever level actually are suddenly realized in fewer 

scholarships and in fewer  research grants, and the 

repercussions of that, particularly when it comes to numbers of 

people.  And I think we should be able to say how many 

graduate students are actually left in search of trying to find 

funding after scholarships and research grants were cut. 

 

Because we're here talking about dollars and cents -- this is 

called Estimates -- but what we're really talking about when 

we're talking education is the people of this province, whether 

it's the young people that everybody refers to as our future or 

whether it's all of us who need to have people with talent and 

education, for which we've paid, be able to stay here and 

contribute to our economy. 

 

So I do hope that . . . And I don't expect you to have this this 

evening, but I do hope that at the next Education Estimates that 

we can in fact hear about scholarships and research grants, 

what has been done to try to expedite a way of having greater 

access to monies for people, and knowing the exact numbers of 

individuals who are affected, either . . .  And one would hope 

that it's going to be in the other direction -- you being able to 

say to me the next time we're here, these were the numbers of 

people that we were talking about last year and look at how 

many 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2055 

more people were able to be the recipients of these things for 

next year. 

 

Having gone on in that recitation, I'll ask you a question.  Aside 

from Saskatchewan's two major urban centres, the only other 

population growth being experienced in our province is with 

aboriginal peoples, primarily on reserves.  Given this situation, 

I'd like to know how you've analysed the future education 

needs of aboriginal peoples. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question with respect to aboriginal education, we recognize this 

as one of the major issues in this province for the '90s. 

 

We have entered into recently a five-year agreement with the 

Gabriel Dumont Institute.  There have been agreements before, 

joint agreements, but they were always for a one-year basis, on 

a one-year basis.  We think that the five-year agreement will 

give them some better permanency and continuity to develop 

programs and curriculum with Metis content. 

 

We are in the closing stages, I believe, of doing the same thing, 

entering into longer-term -- five-year versus one-year -- 

agreements with NORTEP (northern teacher education 

program) in the teacher education programs, on the basis that 

five years will give them a better planning horizon and more 

permanency to the programs. 

 

I met as recently as yesterday with people from the leadership 

of the Metis society on education issues for aboriginal people.  

We are also as a province working with the other three western 

provinces, the Territories, and the Yukon in developing a 

collaborative model for developing aboriginal content 

throughout the curriculum. 

 

Obviously there are some differences because the native 

peoples in Saskatchewan in terms of awareness through the 

whole school curriculum and curriculum designed for them 

obviously has to be different with respect to the Plains Indians 

and the Inuit in the Northwest Territories. 

 

But we still feel as a group of education ministries that there 

are ways that cores can be developed and then regional 

flavours can be put on instead of six different centres 

re-inventing the wheel.  And everybody, every single province 

and territory represented at that meeting where we discussed 

this issue identifies aboriginal issues in education and the 

curriculum as a very high priority for them. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Madam 

Minister, within the aboriginal communities they've identified a 

particular need and that need is for technical training.  Experts 

in the field of education tell us that there's been quite a 

devotion of money to educating a cultured people, people who 

are cultured already, in the liberal arts.  And I'm wondering 

what funds you are making available for post-secondary 

technical education for aboriginal peoples. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response, I'm not 

sure whether we have a complete summary because 

there's a range of programs, some of them provincially funded, 

some federally funded directly through the education system, 

and a number of other training programs that are initiatives 

through the CEIC or Manpower retraining initiatives. 

 

So whether we have a global total, I'm not really sure.  We 

have provincial funding, and I think we're the only province to 

do this, to have direct provincial funding in what we call the 

NSIM, non-status Indian and Metis program, which will 

sponsor about 850 students this year in post-secondary 

technical training through agreements with the Dumont 

technical institute and the SIIT (Saskatchewan Indian Institute 

of Technologies).  This year there's $4.8 million allocated to 

those programs.  This is provincial dollars.  It doesn't include 

any of the other federal initiatives or Manpower training.  And 

this program supports individuals in preparing for academic 

programs in regional colleges and SIAST.  And all Metis and 

non-status Indians, in addition to this $4.8 million, are able to 

access the regular student aid fund to assist them in accessing 

post-secondary technical. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I'm quite 

interested in one particular area and of course that is technical 

training.  I'm wondering if you would provide for me in 

writing, what programs are in place to help make this training 

available, technical training available to aboriginal peoples, 

how many persons are expected to benefit from such programs, 

and the costs associated with them. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we can certainly 

undertake to do that.  It is fairly extensive overall.  I would just 

want to make sure to clarify whether the member from 

Greystone would be asking about just provincial funding or all 

initiatives . . . Just provincial funding?  Okay, because that 

would make it a somewhat smaller job because there are 

comprehensive programs that are either federal or cost shared.  

But we can certainly provide the provincial contributions, and 

we will do that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  I have one last 

question, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, given the 

importance of science and technology to our economic future, 

and all of us these days, I'm sure, have been reading a great 

deal about globalization and particularly the impact of having 

moved out of the industrial era into the information age, I think 

it's important for us not only to think of the role of aboriginal 

people in our province -- I think our future lies there -- but also 

the importance of women who are under-represented in 

engineering and in sciences overall.  I think we have a need to 

encourage a wide range of individuals to enter these 

professions.  I'm wondering what programs are now in place 

that might help eliminate the imbalance of women being 

involved in these fields, and if there are none, if you have any 

intention to implement them. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, when we're addressing 

the programs and the responsibility to set up programs that 

have particular respect to the needs of minority groups or 

disabled people, women, we're generally talking about the 

responsibility of those autonomous organizations to establish 

those.  There are some but we recognize -- and I think it's 

generally 



2056 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

recognized -- that it's one thing to say the words but its another 

thing to hear the music and we have to do it.  So one of the 

ways that we have attempted to address this is to make sure in 

all of our appointments to the governing bodies -- which is 

really besides conditional funding of which there is very little 

-- the major influence that we can have is in our appointments 

to those governing bodies.  And we have had, in spite of some 

criticisms, we have had profound respect for appointments of 

aboriginal people, at least gender parity in terms of making 

sure that women are represented on those governing bodies, so 

that the decisions that are made in funding and programming 

will have, we hope, a good opportunity of representing the 

needs of those groups. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  I do appreciate 

your cooperation this evening.  I look forward to your written 

responses very much.  I'd like to thank your officials and thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was 

wondering if the minister could please give me a list of all the 

boards, committees, panels, that would report to her from 

within the Department of Education. 

 

(2030) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I meant to do this at 

the outset, but I had put it aside because it takes up so much 

room.  I wish to table -- what represents I believe -- the 

answers to all the questions posed by the member opposite in 

the previous session. 

 

On the covering letter there's an indication that there are two 

questions -- a breakdown of in-province travel expenditures 

and the breakdown of expenditures of boards, commissions, 

committees and so forth -- that we're still working on.  This is 

very extensive and will involve quite a few person hours, if you 

like.  That will be forthcoming and we've noted that it is still 

outstanding, but I think the balance of the information that you 

requested, or that the hon. member has requested, Mr. 

Chairman, is included.  I'd like to table it now. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Will that 

include all the names of all the boards and the people on them? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, what we've indicated 

on the covering letter of this package is that the expenses 

related to the boards, commissions, and so forth is still being 

compiled.  But I believe that the membership of the boards and 

the other information, except for the expenses that the member 

refers to, was already tabled in the previous session.  I'm sure it 

was. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, I have a few more questions or a series of questions 

and discussions I'd like to have with you over the Elbow 

School, of course.  And I'm hoping, Madam Minister, that we 

can count on your help and your department's help to try to 

solve this impasse that's happening out in Elbow, Loreburn. 

 

And I'm just wondering if you've been . . . how many letters 

you've got . . . received from the Elbow, Loreburn, 

Strongfield area concerning this here problem area. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I haven't counted the 

representations.  And I'm aware also of a petition that was 

received and tabled in this House. 

 

What has happened since the last time we discussed this issue 

in the House is that there have been some deliberations by the 

local school division in that area.  People from the department, 

from the facilities branch, have taken visits to the field to 

review the condition of the facilities and there is an indication 

that the school board is reconsidering the options, let me put it 

that way. 

 

And certainly we are not attempting to influence the decisions 

in any way.  As the member opposite realizes, the people on 

the school divisions are duly elected by the ratepayers of the 

area to manage the affairs of the school division.  And we as a 

department or as a ministry do not interfere with those 

decisions. 

 

However, we do try to make sure that all the resources of the 

department, in terms of technical advice, are available to them 

to assist them in making decisions.  And we're continuing to 

provide that and to consult with them as they request.  And we 

are sure that ultimately the local elected officials will make the 

right decision with respect to the parents and students in the 

school division of Outlook. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you.  Madam Minister, the last time 

that I talked to you about figures and what has happened and 

approved by the department was approximately $400-and-some 

million for repairing a roof on the Loreburn School and two 

relocateable class-rooms.  Now could you tell me, inform me 

what the new plans are that's different than that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, this has a fairly long 

history actually.  The department had rated the capital project 

for Loreburn as a priority one project in 1991, in the previous 

administration.  However, that administration did not approve 

the project to go ahead amongst the approvals in principle that 

they granted. 

 

However as I say, consultation is ongoing within the school 

division and with the facilities branch.  There was an amount 

that was approved in principle as an emergency amount at the 

request of the Outlook School Division and in light of the fact 

that the project had been rated a priority one by the previous 

administration. 

 

However, this is the information that I have as of today, is that 

the whole project is being reconsidered by the school division 

in consultation with the facilities branch, and I would suggest 

that we await the outcome of those consultations. 

 

There was $438,000 was projected to be the total cost for the 

roof repairs and relocateables.  But as I say, that is the amount 

and the project that is under reconsideration by the school 

division at the current time. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you.  I think I said 438 million, I 

didn't . . . I meant 438,000, but you understood it because we've 

used those figures before.  At least I had the 438 right. 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2057 

Madam Minister, what I was wanting . . . if you would explain: 

what do you understand?  I know what they're saying out there.  

Elbow's saying one thing and Loreburn's saying another, and 

division board, I understand, are making some 

recommendations.  What do you understand, Madam Minister?  

Is there new recommendations that they're talking about? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as I said before, there 

are internal reconsiderations going on within the school 

division in consultation with the facilities branch of the 

department.  I think that a definite decision has not yet been 

taken, and I wouldn't like to comment on it because in no way 

are we trying to influence a decision of the people at the local 

level who surely know what is best for the people that they 

serve. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I 

know that the figure of the 438,000 . . . you told me before that 

was the amount that was passed at that time and they're going 

to reconsider.  But this paper that I have here I think it came 

from you or from your office -- it's to the minister's office --  I 

do believe when I wasn't here in Education Estimates.  But 

correct me if I'm wrong, Madam Minister, that this didn't come 

from you, but this is the paper I have in my hand regardless of 

where it came from. 

 

Its issue is a capital project, 

 

  . . . for Loreburn School to repair roof and add relocatable 

classrooms to accommodate K-6 students from Strongfield, 

Loreburn, and Elbow. 

 

 RESPONSE: 

 

 Saskatchewan Education rated this a priority one project in 

1991, but it was not approved by the previous administration 

(as you said, Madam Minister).  Saskatchewan Education 

believes this request by the school division to be a worthy 

project and will be providing emergency funding in 1992 for 

a roof repair and relocatable classrooms. 

 

All right then, the background is this: 

 

 Loreburn has operated as a 7-12 school for students in each 

of these towns.  Loreburn is the best facility to expand to 

accommodate K-12.  This facility is located in the centre of 

the attendance area. 

 

 Elbow is a K-6 school for students from Elbow and 

Loreburn.  Elbow is a small facility with K-6 and no gym.  It 

is located at the extreme south end of the division attendance 

area. 

 

 Strongfield is a K-6 school.  Strongfield is substandard with 

approximately 34 students, should be closed. 

 

 Strongfield School is in very poor condition . . . 

 

The reason why I wanted to read to you because I want to 

maybe discuss whether these things are all accurate or not. 

 

 . . . The Outlook School Division believes (and we concur) 

that there is no point in spending any money to repair this 

facility.  It is much more logical to close the facility and send 

the children the seven miles to Loreburn. 

 

 There is little utility in having the Loreburn K-6 children go 

to Elbow by bussing them past Loreburn.  Elbow, 

consequently, will be left with approximately 30 K-6 

children. 

 

 The Outlook School Division board is planning to close the 

Elbow and Strongfield Schools effective June 30, 1993 . . . 

 

I mean this is what they're saying, and this is the notification 

Elbow's had, that they're going to close it: 

 

 . . . effective June 30, 1993, and consolidate three schools 

into one.  From an educational standpoint, this makes very 

good sense. 

 

 There will be pressure from the Elbow Local (school) Board 

and community to keep their school open.  They believe that 

Elbow is going to expand to  become the recreational centre 

of the province.  They have been saying this for years 

although enrolment in the school has not changed. 

 

 Saskatchewan Education has approved this project after 

consultation with the Outlook Board and after evaluating the 

Strongfield situation as a significant health and safety 

concern . . . motions passed by the Outlook Board will 

rationalize educational programs in this part of their School 

Division. 

 

 In 1990, the Board has requested Saskatchewan Education 

conduct a facility study of all their schools in the Outlook (I 

guess it must be . . . mean this if . . . it's kind of blurred here, 

Madam Minister, but I think maybe for all their schools in the 

Outlook) School Division . . . The study, with various 

options, was presented to the Board in August, 1990. 

 

And this is signed by Mr. Brunas. 

 

Now is that the new recommendations that they're talking 

about, or is what you say you didn't want to discuss, is it 

something further than this, Madam Minister?  After you 

answer me that, then I want to go back through some of these 

things and maybe get it cleared up, a few items. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

read everything on this sheet of paper, which he has and I have, 

except the date, and it's June 16, 1992.  And there is . . . Yes, 

there is, as I indicated, some more recent developments and 

some current discussions that are not concluded as yet.  So this 

would be dated by almost two months now, or at least six 

weeks.  And this 



2058 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

paper, dated June 16, reflected the views and the preferences, 

and in some cases there's an indication that the department 

concurs, but it basically reflected the views and 

recommendations of the local school division. 

 

Since this time, since June 16, representations have been made 

by parents and ratepayers.  In response to that, the school 

division has asked the department . . . representatives of the 

department to come out and review the situation.  That's been 

done.  Consultations are ongoing.  I understand that some of 

the original recommendations of the school division are being 

reviewed.  And when a decision is made, I'm sure that the 

member opposite will know the results sooner than I do since 

it's the area in which he lives.  And I assume maybe his 

grandchildren even go to school there. 

 

But yes, there is other information but not anything I can 

provide in writing.  As I say, it's a subject of ongoing 

discussions.  And there may be some modification of the 

conclusions that were reached and recommendations that were 

made in this paper of six to seven weeks ago. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, I knew, Madam Minister . . . Mr. 

Chairman, and Madam Minister, I knew you likely had this 

paper because I'm not sure where it came from.  I got it from 

one of my . . . from the colleague from Souris-Cannington, and 

I didn't ask where it came from. 

 

But as far as I know, that the Elbow local school board knows 

nothing about this yet.  Because one of our members, the 

member from Estevan, was in Elbow just a few days ago and 

they have heard nothing.  This is a June 16 letter and this is 

almost, this is well into August now.  And as one of the local 

school board members talked to the member from Estevan who 

was out at Elbow and said they had a meeting in your office 

and they thought they had a good reception and that things 

were maybe going quite well.  But they know nothing about 

this letter and I wasn't going -- until I discussed with you -- I 

wasn't going to, in case there's something else happening since 

this, maybe even send it to them, but we'll have to talk about 

that. 

 

(2045) 

 

But that's been the problem, Madam Minister, that's been a lot 

of the problem that the school division has not been, through 

the years, has not been keeping the Elbow area notified -- the 

local board -- in the manner that they should be. 

 

And I know that we can say here, I can say as the MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for the area, and you as 

the minister, that we shouldn't be interfering there, but I've 

been asked to interfere and help as an MLA to try to keep their 

school open.  And it has caused some . . . Anytime you ever get 

discussing and get involved with school closures, as we talked 

about the other day, it causes a problem.  And you've been 

asked by 400-plus names on a petition to help the Elbow school 

people.  You haven't had . . . very few calls or . . . I've only had 

four calls totally from Loreburn and one from Strongfield, and 

between the petition, I've got over 500 letters, phone calls, and 

the petition, I've got 500 

_and-some names.  Now those will be some repetition there, 

between phone 

calls and the names on the petition. 

 

And they are really an upset group of people in Elbow, that 

their town is nearly 400 people and they're losing their school.  

And you can understand that.  And all I want is to make sure 

that all the details are understood by your office.  Because I'm 

going to go through some of them because I don't think that all 

of the facts are coming out. 

 

In this letter here, for instance . . . I visited at a meeting in 

Elbow where all the school boards -- local school boards -- 

were at, representing Strongfield, Loreburn, and Elbow.  This 

was in the Elbow Elementary School.  And the teacher from 

Strongfield didn't say anything about anything being wrong 

with their school except something wrong with the heating 

system, although he was in favour of moving it to the school . . 

. closing the school down and moving it to Loreburn.  And I'm 

not saying that I'm against or recommending that the 

Strongfield School remain open.  It's not a hardship for the . . . 

when there's getting low on population there and not many 

students left in the town of Strongfield, to take them to 

Loreburn.  And I do understand it's a different . . . little more of 

a hardship to have to take them way down to Elbow.  I do 

understand that, and I'm not . . . I used to get requests for 

several years, keep our school open, and I done everything I 

could to recommend to the department to keep Strongfield 

School open as long as possible. 

 

But it's the perception that's been left that Strongfield School is 

just an old wreck.  And that seems to be what I'm picking up 

talking to some officials in Saskatoon and, not right in the last 

while, in the department in Regina, but that's the impression 

that I get.  And it's not that way.  I haven't been in the school 

for the last . . . for a while but I've driven by and I'm told that 

it's in good condition, so it's just not correct. 

 

But if the people in Strongfield . . . they're not contacting me 

and they don't want to lose their school but still they're not so 

excited as the Elbow people, and you can't blame them.  But 

anyway, I just wanted to bring that to your attention, that the 

school is done and finished and it's a wreck, poor condition, 

when everybody concerned at that meeting said all that was 

wrong with the school is just the furnace and it would take 

about $8,000. 

 

And it was some of the division board members from Outlook 

that said, oh, well, you get into a . . . (inaudible) . . . that you 

get into all these things.  Well that's in all schools pretty well 

and that's not a serious problem.  And they had quite an 

argument about that. 

 

But before I get off Strongfield, I do want to apologize for a 

statement I said about Strongfield in the . . . back here a month 

or more ago, whenever we were talking about it.  It was June 8.  

It's a long time since we talked about that -- pretty near two 

months -- where I did make a mistake in saying that there was 

only one business in the town.  And I do want to apologize to 

the Strongfield people because I knew just after I said that that 

there were several good businesses in that town. 

 

So that's been brought to my attention, that you don't know our 

town very well if there's only one business.  And I knew better 

than that.  So I just want to apologize and 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2059 

have it on the record for the Strongfield people about that one 

incident. 

 

And I also want to take this opportunity for a point that I made 

about the Leader of the Liberal Party here the other night in the 

House.  That's not too long ago, where . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Gee, you're apologizing an awful lot 

tonight. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well a Conservative says . . . Mr. Chairman, 

the House Leader says I'm apologizing.  When it's brought to 

my attention that I've said something wrong, Conservatives 

have no problem apologizing.  It's socialists that don't know 

what the word apologizing means.  But I know what it means, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

And I'm going to apologize in this manner, though.  Just not 

just like maybe you all think.  I did make an accusation that the 

Leader of the Liberal Party sent Hansards out to the area, 

which is all right because I send Hansards out to the area.  It's 

just something that one MLA doesn't do to another.  And it was 

brought to my attention, and by the Leader of the Liberal Party, 

that she had nothing to do with this.  It turned out that some 

individual went to her office in Saskatoon and got the copies 

from there and made them and sent them out from there. 

 

So I want to apologize to the Leader of the Liberal Party that 

she had nothing to do with it.  Except the copies did come from 

her office.  But I've also been asked by her that said, she made 

the statement that I should check out my sources before I say 

statements. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- But, Mr. Chairman, to be fair, when the 

House Leader tells me something, or any individual, I take him 

at his word to be right.  The same as I took the individuals from 

Loreburn and Elbow that told me that this came from the 

Leader of the Liberal Party, that's where this came from. 

 

And so if it turns out for the example I'll use, that if the House 

Leader or anyone else tells me anything or the Leader of the 

Liberal Party makes a statement and you believe it to be so, and 

it turns out that it's not so, who did wrong?  Not the person that 

retold it.  It's the person that told you wrong in the first place. 

 

If the House Leader tells me something, Mr. Chairman, if the 

House Leader that's chirping from his seat, and if he tells me 

something I take him at his word.  And if I repeat that to 

someone and it turns out to be a falsehood, it's him that give me 

the wrong information. 

 

And that's why I am apologizing to the Leader of the Liberal 

Party.  Except in doing so -- I want to have this on the record -- 

that in doing this for her, I want her then in turn when she says 

statements pertaining to the NDP Party or the Progressive 

Conservative Party, then she must check out her sources or 

apologize also. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now, Mr. Chairman, back onto the 

Elbow School.  I just want to, for the record . . . and I'm going 

to read some of this into the record then I'll give you a copy, 

Madam Minister.  I don't think the department has this.  It's 

done, it was given to me by the people in the Elbow area. 

 

And there was also some accusations made to me that I didn't 

have my facts right when I was talking about Elbow, Loreburn, 

and Strongfield's assessment base.  So I have a statement here 

that I want to put on the record that maybe the people that 

contradict me should check their sources out.  Because I got 

this from the Outlook school board. 

 

And it gives all the assessments of all the towns and RMs.  

Now they've got Strongfield is 256,660 assessment, and 

Mistusinne -- which is a park not too far from Elbow so that 

goes in with the Elbow -- and it's 1,068,440 assessment; and 

the town of Elbow is 1,494,900.  Loreburn is only 987,200 

assessment. 

 

So if you take Strongfield, 256,260, and you take Loreburn, 

787,000 -- I guess it is -- 200, you've got about a million 

assessment; where Elbow has almost a million and a half, plus 

another million in Mistusinne which is in the Elbow area.  So 

we're talking two and a half million versus a million for 

assessment.  I want this on the record, because if this is wrong 

then the Outlook School Division put out the wrong 

information. 

 

Now what I think's what we need to clear up -- and I'm saying 

this for the record, Madam Minister, not between you and I -- 

it's the RM of Loreburn, which is seven million, six hundred 

and fourteen nine, so they think they have much more 

assessment. But I want to make it clear that the area of 

Loreburn has . . . the municipality also takes in the town of 

Strongfield and the town of Elbow and this Mistusinne park 

there.  This is actually called a townsite there now, so I just 

want to put that on there for the record. 

 

Mostly what I wanted to get into, and as I'm through . . . I only 

have the one copy, Madam Minister.  It's to clear up some of 

the misunderstandings of what schools are dropping in 

population, whether it's Loreburn or Strongfield, or whether it's 

Elbow.  And I have it all here very clearly that this is the bus 

students that are brought in to Elbow.  Davidson School 

Division have 4; Loreburn rural, 11; Loreburn village, 9; 

Elbow rural, 12; Elbow village, special arrangements, 1.  Total 

bus students is 37.  Students from the village of Elbow, 28; 

special arrangements bus, 1.  Total students from within village 

27.  Total students (a) and (b) is 64.  So that's how many 

students there are in the Elbow Elementary School now. 

 

Then it goes to Elbow Elementary School, 1991-92 school 

term, enrolment summary breakdown as of June 26, '92, by 

grade.  Kindergarten -- they have all the names but I won't read 

the names out -- the total for Loreburn is one; Loreburn rural, 

zero; Elbow village, four; and Elbow rural, one; for a total of 

five . . . or a total of six, and five come from Elbow, one from 

the other area. 

 

And then for grade 1, Loreburn village, one; Loreburn rural, 

two; Elbow village, one.  So a total of four, there's one comes 

from Elbow and the other three from the 



2060 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

Loreburn-Strongfield area. 

 

Then in grade 2: there's Loreburn village, two; Loreburn rural, 

zero; Elbow village, four; Elbow rural, two -- another two -- for 

a total of ten when six come from Elbow. 

 

And then in grade 3, Madam Minister: there's Loreburn village, 

zero; Loreburn rural, three; Elbow village, six; Elbow rural, 

three; and other, one -- total of 13, 10 come from Elbow, 3 

from the other areas. 

 

Then there's grade 4: a total of 10 from Loreburn-Elbow area; 

two come from Loreburn, two from Loreburn village, three 

from Elbow rural, and three more from Elbow village -- 10 for 

a total; again 6 out of 10 come from Elbow. 

 

Then in grade 5: there's Loreburn rural, zero; Loreburn village, 

zero; Elbow rural, two; Elbow village, five.  In grade 5 that's a 

total of seven in that class.  And seven out of seven come from 

Elbow. 

 

And then in grade 6, there's a total of 13: Loreburn rural, four; 

Loreburn village, three; Elbow rural, one; Elbow village, four; 

and other, one -- a total of 13, 6 come from Elbow. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I know this takes a little time, 

but if somebody goes to this much work, a school teacher in 

Elbow, I think it's only fair . . . and she asked for me to do this 

-- and when this Mrs. Wilson done this, I think it's fair to her 

that I do this.  So I apologize to the House, Mr. Chairman, if it's 

taking a little time.  But it's quite important; it's important to 

these people, and I want to keep on. 

 

In those classes that I gave you, Madam Minister, there was 

only the one class that had more at the north end than they did 

the south end.  Elbow -- the students mostly come from there. 

 

The bus students, the total bus students is 19 come from Elbow 

out of the 34 that are bused in -- 19 come from Elbow alone.  

Students from village of Elbow is 26, and special arranged 

bused, total students at 24 -- total students is 58, which 43 out 

of . . . out of 58 students, Madam Minister, out of the 58 

students bused in, 43 come from the Elbow area and the 

remainder 15 come from the North. 

 

(2100) 

 

Now this is just trying to impress upon you, Madam Minister, 

that the information you get from the area about all the 

students, and this being the proper thing to close the . . . you 

spent a lot of money on building up . . . more money on the 

Loreburn School and closing Strongfield School for the 

expense of the Elbow School, to me, is not correct when they 

have the population down at Elbow.  They got the population 

of the students.  Then they go through . . . and I won't read this 

into the record, Madam Minister, because the rest now is the 

proposed for '92-93.  I'll just try to summarize here because it's 

not quite so important, but it is important.  It's the future. 

They got a total of eight for kindergarten and six come from 

Elbow.  In grade 1 a total of seven, five come from the Elbow.  

For grade 2 a total of five and three come from Elbow.  In 

grade 3, total of eight and seven come from Elbow. And in 

grade 4 a total of 13 and 10 come from Elbow.  In grade 5 a 

total of 10 and 6 come from Elbow.  In grade 6 a total of seven 

and seven come from Elbow. 

 

And I think that's important to have that put into the record 

because it shows that most of the students do come from the 

Elbow area, and they talk about a decline.  The division people 

from the Outlook division board have been notifying that 

there's been a drop in students at Elbow.  They've been 

notifying the Saskatoon department, I believe a Mr. Glen 

Penner's been involved.  And they've been saying, oh Elbow 

School is dropping.  Well I'll tell you why it's dropping.  It's the 

students from Loreburn that go to Elbow.  They're the ones that 

drop.  Elbow hasn't dropped.  They're the only town in my 

whole riding, in fact in the whole school district, is Elbow and 

Hanley that has an increase in population.  Every other town 

has dropped.  Every other school has dropped. 

 

So they're misrepresenting you, they're misrepresenting the 

department, and that's what's causing Elbow to be angry when 

they're saying, oh Elbow School is dropping down in students.  

It's not that way, Madam Minister.  It's the Loreburn people 

that . . . And they can't help it, their town is smaller and 

nobody's talking about closing their school. 

 

That's why I want it very clear that no one, including myself or 

anybody that's involved . . . Loreburn hasn't got a problem.  

They've got a K, 7 to 12, Elbow's got the K, 1 to 6. So if it was 

the other way around and Loreburn was losing a school, 

naturally I would be trying to maintain that school.  But we're 

trying to spend a lot of money in the Loreburn School to . . . 

and it's going to be a lot of money if we go move Elbow up 

there because it won't be 438,000. 

 

I'm understanding it's in a division, the Outlook division school 

board or unit board directive that's around a million, four or 

five thousand, a million four hundred thousand if they close the 

Elbow school and move them to Loreburn.  So we're talking 

about an extra million dollars here.  So we're talking about 

spending taxpayers' money of close to a million dollars more or 

less.  That's been an architect that come in to Loreburn and 

made that estimate of spending approximately a million dollars 

at the expense of the Loreburn School.  So I just want to 

suggest this, Madam Minister, that perhaps the people that are 

negotiating in your department and talking to the school boards 

and talking to the area, that maybe this could be a way of 

solving the problem. 

 

I talked to some people in Loreburn the other night and when I 

mentioned this they said, you're right on, because we have to 

do something because the little town of Elbow or Loreburn, 

they're related to one another.  They're friends with one another 

and we have to try to do our best to stop . . . if somebody's mad 

at me or mad at you when this is over, it doesn't matter.  But we 

don't want little towns that are mad at one another. 

 

So when I made this suggestion that you go ahead with 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2061 

the money -- the 438,000 or whatever -- and move the 

Strongfield students there, if that's what Strongfield's not 

opposing that, and not take the K,1 to 6 down to Elbow but just 

maintain the Elbow School for their 30 to 40 students that they 

would have left, that's what I think would . . . if we could just 

get those kind of negotiations going. 

 

So I ask you, Madam Minister, if you could kind of talk along 

or maybe get some of your people to think along those lines 

and maybe we could negotiate between the local boards, the 

school division and maybe work out something that everybody 

goes away happy and nobody loses a school. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, this is exactly the 

process that we have advocated, that we have supported, and 

that we have been part of from the outset.  And as I said earlier, 

this wasn't a letter, Mr. Chairman, in response to the member 

opposite, this was a briefing note dated June 16 that had 

actually been prepared in response to the questions raised on 

June 8 by the member from Arm River.  And then at the time 

that Estimates resumed -- I think after some bell-ringing and 

other things that happened -- the member from Arm River 

wasn't present when a question was raised by the member from 

Greystone with respect to the issue in the same area.  So I 

tabled at that particular time and provided to her a copy of the 

briefing note dated June 16.  But the member from Arm River 

wasn't present so he didn't have a copy. 

 

But as I say, this is the briefing note of which is now nearly 

two months old, which provided some background of the 

situation.  Consultations have been going on within the school 

division, with all the interested parties, as they should. 

 

The original decision . . . the notice of decision that the school 

division made indicated action to be taken a year hence for the 

school term beginning September 1993.  And the notice period 

is intended to . . . and as I understand is being used by all the 

people, parents, ratepayers, students who would be affected by 

the decision to try and search for viable alternatives.  The 

department will be of support and assistance wherever they 

can, but will not interfere or try to influence in any way, as the 

ministry will not, the decision of the duly elected school 

division board. 

 

So I can only say that we support that process of local 

autonomy.  If there are different opinions being given there, 

questions being raised, meetings being held and people 

listening to each other with respect to this issue, that's exactly 

how the process is supposed to work as outlined in the 

Education Act.  And we support that process and we have 

every confidence that the eventual outcome will be the right 

one, will be successful for all the people in the Outlook School 

Division. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, Madam 

Minister.  Yes I hope you're right, hope this can happen.  But 

let's be very, very clear that no matter what they come up with 

out there for a solution, that if it means more money and more 

money from the department, the decision has to be made in 

here.  So don't let us ever kid 

ourselves, and you, Madam Minister, don't kid yourself, that 

local autonomy is going to be what's going to happen if it 

means more money and you have to, your department has to 

make the decision.  I think you realize that. 

 

That if they're going to be able to put the three schools . . . all 

amalgamate together in one school for $438,000 which they 

have to have that -- Loreburn must have that, that roof is in bad 

shape and it must go ahead.  But if they go ahead with closing 

the Elbow school, can your department or can you, Madam 

Minister, give me a figure on how much more money it would 

cost to close the Elbow School and move it to Loreburn? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the information that we 

have here, which is dated June 16, addresses a capital project 

for the Loreburn School to repair the roof and add relocateable 

classrooms which would accommodate the K to 6 students 

from Strongfield, Loreburn and Elbow, if indeed that was the 

decision of the school division, and the estimated cost of that, 

the roof and the relocateables was $438,000. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Then, Madam Minister, if this is the figure 

of $400-and-some thousand . . . I understand that each 

relocateable is around $200,000.  So if it's 438 for two and a 

roof, how could one more, how could one more classroom take 

care of the Elbow School and still end up with the same 

amount of money? 

 

I don't understand that.  And I don't understand how come that 

the local school board has been given the figures . . . they were 

right there at the meeting, the Elbow school board was at the 

Outlook unit board meeting in Outlook.  And an architect said 

it would cost about 1.4 to $6 million to move Elbow to that 

school.  Now that's what's wrong here.  The wrong 

information's getting out.  You can't have the taxpayers from 

the Outlook school district, some thinking that it's one and a 

half million and you, the minister, says about half a million.  

Now that's $1 million out.  But that's the way this whole 

government operates.  The Minister of Finance is out millions 

every day.  He just got an interim supply Bill here for half a 

billion dollars passed, and didn't even answer any questions on 

it. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I want you to be able to tell me and so I 

can have it on the record for the Elbow people, which is right.  

Is it going to cost a half a million dollars, or roughly -- 

whatever that figure was that you gave me -- to move Elbow 

and have the Loreburn School be suitable for a K, 1 to 12 plus 

the kindergarten?  What is it going to cost?  Who is right, your 

figure or the Outlook School Division?  Is it one and a half 

million or is it a half a million?  Which is it? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the estimate of the 

facilities branch was that for a capital project for the Loreburn 

School -- I repeat -- to repair the roof and provide relocateable 

class-rooms which would accommodate the transfer of K to 6 

students from Strongfield, Loreburn, and Elbow, if this was the 

wish of the school division, that that cost would be $438,000.  

Whether someone else came and said that to build a whole new 

school, which didn't include relocateables or whatever the 

hypotheticals are, would cost more than that, I have no idea. 



2062 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

I think that it is the responsibility of the school division to 

make sure that the proper, adequate, and accurate information 

is placed before the ratepayers in support of their -- the division 

board's -- decision to take whatever action it is they deem is 

appropriate.  And I think the hypotheticals of what would 

happen if -- it is simply not in our purview.  It is a decision that 

is the responsibility of the duly elected local board.  We will try 

to provide resources for them in terms of Estimates and making 

their decisions.  When they have made their decision, we will 

support it, whatever it is, on the basis that they're duly elected 

to make those decisions. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, if that 

figure turns out to be a million and a half, will you support 

that?  Madam Minister, I went through a letter here tonight 

where they're going to close the Elbow School in June 30, 

1993.  And will you tell me that you will support no matter 

what they come up with, that if it happens to be a million 

dollars more than what the figure that you're giving me, that 

you'll support that.  If it's a million dollars more or roughly will 

you support that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, where capital costs are 

concerned, as we've outlined in the House on previous 

occasions, the manner in which school capital is allocated is 

under review.  Priority lists will be established.  And any 

capital project will be evaluated on its merits and will receive 

funding as funds become available. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, have you 

or have you not got a directive of some kind or a minute or 

whatever from the Outlook School Division talking in the 

figures of this Loreburn School being approximately a million 

and a half dollars?  I don't want to be quoted to the exact dollar.  

Is there a directive in your department? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we have an approval in 

principle for $438,000 of what is called emergency funding for 

roof repairs and relocateables for the Loreburn school.  This 

was at the request of the Outlook School Division with respect 

to the school, the configuration they want to have for their 

students. 

 

We don't have, to my knowledge, an application for anything 

different than that or more than that.  What we have is an 

indication that through requests to our facilities branch to 

reevaluate the situation, that the Outlook School Division is 

reconsidering that request. 

 

We have nothing formal before us at the moment.  All I can say 

is that the notice that the school division gave for actions that 

they might be considering a year from now in the fall of 1993 

is under active reconsideration.  I am confident that in the end 

the outcome will be the best one for the people of the area. 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, what we're 

talking about, a million dollars here difference.  Because I was 

at a meeting in Elbow where the school . . . the chairman of the 

school unit and the director from 

Outlook was at.  And they said it's going to take the $438,000, 

that we agree on, that that's what's been passed or whatever, or 

allocated to this school. 

 

But they all agree, and the school division people said that will 

not handle the Elbow people.  That's only to help to fix the 

school up for now, and the two relocateables to have for 

Strongfield.  That is not including . . . you're getting wrong 

information.  It is not including moving the Elbow students up 

there.  The Elbow has to happen -- whatever that cost is is an 

additional.  And I think, Madam Minister, you're playing 

games with me by saying that's what's happened, this is what . . 

. whatever they . . . there'll be a new project to look at.  We'll 

have all these new figures to look at.  You're not being truthful 

with me, Madam Minister.  Because I do believe that your 

department, some place, and your officials should be able to 

tell you, is there a directive sent from the Elbow School 

Division, talking about this new plan that we're talking about, 

and it's approximately a million and a half.  Do you know 

anything about that figure at all, other than hearing it from me? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as I've indicated, I am 

aware only that negotiations are going on.  And the situation is 

in a state of flux.  Different alternatives are being considered.  

We have nothing before us.  I have nothing before me except 

the figures that I have given and tabled in this House. 

 

I take exception to the member referring to untruths.  I've been 

honest throughout.  I've tabled the information I have.  I've said 

with respect to this, the situation in the Outlook School 

Division, that it is under reconsideration by the people of the 

area.  It is their responsibility as duly elected members of 

school boards.  And I am sure that they are taking their 

responsibilities seriously, that they will consult with people, 

they will listen to people.  I'm sure there'll be lots of 

possibilities, alternatives, and figures bandied around before a 

final decision is taken. 

 

We will support them with resource people and information to 

whatever extent they request.  Once their decision has been 

finalized, we will support it, because they're duly elected to 

make those decisions.  In the mean time, I'm happy to share 

any information that I have.  But I think that speculation, 

alternatives, discussions, consultations are not decisions, are 

not final, are not applications.  And I think they should be 

treated as such. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Madam Minister, you can take 

exception to things I say.  But I take exception to the 

information I'm getting tonight.  Because I've asked you, have 

you ever . . . You could ask . . . You're not even asking your 

officials.  Has the department . . . We'll be here all night if you 

can't answer me that question.  Because I am sure that that 

motion, that that motion that that school board, school unit 

board, is in your department in Saskatoon.  And therefore they 

must know about it here.  Because everybody from Outlook to 

Elbow knows about the million and a half dollar figure. 

 

And it's common sense that you don't close a town school with 

400 people in it, and 64 students going to school there, and 

move 64 up there.  And it's going to cost exactly the same 

amount of money if you don't move them. 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2063 

Because the $438,000, you told me yourself, was for the roof 

and two relocateable class-rooms.  And so where is the extra . . 

. How are you going to move 60 more students in there -- 64 

more, from Elbow.  That's what their total is there now.  How 

are you going to move that into Loreburn school and then tell 

me you'll give me the right figures. 

 

The department must know.  How can you help them?  How 

can you deal with the school unit?  How can you deal with 

Elbow, Loreburn, and Strongfield in a right and proper manner, 

and deal with the boards and say you're . . . you sound so nice 

that you can do all the things.  How can you do it if you're out a 

million dollars on your figures? 

 

Because I know what's going to happen.  Education Estimates 

are going to pass and then out comes a budget next spring and 

Elbow could be forgotten, and it's too late for me to do 

anything about it.  It has to be discussed here. 

 

And all I'm asking . . . I'm not talking about what decisions 

they make out there because local autonomy I believe in; but 

not when it knows that the decision is made in your office, 

that's made in your department if they need a million dollars 

more money, or whatever they need.  But you're not giving me 

those figures.  And I'm sure the department must know, have 

some idea. 

 

And you get up and answer every time . . . and you've got 

officials around you.  Why don't you ask them?  You just get 

up and give me a political rhetoric.  Ask them the answers that 

I need and we'll get done. 

 

That's why we've been in this House for 60 days -- we don't get 

answers from you people.  We don't get answers.  We just get 

political rhetoric. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the information that I 

tabled in the House, being a page of script, could hardly be 

described as political rhetoric.  It was a page of facts. 

 

I simply repeat again that whatever decisions are made with 

respect to the situation in the Outlook School Division and how 

they want to operate their schools will be made at the local 

level.  It's the responsibility of the school board to make those 

decisions and we respect that responsibility and we respect the 

integrity of their decision making. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I'm going 

to get off this now because we're not getting any place.  But I 

want to leave it this way:  can I, Madam Minister, with your 

blessing, go and show this letter to the people from Strongfield, 

Loreburn, and Elbow and tell them what's in this letter is going 

to happen, and the Elbow school is going to be closed in June 

of 1993 -- June 30, 1993 -- and they're going to be going to the 

Loreburn school, and it's going to be for a cost of $438,000?  

Can I go tell them that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I think that in order for 

people at the local level to make the correct decisions, they 

need current information.  I have outlined to the member from 

Arm River that the note that he was given that was dated June 

16 has now been superseded by 

other events, other consultations that are taking place. 

 

If he wants the people of the area to be aided by current, 

accurate information, then I suggest that he do, by all means, 

share it with them but make sure to point out the date on it and 

to make sure to outline that there are other meetings, other 

events, other happenings that have occurred since then and that 

it may not be current, and ask him, please, if he shares it with 

someone, to include the date and not to represent it as being 

current as of August 6 or later. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, that's fair 

enough. 

 

But I want to ask you this question now.  You said prior tonight 

that $438,000 would house the schools of Strongfield, 

Loreburn, and Elbow.  You'll find that on Hansard tomorrow.  

Will $438,000 handle the dollars and cents for the Loreburn 

school for those three towns?  Now your officials should be 

able to tell you that. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we can only repeat 

again as outlined on the top of the briefing note that we have 

tabled and shared with the member opposite, dated June 16, 

that the approval in principle was given for emergency repairs 

for the roof in Loreburn and relocatables, which would 

accommodate the additional enrolment from Elbow and 

Strongfield and Loreburn students, and that $438,000 was the 

estimate for those repairs. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman . . . Thank you, Madam 

Minister.  We can close that down now because I can hold you 

to that.  That if we see it . . . if we see the Loreburn school . . . 

Elbow School close and Loreburn school has additions built to 

it, with relocatable class-rooms, the roof repaired, and it's over 

$438,000, will you be held responsible if it's more money than 

that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as the member 

opposite knows, that that . . . those figures are based upon real 

Estimates and that that is the total cost, that that number -- 

438,000 -- represents the total cost of the project.  That's the 

amount that the department would be committed to pay. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Madam Minister, I guarantee that you've 

been given the wrong information if you think you're going to 

have those three towns all under a school for $438,000. 

 

Can I have this commitment from you so we can get off this 

estimate tonight, or off my part of it?  Can I have this 

commitment -- that you will sit down with me and we can 

discuss this personally ourselves to get to the bottom of these 

figures?  Can I have that commitment, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I have no problem 

whatsoever with making that commitment.  I'd be happy to 

discuss this with the member from Arm River at our mutual 

convenience as soon as possible. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you very much. 



2064 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  

Madam Minister, in the few minutes that I was up between the 

member from Greystone and the member from Arm River, I 

asked you a question about all the boards and panels and 

commissions that are within your department and I haven't yet 

had an opportunity to look at that package of information that 

you supplied us.  The clerks still have it and are photocopying.  

Will that information be included in that package? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the personnel, the 

number of boards and commissions, agencies, advisory 

committees, their names, and the personnel on them were 

submitted in a previous package, I think at the last session of 

Estimates.  I'm not sure what date that would be now.  It would 

be last week. 

 

Then in the package tonight there was an undertaking on the 

covering letter that the expenses relating to those agencies, 

boards, commissions, committees are still being compiled and 

that we have the written undertaking to provide them as soon as 

that work is done.  So I do believe that all information relating 

to boards, commissions, agencies, personnel, and costs have 

been covered. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I would 

just like, for the record: do you appoint all of the personnel to 

all those boards, panels, and commissions? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there's a wide array of 

advisory committees to various parts of the department and it's 

impossible to make a blanket statement about how they are 

appointed or selected.  Some of them, like the boards of 

governors of the universities and boards of regional colleges, 

SIAST, some of those institutes, it's provided in legislation that 

some or all of the membership is appointed by order in council 

and selected by the government, by the cabinet. 

 

In other cases there are statutory requirements, for instance 

certain organizations are . . . people would be appointed to 

them by virtue of being nominees of a certain organization.  So 

they're not all selected by the government or even by personnel 

in the department. 

 

There might be a committee that's made up of by statute or 

constitutionally by a representative of the School Trustees 

Association, Teachers' Federation, LEADS (League of 

Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents), 

ASBOS (Association of School Business Officials of 

Saskatchewan) and so forth and then it would be, the 

committee would be composed of people that . . . of their 

nominees.  It wouldn't be the subject of a selection process.  So 

there's a whole range of ways of establishing the membership 

and who the individuals are. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, can you provide us 

with that information as to how each one of the personnel is 

appointed to those boards or panels and commissions? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we certainly can 

undertake to do that but it will take some time.  In the 

undertakings that we made with the information that we 

provided tonight, we certainly hope that the information will be 

very useful to the members opposite because we estimate that it 

will take us six to eight person weeks to develop that detailed 

information.  This request that is before us right now will add 

to that time.  So we'd certainly be glad to do it, but it does 

involve considerable staff time in compiling the information. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I 

appreciate your comments that you will indeed provide that and 

we appreciate the time that you have taken because it's 

important that everyone within the province become aware of 

where their money is being spent.  And all these boards and 

appointments and commissions are part of where the taxpayers' 

money is going to. 

 

All of these boards and commissions -- particularly I'm 

thinking of like SIAST and the community colleges, etc. -- who 

do they report to?  Do they report to you, Madam, or to 

somebody else? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, again it's impossible to 

make a blanket statement.  For instance, take the university 

board of governors, for example.  Only half of the membership 

is appointed by the government or by order in council, if you 

like.  There are other statutory positions there.  For instance, 

the chancellor of the university, the president of the university, 

the representative of the faculty association, the representatives 

of the student unions, the nominees are elected people from the 

Senate, are members of those boards. 

 

So in effect they are autonomous and they're not all appointed 

by the government; they don't report directly to the 

government.  There are provincial . . . there's legislation passed 

by the province that regulates and defines their powers, but 

they don't all necessarily have the same reporting structure. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, that's for the 

universities but how about for SIAST?  You, I believe, appoint 

the entire board.  Do they report to you? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to this, this 

is one of the areas that we asked the review committee for 

SIAST to make some recommendations on because the Act is 

fairly new, as the member opposite will know. 

 

It was put in place by the previous administration in 1987 and 

it was The Institute Act and it prescribed how the board should 

be constituted, how many members there should be, some 

parameters for the operations of the institutes. But it says 

throughout the Act: the minister shall, the minister shall, and it 

does not mention the Department of Education or any role for 

the department or exactly how the board should relate to the 

minister. 

 

At the time that we took office, I asked for some information 

from the Department of Education with respect to SIAST and I 

was told that the interpretation of the previous administration 

was that the Department of Education had no role with respect 

to SIAST, that it was 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2065 

strictly between the minister and the chairman of the board. 

 

And our interpretation is that it's not the minister and the board 

that, in fact, the minister should delegate that responsibility as 

outlined in the Act to a large degree, to a liaison function 

within the Department of Education in order that there can be 

some integration in the post-secondary system and that we 

don't have regional colleges, SIAST, the universities perhaps 

duplicating efforts and not having any monitoring function 

where anyone is even aware that that's happening. 

 

So SIAST is a good example of where we saw a need to change 

the reporting structure and we intend to act on the 

recommendations of the review committee that the function 

within the Department of Education, that the people, person or 

people that will provide a liaison between the department and 

the institute should be strengthened. And we intend to act on 

that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, if there is a 

liaison person put in place for, within the department for the 

SIAST to report to, who would that person in turn report to? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, ultimately of 

course, and as it should be since such a large proportion of the 

funding for those institutes and for the educational system 

comes directly from the taxpayers of Saskatchewan as 

represented by the government and in the budget the 

Department of Education, the ministry and the government is 

ultimately responsible.  But we have different ways of 

delegating that responsibility and making sure that there is a 

certain amount of autonomy in the system. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, we seem to have 

taken a long time to get around to the point that they actually 

do eventually report to you as the Minister for Education.  Is 

that the same situation for the community colleges? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I would have to ask the 

member to define the . . . there are not regional, there are not 

community colleges as such.  The community college system 

disappeared, if you like, at the time of The Institute Act and 

The Regional Colleges Act. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, with leave for the 

introduction of guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I want to recognize the presence of a 

former member and former minister and presently employee of 

the Crop Protection Institute who is in the Mr. Speaker's 

Gallery, I believe with his family, Mr. Lorne Hepworth.  

Welcome to the Chamber. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Hagel: -- The Chair would join the minister in recognizing 

the presence of the former member. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Education 

Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  

Madam Minister, I agree I used the wrong terminology in 

saying community colleges, but when I went to the schools, 

they were community colleges.  The regional college system, 

do they report to you?  Do you appoint the boards of directors 

for the community colleges, and do they report back to you? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, again we do by order 

in council appoint the members of the boards of directors of the 

regional colleges.  Again we do expect to have and are putting 

together the elements of our review of the regional colleges.  

Again the Act is some five years old, and I think there are some 

contradictions, which is not unusual I guess, with new 

legislation and working your way through a new system about 

what the reporting system really is. 

 

But I guess ultimately, of course, the province, through 

third-party funding, funds the system to a large extent.  We do 

appoint the members of the boards.  So one of the reasons for 

the review committee is that we want to refine what the 

reporting process is, but ultimately would be the government 

and the ministry. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Who 

outlines or defines the mandate for each of those boards and for 

the institution they represent? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the mandate and the 

parameters under which these institutions would operate is 

fairly clearly spelled out in the respective Acts, The Regional 

Colleges Act 1987 and The Institute Act, which created SIAST, 

which was also passed in 1987. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- And, Madam Minister, you're 

responsible for those Acts, are you not, for their 

administration? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Yes, under the current system, it 

would be the Minister of Education. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  So 

we've established now that ultimately those institutions, SIAST 

and the regional colleges, report back to you that they're 

responsible for you.  You set their direction; you interpret the 

Acts as to what is going to be established. 

 

What I would like to ask you know concerns a number of 

employees that were with the regional college system.  Mr. 

Terry York who was employed, I believe, in the Cumberland 

community college . . . he was terminated, is this not the case, 

by the board that you appointed? 



2066 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, it's my understanding 

that there were some continuing problems within the 

Cumberland College.  We did in fact appoint members to a 

board.  I think it was in about March; it was fairly early in 

1992.  The board, to my knowledge, did part company with the 

principal that was there at the time.  This was entirely their 

decision, was not influenced by anyone in the department or 

the ministry.  Although the Act spells out a certain potential 

relationship, again as with the school divisions in the province, 

the department or the ministry does not interfere in the the 

decisions made by the local board. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, if this ex-employee 

were to sue the Cumberland Regional College, who ultimately 

would pay if there were any damages awarded to him? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, all of the 

administrative matters, the costs of administration, including 

the cost of conducting any lawsuits or any liabilities, are 

entirely the responsibility of the respective regional college 

boards. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- And, Madam Minister, where do they 

get their funds from? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the income of the 

regional colleges comes from a variety of sources.  The main 

source would be the core funding or the third-party grant that 

the Department of Education or the province provides. 

 

There would also be tuition fees that they would receive.  

There would be contract arrangements that they might have to 

deliver courses to other colleges.  There would be seats that 

they might be paid for to hold for manpower training.  They 

have a fairly diverse source of revenue. 

 

Any costs that they have . . . they are responsible for 

developing their own budget within those parameters.  

Approximately 20 per cent of their income comes from 

Saskatchewan Education.  The balance is made up from the 

other sources that I mentioned. 

 

So any costs that they have as a result of any actions that they 

may take, or contracts that they enter into, would have to be 

managed entirely within their own resources.  The Department 

of Education would not be involved, would not be a party to 

contracts that they enter into, and certainly wouldn't be 

expected to absorb responsibility for any actions they might 

take over and above the normal funding. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- If it should happen that Mr. York was to 

win a lawsuit against the Cumberland Regional College, are 

you indicating, Madam Minister, that the Department of 

Education would not provide any additional funding for that 

community college if the award was such as to put a burden on 

that institution? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in the hypothetical 

situation that the member raises, the answer is no.  The 

Saskatchewan Department of Education would pay, through its 

budget, through the third-party granting formula, exactly the 

same amount no matter what the 

situation was.  And there are no extraordinary allocations. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I find it difficult 

to believe that, when you've appointed the board, the board 

reports to you, your department funds a portion, if not a good 

portion, of the institution; that the operations of the board is 

left, is without direction from the minister; that the 

terminations of employees at these boards is simply a matter of 

that board.  There have been a number of times . . . the 

Cumberland board, the North West Regional College, have 

both let their principals -- I believe is the term you used -- go.  

All of a sudden these people are disappearing from the system, 

just since the new government has changed.  Is this a pattern, 

Madam Minister, or is this just circumstances that occurred out 

of the blue? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I think we have to 

really make sure that the information that we're using in this 

House is accurate.  I am aware of a situation with the 

administration that did develop in the Cumberland College.  

But I'm certainly not aware of a situation with any other 

principal or any other administrative members in any of the 

colleges, including the North West College. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I agree.  I have 

to apologize in this case.  It wasn't the principal.  It was the 

board itself at the North West Community College. 

 

Madam Minister, in questioning on June 8 you supplied us with 

a list of positions that had been deleted from the system.  I 

believe you said there was 41 full time and six and a half part 

time positions that had been eliminated.  Have there been any 

new positions eliminated since that time?  And is this list the 

complete list, including all the secondments? 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, to my knowledge, the 

list that we provided in early June was complete at that time.  

And there haven't been any other changes since then. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Does the list that we were provided 

include all the secondments also? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe there were 

two separate lists.  One was the positions that were eliminated, 

or the vacant positions that were not intended to be again filled.  

And then there was a separate report, I believe, on the number 

of secondments, where we said that they had reduced . . . I 

recall the figures, that last year there were 71 secondments and 

they reduced this year to 57.  And I'm quite sure if the member 

will look at the material he will find that there is an outline of 

what positions those were. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, they're not on the list 

that I have.  And they may be in the package that you supplied 

us this evening.  I'm not sure, in that you say the list was 

provided.  Did it include all of the names of the people that 

were the secondments, the 71, the 57 that are currently still in 

position, and what their positions were, and what programs 

they were involved in? 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2067 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, to my recollection I 

think that we used numbers only and not a list of names 

because, by the nature of the secondment, it should be 

temporary.  The people are, if you like, borrowed from the field 

or from various parts of the education system to lend a certain 

amount of expertise to a project, and then when the project is 

finished, they go back to their permanent employer.  So there 

certainly is, or should be, a rapid turnover of secondments. So I 

believe we didn't supply names, just numbers, and the areas of 

activity, parts of the department that they were engaged by. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, could you supply me 

with a list, please, of the projects those secondments were 

working on, the name of the person who was in that project, 

and whether that project is now completed, or whether it's still 

ongoing?  And whether or not any of those projects that are 

still ongoing have had any secondments terminated or however 

you deal with secondments to remove them from the program 

and allow them to go back to where they came from? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we certainly have no 

hesitation in undertaking to provide that information, but I 

would just like to . . . with the caution that it will take us a bit 

of time, more than just a day or two.  I must point out that we 

did reduce the size of the administration and the administration 

budget for the department by 12 per cent this year.  So we 

certainly have people that are fully engaged at all times and 

will have to make time to compile this information. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I would 

appreciate it if, at some point in time, you could supply us with 

that information.  Because, Madam Minister, there were a 

number of secondments that were allowed to be terminated 

within the department and have gone back to their respective 

positions wherever that was. 

 

But my concern is, is whether or not those secondments that 

were allowed to lapse, whether those projects were completed, 

whether or not those positions were refilled again afterwards.  

Has there been any circumstances where that has happened, 

where a secondment has been removed from the program and a 

new one put in, or whether the program is continuing on. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, it's difficult to answer 

that because, for instance in the curriculum area there are a 

number of different streams of activity going on at the same 

time and different kinds of expertise is required.  So it's 

conceivable that a secondment from the curriculum area might 

have gone back out to the field and another person might have 

come in, but it might be working on a different project and with 

a different area of expertise. 

 

So, you know, if the member opposite has any specific cases 

that he'd like to ask about, I'd be glad to answer.  But it's 

difficult to answer that question in a global way. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I will 

indeed take a specific case, one Joan Berntson.  What was the 

project that she was involved in?  Has that project been 

terminated?  And if not, why was she let go? 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, Mrs. Berntson was 

engaged on a temporary project, the PALS (Principles of the 

Alphabet Literacy System), the literacy project in Saskatoon.  It 

was slated to terminate . . . that portion of the pilot was slated 

to terminate in June. 

 

It's a requirement for people, for the temporary employer -- in 

this case the department -- of people who are seconded, to 

notify the school division from which the employee comes, 

who is the permanent employer, by January of the contract 

year, that the person who is seconded will not be re-engaged. 

 

So that was done. That notice was given by the department in 

January, to the . . . I believe it was the Regina School Division 

that Mrs. Berntson was permanently employed by and had 

tenure with.  There was certainly no attempt to single out any 

person.  It was understood from the beginning of the 

secondment that the secondment was for the purposes of that 

temporary project.  The project was complete; the proper six 

months notice was given that the secondment would be ended; 

and those are the facts of that case. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Were there any other secondments 

involved in that program? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, no.  There were a 

number of field projects -- I think four in the province -- but 

there were no secondments to my knowledge, other than that 

one, in the area. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  How 

about Elizabeth Azzopardi?  What was the project she was 

involved with, and was it terminated? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I . . . Just a 

clarification. I think that the member opposite means Isabel 

Azzopardi.  Ms. Azzopardi was in the curriculum area.  The 

project that she was engaged in had reached the end of a phase.  

A number of people from the curriculum area who were 

seconded . . . I'm not sure exactly of the numbers -- but that 

was the area where most of the secondments were and it was 

the area where the largest number of secondments were ended.  

And one of the positions has recently been advertised and I do 

believe that some of the people, some of the secondments that 

were terminated, the people who had those secondments, have 

applied for that position. 

 

Now whether it's been filled or not, I'm not sure that a decision 

has been made.  I think it's at the stage of sort of a short-list 

being established.  But that is the situation there. 

 

Certainly there was no targeting of any individuals in either of 

the cases you cite. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, within that project that 

Mrs. Azzopardi was on, were all of the secondments 

terminated? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there were a number of 

secondments in that area.  I guess a problem with that 

particular position was -- and some others in the curriculum 

department -- as I said in an earlier 



2068 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

session, that secondments are meant to be temporary, and what 

we did discover is that there were a large number of 

secondments that had been renewed and renewed and renewed 

over a long period of time, in which case the position should 

really be a permanent one.  So after ending a number of the 

secondments, the situation was reviewed and it was determined 

that one or some of those positions should be permanent.  And 

they were thus posted in an open competition.  And to my 

knowledge some of the people who were seconded and the 

terms were ended, did apply for those positions.  But it's still in 

a selection process and a final determination hasn't been yet 

made. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you say that a number 

of these secondments were there for an extended period of 

time.  But of all those people seconded, were they providing 

valuable service and were they doing a good job on the 

programs that they were involved in? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the issue wasn't 

whether the incumbent secondments were doing a good job or 

not, but whether indeed those positions should be seconded 

positions or whether they should be permanent positions.  

Because we're in a process of internal reorganization in the 

department, one of the things that we wanted to make sure of, 

in reporting the establishment and the person years in the blue 

book, to make sure that it was an accurate reflection of the 

manpower requirements in a department and that there wasn't -- 

as there was some in the previous administration, in some 

departments, particularly -- sort of a fudging of what the real 

numbers were by having a lot of temporary appointments, 

secondments, order in council appointments.  If there's 

permanent work to be done, then it should be represented as 

part of the permanent establishment and it should be budgeted 

for; it should be shown in the blue book. 

 

And that was our reason for reviewing the whole number of 

secondments there were, bringing it out into the open, deciding 

whether it was a permanent position that was permanently 

needed or whether it was indeed temporary. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I can't 

disagree with you on that, because I believe that if a person is 

involved in a job in a project for an extended period of time, 

that it indeed should be a permanent position.  Does that mean 

that a number of these secondment positions will indeed be 

turned into permanent positions? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, this will be reviewed in 

the context of the review of the internal organization of the 

department. 

 

Certainly as I've said before, secondments -- lending temporary 

expertise in a project area -- is a very valid use of talent and 

very cost effective.  But, you know, we have to make sure that 

if it is temporary and it's a secondment, that the person goes 

back to their former employer and that secondments are not 

abused to increase the establishment in a way to sort of obscure 

what the real situation is in terms in manpower. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 

 

 


