




















































Hansard: May 15, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 439 

 May 15, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

 

The Speaker: -- I table this morning, as chairperson of the 

legislative Committee on Rules and Procedures, I table this 

morning the First Report of the Special Committee on Rules 

and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

at the end of my remarks I propose to move a motion that the 

first report, which has just been tabled, be concurred in. 

 

Before moving the motion I want to make a few brief remarks 

to outline to the members and to those of the public that may be 

viewing at this time as to what these changes are all about. And 

I'll try to do it as briefly and succinctly as possible. 

 

The committee was set up -- the Committee on Rules and 

Procedures -- was set up in December 1991 to review the rules, 

procedures, practices and powers of the Legislative Assembly. 

This is the first report, and the report contains a number of 

recommendations of interest to the members. 

 

The committee, I might say, Mr. Speaker, met on seven 

occasions for approximately 40 hours. In addition to meeting, I 

think all members of the committee also consulted widely with 

other members of the Legislative Assembly. The meetings 

were open to the public and to the media. And I might say that 

some of the media did attend for brief periods of time to 

comment on some of the proceedings. 

 

The report also suggests that the committee continue to meet to 

monitor changes. I might point out that most of the changes 

that will be proposed today are provisional ones. We propose to 

operate these changes on a trial basis and adopt them later on 

day 50, and I'll move a separate motion later on, Mr. Speaker, 

should the report be accepted, to that effect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most things in life change and from time to time 

it's appropriate to examine the rules. The sheer passage of time, 

certain events, changing expectations by the public of members 

and how they should behave and what they should be doing, 

technology, the increase in changing work-loads for members 

within the Legislative Assembly, all suggest there may be 

occasion to review our rules. And that's what we've done. 

 

And getting right to the rules themselves, Mr. Speaker, I just 

want to take a few minutes to briefly go through these. First of 

all with respect to sitting hours, I point out that there has been 

no change in the specified hours of sitting in this Assembly 

since 1976. 

 

And the committee considered ways to enable members 

to use their time more effectively, and while retaining the 

weekly number of sitting hours at 24 hours. That is to say, 

although we think that the Assembly should continue to sit for 

exactly the same number of hours, we propose that one of the 

night sittings be dropped and that the hours then be added to 

other times throughout the week. 

 

We feel that by dropping Thursday night sittings, it would 

provide members more of an opportunity to meet with 

delegations, interest groups that place demands on members 

and that want to meet with us. And I think the most dramatic 

example of that was just a few days ago with the real estate 

association that wanted to meet with members while the 

legislature was in session. 

 

I might point out that it would also accommodate legislative 

committee meetings, should those be necessary, on Thursday 

evenings. The rule changes, I might point out, also provide an 

extra hour of time for private members as opposed to 

government business time. 

 

And the specific hours, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to starting at 2 

o'clock in the afternoon, it is proposed that the Assembly will 

convene at 1:30 in the afternoon. And as opposed to going to 

10 o'clock on Monday and Tuesday nights, it is proposed to go 

to 10:30 p.m.; the same number of hours -- 24 hours -- will 

continue to be the case. 

 

It is also proposed that the Assembly observe public holidays. 

As it now stands, the way we observe these is by way of 

motion to agree not to sit on public holidays. We think that it's 

appropriate that these holidays be observed in the rules. 

 

We also propose to abolish the requirement for seconders of 

motions. We have a rule that requires seconders, but we've 

modified that over time. In committees we no longer require 

seconders, and Bills at various stages no longer require 

seconders. And a number of other legislatures, including the 

British House of Commons and the Australian Senate, have 

deleted the requirement or abolished the requirement for 

seconders. 

 

The consideration of Estimates. As it now stands, all Estimates 

-- and this is a very important part of the work of the members 

of the Assembly -- is done in this Chamber. We look for ways 

to make that process more efficient and utilize members' time 

more efficiently and to conduct government business more 

efficiently. And we are making a recommendation that the 

Committee of Finance be enabled to sit in two different places 

at the same time and consider two sets of Estimates -- so in a 

sense, to have a split Committee of Finance, Mr. Speaker. And 

I might point out that any such innovation would be done upon 

agreement between the Government House Leader and the 

opposition House leaders. 

 

Television guidelines, Mr. Speaker. We're proposing some 

changes to the television guidelines. These guidelines have not 

been changed since 1981, I believe when they were adopted, 

and we've looked at them and feel that there should be . . . there 

is some opportunity to change these. The present guidelines are 

restrictive. 



440 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1992 

Those at home can only see, I guess, this part of my body and 

see me speaking, but have no sense of my relationship to the 

rest of the Chamber, have no relationship . . . no sense of 

relationship of me to the Chair. And we propose to, from time 

to time, provide establishing shots so that the people who are 

watching might know where it is that the member is speaking 

from. 

 

Also during Committee of Finance, as it now stands, ministers 

will confer with their officials for answers, but the camera 

remains on the table in front of me, Mr. Speaker, and it gives 

the people at home some distorted view of what is going on 

here. And we propose to show, from time to time, ministers 

conferring with their officials. 

 

We also propose that if there are distinguished visitors to our 

Assembly such as ambassadors and government officials from 

other places that these officials, when they're introduced during 

question period, also be shown on camera, Mr. Speaker. And I 

might point out that the House of Commons, I note reading in 

the Leader-Post just the other day, the House of Commons has 

also agreed to make some of these same changes that we are 

proposing for the House here today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, other changes: statements by members. Many 

legislative assemblies provide an opportunity for members to 

make brief statements prior to question period on issues of 

concern to them. We propose to introduce the same innovation 

here in Saskatchewan so that members will have an opportunity 

to speak for 90 seconds to make a statement of concern to 

them, and that this statement period not exceed 10 minutes. 

 

We also propose, Mr. Speaker, to enable the time for the 

answering of written questions to be extended from two days to 

five days to enable the government to answer the questions that 

have been put to them. It's felt that two days may be too 

restrictive and may lead government to convert these written 

questions into motions for returns (debatable). 

 

We also propose, on the other hand, that these motions for 

return (debatable), as opposed to being open-ended as to when 

they should be answered, that they now be answered within 

180 days, as opposed to the previous practice where there is no 

limit. And it did happen from time to time that these questions 

might not be answered until the last day of the session. And we 

propose in this way to hold government more accountable, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Also we propose that the order of private members' business be 

rotated in a way so that private members will have a better 

opportunity to debate Bills that they want to put forward, as 

opposed to Bills that the government may want to debate, and 

also to provide more of an opportunity for members to in fact 

debate motions for returns (debatable) and in this way hold the 

government accountable. 

 

Private members' motions, Mr. Speaker, we are proposing 

some changes. As it now stands, these motions must be 

submitted near the beginning of the session and stand on the 

order papers and some months later some of these motions may 

come forward for debate, even though that they are no longer 

timely. So we are now proposing 

that these motions be submitted to you on the Friday preceding 

the Tuesday that these motions are to be debated, and therefore 

make the debate more timely and hopefully more interesting 

for the people that may be watching and following the 

proceedings here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also are proposing another innovation on 

private members' day. Motions under rule 16, which are 

debated every second Tuesday and which is a time limited 

debate of 75 minutes, we propose that the last 10 minutes of the 

75-minute debate be a question and comment period where any 

member of the Assembly might . . . or has the opportunity to 

rise and to ask questions of any of the previous speakers or to 

make a brief comment on the speeches that they've heard. And 

we hope that this will help to enliven the debate and make the 

debate more interesting for the members and also for those who 

are following the proceedings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also the priority of debate, that is the emergency 

debate procedure, and I won't go into the specifics to try to 

explain just how complicated this process is, but suffice to say 

we propose that this matter be simplified, that it be a straight 

ruling of the Chair as to what constitutes an emergency, and if 

there is an emergency, that the members will then debate the 

priority of debate or emergency motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is also some suggestions with respect to a 

legislative internship program in that you'd be instructed to 

explore alternate means of funding a program. 

 

There is also suggestions with respect to smoking in the 

Chamber, Mr. Speaker, that smoking no longer be allowed in 

Committee of the Whole. 

 

Some other innovations -- use of lap-top computers. Those who 

are watching may after a point see members using lap-top 

computers to do their writing in the Chamber during 

committee. 

 

There's some changes to the election of the Speaker, some 

changes that are necessary. And finally we propose that the 

election of the Deputy Speaker be held by secret ballot. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the changes. Some of those changes will 

enable the government in conducting the public business, such 

as the split Committee of Finance and a five-day deadline for 

answering written questions. But many more changes will 

enable private members to make contributions to debate and to 

fulfil their roles as members -- changes such as the abolition of 

the requirement for seconders, statement by members, the 

rotating order of private members' business, more timely 

private members' motions, questions and comments period, and 

the election of the Deputy Speaker by secret ballot. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these changes are modest but should help restore 

public confidence in the role of people's representatives and 

improve the ability of all MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) to act directly on their constituents' concerns. I say 

these changes are modest, but changes are not made very often. 

I believe 



May 15, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 441 

that the last substantive changes to the rules were made in 

1969, 1976, and last, in 1981. 

 

Essentially these rules have served us well. Yes, Mr. Speaker, 

our debates -- and you draw our attention to that -- our debates 

are sometimes raucous. But we do have debates in more or less 

a civilized fashion, unlike others who choose to resolve their 

differences in much more violent ways, and others even in 

some legislatures, Mr. Speaker, who don't seem to be able to 

deal with their differences in a civilized way. 

 

And I point out to the South Korean National Assembly, there 

was a report that the Speaker resigned after a stormy final night 

of the session that ended with legislators pushing, punching, 

and shouting obscenities. I note that in The Globe and Mail 

there's an article out of Italy that the Neo-Fascists and Christian 

Democrats traded punches at Italy's parliament yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yes, we do debate things in a civilized way in our 

Chamber. Some outside of this Chamber say that we should be 

making many more radical changes in the way we operate. But 

I say that the rules that we have, have in the main served us 

well, recognizing that there is a need to update them from time 

to time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, I want to thank all those who have 

been involved in helping the committee to do its work and to 

prepare the report -- all the members of the committee, other 

members of the Legislative Assembly who have been 

interested in the proceedings, the people from the broadcast 

office, the library, even the Legislative Counsel, and especially 

the Clerk and her assistants, without whose help we would not 

be, I suggest, providing an annual report today at all. And 

finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you for your guidance and 

your patience in these matters. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to move, seconded by 

the member from Morse: 

 

 That the First Report of the Special Committee on Rules and 

Procedures be concurred in. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to just have a 

few brief comments regarding . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Sorry. Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, for the 

introduction of guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my honour on behalf 

of my colleague, Tom Keeping, to introduce to you and 

through you to this Assembly a group of 35 students from the 

Carrot River School together with their teachers, Mrs. Beth 

Ferguson, Miss Diane Higgins; the chaperons, Mrs. Muriel 

Green, Larry Ernst and Jim Kiteley; and their bus driver, Irene 

Enns. 

 

They will be gathering on the stairs for a photograph after . . .  

at the time they have to leave. It gives me particular pleasure to 

introduce a group from north-eastern Saskatchewan, Carrot 

River being the town where I was born and went to school 

myself. So we wish them a pleasant stay in Regina and a safe 

trip home, and I know the Assembly will want to join me in 

welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- With leave for the introduction of guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- We'll do all the introductions of guests now. 

The member may proceed. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I would like to introduce, Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through to the Legislative Assembly a group of 43 grade 7 

students from Elizabeth School in Kindersley, Saskatchewan, 

seated in the Speaker's gallery. 

 

The students are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Dave 

Burkell, Mr. Lane Peterson. Their chaperons are Mrs. Carrey 

Howie, Mrs. Nancy Torry, Mrs. Heather Sears, Mrs. Darlene 

Hogan. And the bus drivers are Mr. Jim Baker and Mr. Cliff 

Gunness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be meeting with the students following 

question period for pictures and refreshments. Please join with 

me in welcoming the students from Elizabeth School in 

Kindersley. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures (continued) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to on behalf 

of the opposition speak to the motion as presented by the 

member from Regina Victoria. I want to begin by saying that 

the rules and procedures as a part of a committee of this 

Assembly have been meeting for a long time in trying to 

undertake some significant rule changes, some minor rule 

changes. Many of the suggestions raised by the committee and 

by the Clerks of the Assembly were suggestions that have 

transpired through the committee over the past number of 

years. And I want to make a point of that; that many of these 

suggestions have not just arisen in this past six months but have 

been brought forward by the government when they were in 

opposition and us when we were in government. 

 

And the consensus that came through in the committee as we 

spoke about them, and as we address the various points of view 

with each of the areas that we discussed, I want to say that your 

leadership, Mr. Speaker, was frank; it provided consensus; it 

provided an atmosphere of a willingness to participate; and 

basically I believe it was because you made the observation 

that if there was disagreement the rules would not proceed. 

And I think that that was a benefit to the committee and a 

benefit to the discussion. 
 

I want to say that the Clerks and their staff did a commendable 

job in relation to assessing the material. 



442 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1992 

And at the back you will see a long list of the material that we 

had. It was done by the staff, it was done by Mr. Speaker's staff 

and others in the Assembly, and I want to thank them for that. 

 

I think that the committee worked well together. I think it did 

some significant changes. I want to point some of them out that 

deal with some of what I would call democratic reform kinds of 

things. 

 

Many people in the province and in other places do not even 

realize that this Assembly has been sitting three evenings of the 

week for the past number of years, ever since I've been a part 

of this Assembly. I think that that's a step forward when we 

begin to realize that there is an opportunity for us to deal with 

our constituents in the evening, deal with committees, and deal 

with other things that are very important. I think that's an 

important part of the role of a member of the Assembly and his 

relationship to his constituency. 

 

One of the other things on democratic reform that I think are 

important is that we will be putting forward where motions in 

this Assembly do not need a seconder. I believe that that says 

that individuals who are elected from their constituency will 

have an opportunity to present a motion that will give them 

freedom of speech in this Assembly for private individuals to 

express their opinion. And I think that that's an extremely 

important part of what we have here today. 

 

In consideration of the Estimates -- and this is where it's going 

to be extremely unusual for us to consider with the acceptance 

of the Government House Leader and the Opposition House 

Leader where we have a committee outside of this House -- we 

are going to have to do some experiments, Mr. Speaker, to see 

how this works. 

 

We'll have to have some flexibility on the part of members as a 

part of what they do in relation to this Assembly and to the 

meetings that are being held in committee of Estimates outside 

of this House. And it's going to take a great deal of effort on the 

part of members and the Clerk and the committee chairmen 

that it's going to have to take some time to realize all of the 

quirks that may occur as a result of various kinds of procedural 

processes that we have to go through in order to accomplish 

what we want to do in speeding up the agenda of this 

Assembly. 

 

The television guidelines I think have been highlighted 

adequately by the member from Regina Victoria. 

 

I want to say something about statements by individual 

members. Here again is a part of democratic reform -- 

democratic reform by individuals being able to say something 

about their constituency, about how they view a particular 

policy relating to their constituency as it relates to themselves. 

They'll be able to make these statements and for 90 seconds 

they will be able to provide that to the Assembly. And I think 

that that's a process of democratic reform I think that is 

important. 

 

Deadlines for written questions and expansion of time for the 

government to answer the questions from two days to five 

days. Again, I think a measure of consensus and 

agreement from opposition and from the government side to 

extend that part and also to shorten the time line in relation to 

the length of time that they have to answer the questions from 

no time limit to 180 days -- I think that's an important part of 

making democratic reform in this Assembly. 

 

The order of private business on private members' day as a 

rotation, I believe is another aspect of democratic reform where 

individuals who are members of this Assembly will have the 

opportunity to address this Assembly on the basis of providing 

an agenda that speaks to their own initiative being brought 

forward as a part of the agenda. 

 

To this point it has been a part of the government's order of 

business to dictate the volume of business accruing on private 

members' day. And this will provide private members the 

opportunity to deal with it on the basis that they will have their 

orders of business brought forward on a rotational basis. I think 

they're very important. 

 

Private members' motions and private members' debate day, I 

think, are also a part of the rule changes that provide an asset 

so that things are current, things rotate on a current basis, and I 

think those are important. 

 

The rest of the items, I believe, are significant. I won't take the 

time of the Assembly at this point to talk about them. I want to 

point out that members should feel free to approach members 

of the committee about what they perceive adjustments need to 

be made in some of these items. Because we're experimenting, 

we're dealing with new territory for this Assembly, both on the 

Speaker's part and on the Clerks' part and on the members' part. 

And I think we want to be open-minded. We want to have 

suggestions brought forward to streamline the activities of this 

Assembly. 

 

I want to point out too that these are provisional changes for 50 

days to see how it works. And we will probably be beginning, 

Mr. Speaker, a week from this coming Monday and these 

provisions will be in place for that time. And I want to say that 

this side of the House, and I would expect that the other 

members on the committee from the other side of the House, 

would value your suggestions as a part of the opportunity to 

work together. 

 

I want to conclude, Mr. Speaker, by saying that it was a 

pleasure to work on the committee and we will be anticipating 

that we would be able to work very well with providing the 

official recommendations after the 50th day. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to speak on 

some of the changes proposed by the Rules Committee. As a 

member of the Rules Committee I want to thank you, Mr. 

Speaker, for providing leadership and for helping us to 

co-operate together to come to some degree of changes of the 

rules. 

 

Also I want to thank all the members of the committee as 



May 15, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 443 

this is an all-party committee that joined together, and I, the 

same as the member opposite, enjoyed the work very much. 

And I feel that your leadership helped a great deal in the 

co-operation and the consensus that we came to. 

 

Also I'd like to thank the Clerks' office and Mr. Speaker's office 

for the help that they gave us in compiling all the information 

that we needed. 

 

One of the concerns that we had was that private members' 

motions often never got debated during the session. The 

motions that were considered were usually adjourned and never 

resumed, and the remaining motions stayed sitting on the order 

paper for long periods until the end of the session. The 

consequence of these delays was that the subject matter of 

these motions became dated so when they finally came . . . and 

when they finally came to the House, were of no consequence 

often. So to make private members' motions more relevant we 

are making rule changes. 

 

I believe that private members must have an ability to speak for 

his or her constituents, so it is imperative that private members 

are given the opportunity to introduce debate, and also to 

comment on immediate and current concerns. My constituents 

would view this change as progress towards democratic reform. 

I believe that changes will make private members' motions 

more relevant in our legislature. 

 

(1030) 

 

I endorse the continuation of the current practice of the 

Assembly with respect to debates of motions under rule 16. 

This provides private members an opportunity to a forum to 

debate topical and timely subjects of great importance to 

themselves and their constituents. 

 

Now to complement this ability to speak on important topics 

will be a procedural innovation which provides for a 10-minute 

question and comment period after each member's speech in 

regular debates. And I'm really looking forward to this because 

I think it will enhance the debate, make private members more 

accountable for what they say in debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that members of the legislature will join 

with the Rules Committee to make changes that will make our 

House more relevant, more accountable, and more interesting. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to just make a 

few short comments on the report of the special committee that 

was tabled in the Assembly today. 

 

I won't speak to the substance of the report because others have 

done that in a very appropriate manner. My purpose in 

speaking to the report is only by way of congratulating all the 

members who worked in a spirit of co-operation, and you 

yourself, Mr. Speaker, along with the staff. 

Having been on the Rules Committee for the last number of 

years and on this Rules Committee, I know we spent a great 

deal of time over the past five years looking at the rules. And 

some of the effort of the previous Rules Committee I'm sure 

was used. But I think, in terms of getting work done, in the first 

six months of this term this committee was able to put together 

and bring before the Assembly a set of rules that I think that 

will greatly enhance the operation of the Assembly, and in 

particular the role of the private members in the Saskatchewan 

Assembly. 

 

And just on that point, I want to conclude by saying that this 

spirit of co-operation, I think, in many times goes unnoticed by 

the public and probably will in this case. But I think there 

should be an attempt to extend this to other areas of the 

Assembly because I think it's important, not for the government 

and not for the opposition, but in terms of democracy. 

 

And I just want to say congratulations to all those who were 

involved in getting this report before the Assembly in such an 

efficient manner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Trial Basis for Implementation of Rules and Procedures 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to move a motion 

with respect to the provisional basis and trial basis for 

implementing these rules that have been talked about and just 

point out that many of these rules . . . I think it's appropriate to 

test them and then in the coming days and later on in the 

session, as is proposed here on day 50, to assess whether or not 

they have worked the way we hope that they will work and to 

entrench them if they are suitable to put them into the rules on 

an ongoing basis. There are some exceptions to this, rules 

changes that are one time only and are not really appropriate 

ones to test out, such as a new filing deadline for candidates 

running in elections, Mr. Speaker, and the like. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I'll move, seconded by the 

member from Morse: 

 

 That the modifications and amendments to the practices of 

the Assembly, the television guidelines and the rules of the 

Assembly, recommended in the First Report to the Special 

Committee on Rules and Procedure presented to the 

Assembly on May 15, 1992, be implemented effective May 

25, 1992, on a provisional basis for a period extending to the 

50th sitting day of the current session, except the following 

proposed amendments to the rules which are hereby approved 

and adopted and which shall come into effect immediately: 

 

 (1) new filing deadlines for candidates running in an 

election of Speaker; 

 

 (2) eligibility of an incumbent to be a candidate in 



444 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1992 

an election of Speaker; 

 

 (3) election of Deputy Speaker by secret ballot. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Farm Foreclosures 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Agriculture and Food. In last fall's session, 

December 1991, the government gave in and allowed the 

Minister of Finance to answer some mini estimate questions. 

 

I ask this question to the Minister of Finance: how many farm 

foreclosures were there in the period, election day October 21 

till that date which was December 21, '91? And if I may, Mr. 

Speaker, just a short quote from Hansard. The Minister of 

Finance: 

 

 Well, we wouldn't know that in the Department of Finance, 

but I can tell you that through ACS, (Agricultural Credit 

Corporation of Saskatchewan), because of the government's 

policy decision to freeze, there have been none. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister. The government then placed a 

freeze or a moratorium for 90 days ending on March 31, 1992. 

My question: how many foreclosures by Agricultural Credit 

Corporation took place, if any, during that period? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I do not have the exact 

number before me, if any at all. The facts of the results of the 

interim measures that happened from January to the end of 

March is that the numbers of foreclosures reduced from 

something in the vicinity of 5 to 600 in the three-month period 

comparable in the previous year, to something around 50 in this 

year, of which about . . . a significant number would have been 

voluntary arrangements and the others would have been 

deemed by the institutions to have fallen into the exceptions of 

the voluntary agreement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. I'd also like 

to ask him: since the freeze had been lifted on March 31, 1992, 

how many have taken place since the freeze had been lifted, if 

any? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I also do not have the 

specific numbers on those. The understanding though that was 

reached with the financial institutions in the period following 

the end of the interim agreement was that they would begin to 

act on notices that had accumulated during the three-month 

period, but that they would offer leases to people who had not 

yet had leases offered for the year, until our jointly proposed 

program that was put forward by the Farm Debt Advisory 

Committee could be implemented. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't think he knew what I 

was talking about. He was talking about voluntary notices. I'm 

talking about notices of intent to realize on security from ACS 

only; that's all I asked you. 

 

And I don't think, Mr. Speaker, that the minister realizes that he 

is responsible for the Agricultural Credit Corporation which is 

one of the largest lenders in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I'm not going to give him the figures because that's up to 

him to get. I can get them every day; he should be able to get 

them. In January there was some; in February there was quite a 

few more; in March there was a lot, and the total is . . . There's 

quite a few and you should know that. 

 

And what I'm saying to you, Mr. Minister, you've been head of 

this big organization and you're dealing with the banks; does it 

show good faith to have any foreclosures at all in that period? 

Do you believe that is fair to the farmers and to the banks 

you're dealing with to have any foreclosures whatsoever when 

your policy, stated by the Minister of Finance, was before the 

freeze there wasn't any, and then while the freeze was on you 

had any at all? Does that show a good intent to the lenders 

when you're dealing with them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the daily business of the Ag 

Credit Corporation has been in keeping with the agreement that 

we had reached. I want to say that the institutions have been 

loyal to the agreement. When you say that there should be no 

foreclosures at all, I appreciate that. We also believe in spirit 

that's the case. 

 

The fact however is that there was room in the mutual 

agreement for exceptions in a narrow band of activity when 

farmers were seen to be not dealing in good faith with the 

lenders. And there has been a very good compliance with the 

financial institutions, including ACS, with the agreement that 

was joined in by all institutions in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, to the minister again. I think 

it's an absolute shame that the member from Estevan asked this 

question on budget day: how many farm foreclosures in total in 

the province with the Farm Debt Review Board and the Farm 

Land Security Board to mediation services. The Premier 

couldn't, he tried to answer for you, and there wasn't any 

answer. And today you do not know. And I think that's 

absolutely an unbelievable situation when the Minister of 

Agriculture does not know. 

 

My new question to the minister, Mr. Speaker. I'm sure you 

must realize the seriousness of the farm debt. If you don't you 

should, Mr. Minister. The farmers are daily losing their land, 

losing their machinery, being put off 



May 15, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 445 

their farms, losing a lifetime of hard work. Many are giving up 

everything they've ever had. Some people have started in the 

turn of the century. 

 

Your government set up a farm debt review panel to investigate 

all farm debt problems. That was the group of 12, Mr. Speaker. 

At the end of March, you, Mr. Minister, held a press 

conference and stated that there was only one solution to end 

the farmers' problems and that was to ensure that farmers after 

foreclosure would be able to obtain a six-year leaseback. You 

stated at the press conference you were negotiating with all the 

lenders for a voluntary commitment for the program. 

 

My question -- they want my question, they'll have it, Mr. 

Speaker. Would you inform the Assembly how these 

negotiations turned out? Did you get an agreement from the 

lenders? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the member 

opposite that any specific numbers that he wants, I can bring. I 

don't happen to carry an encyclopedia of numbers around in my 

head. 

 

I want to also comment on the question that was asked on 

budget day, that both in the question and the manner in which it 

was asked attempted to be . . . convey a truth that may not be 

exactly a truth, in that the suggestion was that there had been a 

large number of foreclosures. Notices going out to farmers are 

not foreclosures, and the member opposite knows that quite 

well. 

 

The fact about the income stress in Saskatchewan however is 

also well known to the members opposite, and is well known to 

be associated with the policies of the federal government and 

their off-loading to the provinces and their inadequate income 

support to farmers. 

 

There has been in the last year, two years, in excess of $900 

million in accumulated financial stress to farmers because their 

income levels have dropped so substantially below the regular 

numbers that are required to operate the system. 

 

The Farm Debt Advisory Committee, when it met, said that we 

need to come to grips with the farm debt crisis in Saskatchewan 

because it's the only province in Canada where the farm debt 

crisis continues to deepen, and it's a result of the policies that 

were put in place by your government prior to our coming to 

office, and we are implementing policies to address that. And 

the Farm Debt Advisory Committee will be implemented . . . 

the report will be implemented in this session, and those 

discussions are ongoing. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, in the prelude to my questions 

I just made comments about how he didn't know anything 

about the figures, he didn't know the amount, and he doesn't 

understand what's going on in the department. He never even 

got close to answering my question. 

The question that people hurried me up to ask, Mr. Speaker, 

and that question was, and I ask you again: after I said the 

disastrous situations the farmers are in, would you inform the 

Assembly how these negotiations turned out with the lenders? 

That's what my question was. You never even touched it. 

Please answer the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I would be pleased to answer 

how those negotiations have gone with the lenders. I want to 

maybe remind the member opposite of a little bit of history. 

We began those discussions with the lenders last November 

with not very much co-operation from the members opposite. 

And as a result of those negotiations, I think achieved an 

unprecedented agreement between financial institutions and 

government on behalf of farmers that there would be actions 

that would guarantee farmers access to their property in an 

intervening period while other measures were being discussed. 

 

I want to say that the process established for reviewing the 

farm debt question in Saskatchewan was the broadest process 

that has probably ever been engaged in in terms of analysing 

the question with representatives from the farming community, 

the legal community, and the financial community. The 

member has had access to that report and understands the 

comprehensiveness of that report. 

 

The report indicates that the farm debt crisis in Saskatchewan 

is building and needs to be addressed. The fact is that the 

discussions that carried forward after March 31, lenders agreed 

to continue to offer leases for farmers who had not had leases 

offered for this year, assuring them access to their land for 

another year. And the discussions that are now ongoing . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, as usual the minister is not 

answering the question. And the question I've been asking, and 

what the people and the farmers in the province of 

Saskatchewan want to know . . . or are you afraid to answer 

that question. Because you said very clearly at your press 

conference last fall that you are out negotiating with the 

lenders. Please bring us up to date -- did you get an agreement 

with the lenders? Don't both bother with the speeches; tell us 

the facts. Did you get an agreement with the lenders? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I was in the process of 

telling the member opposite the agreement with the lenders. 

You know there was a January 8 agreement at which point we 

also indicated that further discussions would take place. 

 

The financial institutions were represented on the committee 

which brought forward a report at the end of March, indicating 

agreement one more time on the broad analysis of that. 

 

They agreed one more time after that to offer leases to 



446 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1992 

farmers who had not yet accepted leases for the intervening 

period while the report was being implemented. And they have 

agreed now to continue discussions until the implementation of 

the report and legislation. 

 

If that's not adequate update, I would give you further 

information. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, what the member's really 

telling us, that he hasn't been able, or his government be able, 

to panel the big lenders. They haven't been able to make a deal 

with them. That's what he's really saying here. 

 

So my question, a new one, a new question, Mr. Speaker: In 

the throne and the budget speech your government said there 

would be legislation introducing a six-year lease program. Do 

you believe that it's fair to farmers to hold back information 

what the particulars of the legislation will be so they can plan 

their lives? 

 

The need to know whether you're going to keep them on the 

land, or are you going to break the promises and throw . . . 

break another promise and throw them off their land too? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I would answer the question 

again and hope the member opposite would this time listen. 

 

In the period from January to March, lenders offered farmers 

leasebacks in cases where they had previously had leases so all 

farmers would have access to their land if they didn't fall within 

the narrow band of exceptions. And they offered after March 

31 to offer leases to those farmers who had not yet received 

leases. And they have agreed to do that because this gives 

farmers the access to their land for this year. 

 

In the intervening time we are going to be introducing the 

implementation of the Farm Debt Advisory Committee report 

in legislation. And I don't think the member opposite believes 

that legislation was ever taken out to the public before it was 

introduced in the legislature. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, what the Minister of 

Agriculture doesn't understand, that every second Monday in 

Moose Jaw and every other Monday in Regina there's a court 

case dealing with farmers, and they are losing their land. 

 

And there's been many, many lost their land since the 31st of 

March. And he did not have any action whatsoever to take 

place, to take care of these people. This government believes in 

retroactive legislation. Now when you bring this Bill in about 

the six-year lease, will there be retroactive legislation to protect 

these farmers that have lost their land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the agreement that was 

reached with the financial institutions was that those 

farmers would be offered leases for this year, and I would 

invite the member to get in touch with my office for cases 

where that agreement has not been held. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister. 

As far as the farmers in Saskatchewan is concerned and far as 

the people on this side of the House is concerned you have 

betrayed every farmer is Saskatchewan. Will you just tell us 

one quick answer: when will you introduce this farm 

legislation? When will it be introduced? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the agreements that were 

reached with the financial institutions were reached in such a 

way that farmers would have access to the land for the 1992 

cropping season and the timing of the introduction of the 

legislation then is of not the most importance relative to this 

year. The measures will be introduced so the appropriate 

procedures can be put in place and farmers will have access to 

the rights given under the advisory committee report. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture 

states this legislation is not important just as he looks at all 

agriculture, at all the farmers out there. He doesn't seem to take 

it as important. 

 

A new question. Mr. Minister, this government continues to 

dance around the issue of farmers are literally being kicked off 

their farms and others are just packing up in sheer desperation. 

 

Your Premier said during the last election that he could do a 

better job of standing up for farmers than the Devine 

government and what do we see so far? The GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) program is gutted, no debt 

restructuring plan, no cost of production, foreclosures are 

rampant, absolutely no cash after expensive trips, no fuel 

rebates. The Premier and the minister are failures to farmers in 

the rural communities. 

 

My question: will the minister stand in his place and tell the 

people of this province that he knew all along that he couldn't 

keep those promises and that he owes farmers in all of 

Saskatchewan apologies for his lack of action to keep the 

farmers on the land? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the member 

opposite, if he does not remember on his own, that the major 

agenda of government since we have been in office has been 

review of agricultural programs put in place by the members 

opposite. We have been in a position to listen to farmers, to 

make adjustments, and to try to live within the financial 

flexibility that's been left by the devastation of the members 

opposite when they were previously in government. 

 

Our province has dealt with the issue of GRIP. We've 



May 15, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 447 

dealt with the issue of farm debt. We are dealing with the 

transportation policy of the province which you or which 

members opposite were at the edge of undermining. 

 

Saskatchewan farmers know that the integrity of our 

transportation system in Saskatchewan, the rail transportation 

system, is dependent on the method of payment of the Crow. 

And members opposite participated in putting that at risk. And 

we continue to see you not challenge your federal minister 

when your federal minister says that he's opposed to the 

method of payment that's presently in place. 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Crop Insurance Contracts 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm sure the farmers of 

Saskatchewan would be very disappointed at the answers that 

we've had from the Minister of Agriculture this morning. But a 

new question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture stated inside this House and 

outside the House that the member for Arm River was one of 

the new contract holders of the new GRIP program. My 

question: where did the minister receive this information 

regarding my confidential crop insurance file? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the information that that may 

be true was a result of bantering in the House, and I think it 

came from the member opposite. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- You banter with farmers' lives? Mr. 

Speaker, the only statement I ever made, and it's in Hansard, 

that I put crop insurance on . . . There was nothing, no 

statement ever made by this member about putting on GRIP. 

So my question now is to the minister responsible to the Crop 

Insurance Corporation. My question, Mr. Speaker, is: have you 

revealed information about my personal file to other members 

of your cabinet? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I have not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, final supplementary to the 

minister of Crop Insurance. This government has been known 

for budget leaks, now I ask the minister is it going to be a 

policy of this government to have personal files also leaked -- 

of MLAs -- in this House? Answer that question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I have listened with 

interest to the member for Arm River, and I want to refer to 

where the minister got the idea of his participation in 

government programs, but basically on page 168 on May 4, 

and I refer to the speech being given by the member for Arm 

River. And I just want to quote from Hansard, he said: 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Elphinstone asks what 

program did I sign up for? I had no choice, I had no 

choice. I didn't have (and then there's a blank) . . . the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose made the statement the 

other day, I am so proud to announce that there's 300 . . . 

people signed up for GRIP. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

 You know maybe there are 300 new farmers like me because 

I didn't have (and then there's another blank) . . . (Then he 

goes on to say) I could have nothing to do with it whatsoever, 

but I put crop insurance on this year so I had to take (up) . . . 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it's very difficult to understand what the 

speech was about, but the assumption is that he was saying that 

he's taking out crop insurance and GRIP this year and he didn't 

take it out last year. And the leak is here in the House on page 

168, the leak that you talk about is your speech. That's the leak. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, a question to the member . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. Order. The members have been doing 

very well this morning being Friday morning, and I appreciate 

that. I will not allow this House to deteriorate into a standard 

that we have become used to. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- The question to the member from 

Elphinstone. It's very clear here this morning he doesn't 

understand the difference between crop insurance and GRIP. 

It's very, very clear. 

 

I had two choices, and I said very clear that I put on crop 

insurance. Crop insurance has been there since 1962, and GRIP 

is a new program. I had two choices -- crop insurance or GRIP. 

That's the only two choices. 

 

Do you not understand the difference between crop insurance 

and GRIP? I ask the member that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well first I want to say to the 

member that in reading his speech very carefully, and I might 

add it's a confused statement, but you referred to the 300 new 

people who signed up for GRIP. And in that you were talking 

about you signing up. It's easy to see here that the 300 people 

who signed up were GRIP people. 

 

Now I'm not sure what your speech meant, but the assumption 

that many people would arrive at, having read this, that you 

were the one of the 300 that you referred to that were new 

GRIP sign-ups. 

 

This is the leak. If you want to talk about all the leaks you've 

been finding, this is yet another one, and it's on page 168 of 

Hansard out of your speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- A final question to the Minister of 



448 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1992 

Agriculture. The member from Elphinstone has just said we're 

talking about assumptions. Does the Minister of Agriculture 

use assumptions to use the member from Arm River's name in 

this House and outside that House? Is that what this 

government's all about, to use assumption? Will the minister 

promise that he will use facts from now on instead of 

assumptions as the minister from Elphinstone said? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I can't resist getting 

back in to answer this, but I really think this is a new low in 

question period and also in speech giving. 

 

The member is obviously upset that he didn't get any press on 

his speech, and I can well understand why. So he goes back to 

his speech, he finds a section, calls it a leak, and gets up and 

asks questions about it. 

 

I think I'd go back to the Leader-Post to do your research 

because it's much, much better than what you're getting out of 

here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cancellation of Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 

I had an opportunity to meet with a grade 8 student delegation 

from Kindersley. When I had the opportunity to speak with 

them, they had a number of questions that they wanted to ask 

of me as well, Mr. Speaker, and they dealt with the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

 

They asked a simple question, one of the students: why was the 

pension plan cut for her single parent mother? That was the 

type of questions that we dealt with, Mr. Speaker. They went 

on to ask things such as: were there any alternatives that the 

government looked at for the pension plan rather than just 

slashing the pension plan, Mr. Speaker, and especially in light 

of the fact that the Justice minister on May 12 of this past few 

days has said that the government will be pursuing significant 

pension reform? 

 

I won't go into the release in the interest of time, Mr. Speaker, 

but I think the release is concluded by the following statement: 

 

 "We need to protect the pension benefits of the province's 

workers and allow those workers greater control of their 

pension plans." 

 

My question is for the Associate Minister of Finance: will they 

now reinstate the Saskatchewan Pension Plan and allow the 

women of this province an opportunity for a pension and for 

greater control of the pensions as the Minister of Justice has 

promised? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

say to the member opposite that like so much of what the 

former administration implemented, this was not on a very 

sound financial footing. This program, when it was 

implemented, was actuarially unsound. It was 

costing this government $12 million. And in a space of a very 

few years, it had accumulated an $80 million unfunded 

liability. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, any program . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. I hate to do this, but I have to 

call the member from Rosthern to order. Will you please not 

continuously interrupt when ministers are trying to answer the 

question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I just add for the benefit of the 

member opposite, any program which you don't have to pay for 

is a very attractive one. We determined that if you've fully paid 

for it, it will be a lot less attractive. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1100) 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I would like to, 

pursuant to section 222(1) of The Election Act, I'd like to table 

the election expenses of candidates and their business 

managers and of the registered political parties at the 

twenty-second general election held on October 21, 1991. 

 

And in conjunction with that I would also, pursuant to section 

222(1) of The Election Act, table a report respecting the annual 

fiscal returns of registered political parties for the fiscal year 

1991. I so table. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 8 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of Bill No. 8, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 

Act. 

 

As many members will know, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 

Act establishes the level of provincial assistance to be allocated 

to both urban and rural municipalities. Accordingly, the 

amendment gives legal effect to decisions reflected in the 

1992-1993 budget. 

 

The amendment provides for overall reduction in funding 

through the revenue-sharing program to urban and rural 

municipalities. This funding reduction in revenue sharing and 

similar ones in other sectors are hardly desirable, Mr. Speaker, 

but I might add are necessary as a result of the massive deficit 

this province now finds itself in. 

 

Nevertheless the provincial government has inherited this kind 

of a fiscal mess and problem of immense proportions and we 

intend to do what the people elected us to do, and that is bring 

down the ever-increasing size of the provincial deficit. 
 

For the sake of Saskatchewan's future, it is vital that the 



May 15, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 449 

province's debt crisis be brought under control. And I ask the 

members opposite who were responsible for this huge deficit to 

join with us as opposed to fighting and trying to continue the 

drastic increase in the deficit of the province. 

 

Major funding reductions are a necessary part of the situation 

we face. The province, its communities, and its individuals will 

be tested to find new ways of achieving common objectives as 

we begin the significant challenge of rebuilding Saskatchewan. 

More specifically, the Bill provides an overall 14.8 per cent 

reduction for urban municipalities. I would like to describe 

what it contains in this figure. 

 

Firstly it includes a global 15 per cent reduction in 

unconditional revenue-sharing funding for 1992-93. However, 

in discussion with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association) they felt that a funding safety net should be put in 

place to buffer the impact of the revenue-sharing distribution 

formula for communities in particular need. Three hundred and 

eighty-five thousand dollars has been injected into the program 

to provide a degree of funding for 168 communities, and this 

has been done in consultation with SUMA. 

 

Also contained in the funding decision is the discontinuation of 

an intermunicipal fire protection program. The conditional 

program was operated for more than a decade as a very small 

component of revenue sharing. Historically the program 

provided a small financial incentive for municipalities to join 

together with other municipalities for the provision of fire 

protection. Most communities are now part of such an 

intermunicipal agreement and the funding incentive can be 

considered to have in fact done its job. 

 

In the coming days we will have more to say about the new 

approach to fire prevention and training and new methods of 

promoting intermunicipal co-operation. These changes, when 

taken together, are reflected in The Municipal Revenue Sharing 

Act of 1992. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I urge all members to support the 

Bill, and I move second reading of Bill No. 8, The Municipal 

Revenue Sharing Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to speak a little bit about 

it, and then I will be adjourning the debate. 

 

The minister raised some very significant issues here, I believe, 

about deficit and deficit reduction. I want to ask the minister in 

Committee of the Whole whether $517 million deficit in his 

budget is a deficit reduction. I want to ask the minister about 

off-loading. He mentioned off-loading as a part of the reason 

why we have the problem with the budget deficit. Is the 

off-loading by the federal government any different than the 

off-loading by the provincial government? What are small 

businesses going to respond to in this off-loading? Who's going 

to take care of the small-business tax that the businesses in the 

province have to deal with? 

 

Yesterday the Minister of Finance, in his closing address here, 

said that the economy in this province is strengthening, and he 

tabled a report that said that it 

maybe was. And if it is strengthening, the consistent overview 

of the revenue-sharing component as a part of its tradition has 

been that the municipalities and the various agencies that are in 

the revenue-sharing pool, municipalities and urban 

municipalities, have access to that revenue sharing as a part of 

the economic strength of this province. You're saying now that 

you're off-loading to the municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to be cognizant of the impact of the 

deficit in the province of Saskatchewan, but to continually 

blame other agencies, other groups for the kinds of things that 

you did in your budget is not fair, Mr. Speaker. And we're 

going to ask you a whole lot of questions, not only in the 

discussion, but in the Committee of the Whole we're going to 

be asking a whole lot of questions in relation to that. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, because of a lot more to say and 

we want to review what the minister has said, I'm asking for 

adjourned debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 5 -- An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Wascana Centre Amendment Act. This 

Bill amends the legislation pertaining to statutory funding for 

Wascana Centre for 1992-93 fiscal year. Mr. Speaker, it too 

reduces the level of funding by 5 per cent relative to the level 

of funding provided for in the 1991-92 fiscal year, 

implementing the change already announced in the budget. 

 

The members opposite will know that this comes as no surprise 

to the municipality or to the park. It's been debated and 

discussed. Under the former government, the Wascana Centre 

Authority suffered through several years, with funding being 

frozen at a level originally set in 1986 and '87. Now because of 

the deficit accumulated by the same government, we have had 

the need to implement a further reduction for this year. 

 

The government remains committed to seeing that the Wascana 

Centre continues to perform its unique, combined role, both as 

a setting for the provincial government and as a major amenity 

for the residents of Regina and also for the whole province. 

Some adjustments will be necessary in this financial difficult 

time, but the commitment remains. 

 

Funding in future years will be subject of discussions with the 

other participating parties of the Wascana. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

would therefore move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm going to again move 

adjournment of the debate at the conclusion of my remarks. I 

want to point out that the member responsible for the actions of 

the minister responsible for Community Services is not present 

today and will be wanting to review some of the aspects of the 

Bill. 

 

And I also want to point out, as I will in subsequent motions, 

that he has . . . again attacking everybody else 



450 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1992 

but not involving himself in his own decisions. And I again 

want to point out, the $517 million of deficit that you put on 

the books is your responsibility. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that 

that's second highest deficit in the province of Saskatchewan's 

history. And that, Mr. Speaker, is a part of their legacy -- not 

only ours but theirs -- because they made the decision to do it. 

They cut and cut and cut, and yet, Mr. Speaker, I believe they 

cut fairly. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the premise that I think that you should 

have reassigned yourself the opportunity, when you had it, to 

deliver a better opportunity for the people of Saskatchewan and 

where you place the emphasis. 

 

I move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 6 -- An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 

Authority Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second 

reading of The Meewasin Valley Authority Act amendment. 

Mr. Speaker, this Act includes changes in a number of areas for 

the Meewasin Valley Authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased that the opposition is giving up on 

their argument that they're not responsible for the debt, and are 

now saying we should come forward with our own proposals. 

But at least now they're accepting that they ran the deficit in the 

province to close to $15 billion, when you include loan 

guarantees along with the debt. But I can tell you very clearly 

that when you try to shift the onus of your responsibility on an 

ongoing basis and hope people will forget about it, that won't 

happen. 

 

Just as things done by previous governments, for example the 

Thatcher government back in the 1960s when they put 

deterrent fees on all of health care . . . and you remember the 

payments for going to the hospital, some dollars a day and 

every time you went to the doctor. That is still a legacy of the 

Liberal Party of Saskatchewan. And I say to the member from 

Morse, when you try to say, look, quit talking about the debt 

and who's responsible for it -- the public know why you want 

to get off of that topic. 

 

The member for Arm River last night went to great lengths to 

try to get people to quit thinking about it and quit talking about 

it because we don't like it. Well we know why you don't like it 

because you're guilty of having driven this province to the 

extent where the new government now has to come in and 

make small changes across the piece -- to oil companies, to 

potash companies, to banks, to farmers, to storekeepers, to 

politicians, 5 per cent cut for cabinet ministers. All of this is 

being done in the name of solving the problem, Mr. Speaker, 

that these people created. That's why the Bill is being brought 

here. 
 

I want to say to the member from Morse very clearly, we did 

have options. We could have continued to run the deficit up 

even higher. That's true, we had that option. That option was 

followed by you people for 9 or 10 budgets -- I believe 10 

budgets -- where deficits were introduced in the House in much 

easier times. 

But I want to say to you that that would be totally irresponsible 

-- having run a total campaign on attempting to get the deficit 

under control -- to continue to drive it up. So what we're doing 

here today is attempting, in a small way by moving an 

amendment to the Meewasin Valley Authority, to come to 

grips with the ever increasing deficit in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that first the Bill amends the 

provision of the Act relating to the statutory funding for the 

Meewasin for 1992-93 fiscal year. It reduces this funding by 5 

per cent relative to the level provided for in 1991-92. This 

implements the changes as I mentioned that were announced 

last week in the provincial budget. I, like many other 

colleagues and cabinet responsible for urban parks, find this, 

and I'm speaking on behalf of my colleague, find this most 

regrettable in the context of the reductions to and freezes of the 

Meewasin Valley funding implemented by the previous 

government for four or five or six years. 

 

(1115) 

 

However the fiscal situation leaves this government little 

option but to look at all opportunities to make small savings 

which we believe will add up to a balanced budget during our 

first term in office. 

 

Discussion with the other participating parties for funding 

Meewasin Valley Authority in the future years will be taking 

place over the next several months to determine how best to 

ensure Meewasin continues to meet the high expectations that 

all of us have of it. 

 

I hereby, Mr. Speaker, move second reading of The Meewasin 

Valley Authority Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my remarks 

I will move the motion to adjourn debate. We had the minister 

speak about deterrent fees. We had the minister speak 

something about doing something about it, about the budget 

deficit. And, Mr. Speaker, he has said in this House that it's 

time to do something about it. He's even committed that in his 

first term of office he's going to have a balanced budget, 

balanced on the basis of tax increases, horrendous tax increases 

to every sector of society starting at the small business, in 

Power, SaskTel, SaskEnergy, government insurance programs. 

 

And then he concludes by saying that he's going to cut these 

spending in Meewasin. And I would say, Mr. Speaker, again 

that because the member will be addressing -- who is the critic 

-- will be addressing later, I move the adjournment of the 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 4 -- An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley 

Authority Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, this will be the last of 

the Bills that I will be dealing with today, and it is basically the 

second reading of The Wakamow Valley Authority 

Amendment Act. And I say this Bill changes the statutory 

funding for the Wakamow Valley Authority, restoring the 

formula to that which existed prior to the 20 



May 15, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 451 

per cent reduction instituted by the provincial government in 

1983, if you remember back to those days when the Tories 

were first elected. 

 

The effect of this cut, compounded by the freeze of the 

provincial funding since 1986-87, has been bringing Wakamow 

close to the point of no return. A recent review by the 

participating parties and Wakamow's independent auditor 

found the Authority in debt and likely to be unable to survive 

another year without steps to address its financial situation. 

 

Here again I say that in light of the terrible debt situation that 

the province now finds itself in, we're trying to do what we can 

to salvage programs, parks, and those kinds of things wherever 

we can. But I must tell you that it's very, very difficult. 

 

And I know the member is upset with the tax increases and the 

cuts. And many people in the province are not pleased with the 

cuts and the tax increases. But I think the vast majority know 

full well, and indications are when I travel around that they 

know full well, who is responsible for the fact that we have to 

go through this major overhaul of the economy in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I compare it to a family where they may have had 

a family income of $80,000 and all of a sudden due to lay-off 

or due to loss of jobs they end up with a job that earns half of 

the 80,000 and have 40,000. They have a choice to make. Do 

they continue to spend at the salary they were before the 

change in status or do they sit down and figure out how they're 

going to manage on the new income. 

 

Well we're a government that has been left in dire straits. The 

$517 million debt that we have presently, if it were not for the 

massive interest on the debt, the member from Arm River will 

know that we would not only have a balanced budget but we'd 

have a surplus of over $200 million given our budget that we 

brought forward. 

 

I say to you that this is a small part of it, the changes that we're 

making within the park authority amendments that I have 

announced today. But I say these small moves are going to 

bring the province back to fiscal stability. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I would please ask you and your colleagues, 

rather than being doom and gloom about the future of the 

province, to join with us and tell us what your options are, 

because for the past 10 years it's amazing to me, we saw none 

of them. And all of a sudden you get on the opposition benches 

and you have all these bright ideas about how you would solve 

the debt problem. 

 

Well I say, Mr. Speaker, that it's the height of hypocrisy to 

watch the members opposite talk about what they would do to 

solve the $15 billion debt problem when they were the 

architects. And that member opposite who is now sitting and 

talking about how he would do it, voted for the exact debt that 

we have in this province of $15 billion, and now has the 

audacity to stand here and say that he has the answers of how 

to solve it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that I would move second reading of The 

Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act. 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, an observation I want to make 

about all these Bills -- The Meewasin Valley, Wascana, and 

Wakamow. 

 

I sat in this Assembly year after year after year when we 

stabilized, when we stabilized the expenditures to those park 

communities. And, Mr. Speaker, on every occasion, on every 

occasion as I sat here and listened, the members from Moose 

Jaw, the members from Saskatoon, and the members from 

Regina who were in opposition at that time continually said 

spend more, spend more, spend more. And that, Mr. Speaker, 

was consistent with their theme all the way through. 

 

And when you place responsibility on each one of these 

members, then they have a change of heart. They begin to 

realize that it's necessary to balance the budget. They begin to 

realize it's important to do that. And, Mr. Speaker, I know 

absolutely for sure that every one of those members spoke in 

favour of spending more. And now when they have the 

responsibility to manage the affairs of this province, they say, 

spend less. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the members from those communities 

should hang their heads in shame for driving the budget in this 

province to the point that it was because they said, spend more. 

And the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow and the member 

from Moose Jaw Palliser said that over and over and over 

again. And they had very significant speeches, standing in that 

corner of this Assembly and saying it. And from the back row I 

can distinctly recall them saying, spend more, spend more, 

spend more. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, the chicken has come to roost. And 

that, Mr. Speaker, we said, hold it flat; and you said, spend it 

more. Now, Mr. Speaker, you are forcing the people of 

Saskatchewan to spend less, and that is the result of your 

pressure on the wrong side. And, Mr. Speaker, we are going to 

find out how many more places these people are going to have 

to say, we can do it better. But before they said no, spend more, 

spend more, spend more. And they did it in every facet of their 

departments. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to ask, because I have more to 

say, to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 9 -- An Act to amend The Mineral Taxation Act, 

1983 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

am pleased to rise today to move second reading of The 

Mineral Taxation Amendment Act, 1992. This Bill will change 

the rate of the mineral rights tax currently being assessed from 

$1 per acre to $1.50 per acre, a necessity brought on by the 

current fiscal situation of the province. 

 

The mineral rights tax is paid by more than 600 individuals and 

corporations, however large corporate entities which hold large 

tracts of mineral rights pay most of this tax. Approximately 

$5.7 million in mineral rights tax was collected in 1991. The 

increase in the tax rate is 



452 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1992 

expected to generate an additional $2.1 million in revenue for 

1992. 
 

An amendment of a housekeeping nature is also included in 

this Bill to clarify the conditions which apply when mineral 

rights are being transferred from a taxable entity to an 

individual who is exempt from tax under this Act. 
 

With those brief comments, I move second reading of The 

Mineral Taxation Amendment Act, 1992. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

because this Bill was just presented to the House yesterday, 

we've not yet had an opportunity to review it and to consider its 

implications. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to move that we adjourn 

debate on this Bill. 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 10 -- An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act and 

to make consequential amendments to certain other Acts 

resulting from the enactment of this Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I'm pleased to rise to move second reading of The 

Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 1992. This Bill amends 

various provisions of The Crown Minerals Act which was last 

amended in 1990. 
 

The Crown Minerals Act applies to all Crown minerals and the 

granting and acquiring of interests in Crown minerals and 

Crown mineral lands. The main elements of the Bill address the 

ability of the province to manage its mineral resources by 

doing five different things. First, is strengthening and 

protecting the Crown's authority to collect royalties; secondly, 

providing greater ability to address environmental concerns; 

thirdly, improving the province's capacity to address Indian 

land settlement issues; fourthly, modifying land tenure 

practices as relate to unexplored deep oil and gas rights; and 

finally, refining the provisions pertaining to Crown acquired 

lands. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the minerals belonging to the people of this 

province are valuable assets, and it is incumbent upon the 

government to ensure that appropriate benefits flow to the 

Crown from the development of these resources. Provisions of 

this Bill strengthen the Crown's authority to assess a royalty in 

various forms, including that of a tax on incomes or profits. 
 

Furthermore, a general royalty-avoidance clause is being added 

to prevent the erosion of Crown revenues as a result of 

arrangements or transactions designed to unduly or artificially 

reduce the liability of a Crown lessee to make royalty 

payments. The Bill will also strengthen the ability of the 

minister to determine the appropriateness of a price which is 

reported for royalty calculation purposes. 
 

Environmental protection, Mr. Speaker, is a priority of this 

government. We must recognize that environment protection 

imperatives may ultimately preclude the exploration and 

development of Crown minerals in certain areas. In the event 

Crown minerals have been disposed within an area of high 

environmental sensitivity, the minister will have the authority 

to cancel such dispositions following the completion of an 

appropriate 

environmental assessment process. If mineral dispositions are 

to be cancelled for the environmental protection reasons, the 

holders of those dispositions will be provided fair and 

reasonable compensation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the governments of Saskatchewan and Canada 

and the province's Indian leaders have made considerable 

progress with respect to the negotiation of outstanding treaty 

land entitlements. Our government is committed to this 

process. I am pleased to advise that this Bill includes provision 

which expands the province's ability to transfer Crown 

minerals and Crown mineral lands to the federal government to 

satisfy Canada's obligations with the Indian bands of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has developed a mineral land 

tenure system over the years to facilitate the exploration and 

development of its valuable non-renewable resources. In recent 

years, there has been renewed interest in the exploration of 

deep oil and gas rights, particularly in south-east 

Saskatchewan. To encourage further deep exploration and 

allow greater access to deeper oil and gas rights, we are adding 

provisions to allow for the severance of deeper rights 

associated with the gas and oil leases if those rights remain 

unexplored for a period of more than five years. 

 

(1130) 

 

These provisions will apply to oil and gas leases granted in the 

past as well as all future leases which are granted. This will 

ensure that players interested in this type of exploration will 

have access to those rights. 

 

Two years ago, Mr. Speaker, The Crown Minerals Act was 

amended to limit the compensation payable to former mineral 

owners whose rights were acquired by the Crown in 1974. A 

cap of $50,000 per year per owner was imposed. This action 

was taken to reduce the expenditure requirements of the 

province. The need to contain government expenditures is even 

greater today, and therefore we will protect the expenditure 

savings resulting from the limitation on Crown acquired 

compensation payments introduced in 1990. 

 

One weakness of the compensation limitation provisions 

introduced two years ago is the failure to recognize and address 

the existence and impact of encumbrances which may have 

been registered against the mineral titles at the time of 

acquisition. Because the former owners of Crown acquired 

minerals may have significant obligations with respect to these 

encumbrance holders, we are introducing provisions to also 

limit the owners' obligations to make payments to these 

interests consistent with the revenues they are receiving in the 

form of compensation from the Crown. 

 

Other provisions of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, is to remove sand 

and gravel from the definition of the Crown mineral, to 

strengthen the authority of the Crown to lease sub-surface 

reservoirs and caverns for storage purposes, and generally 

clarify and improve the regulatory powers of the minister as 

they pertain to the administration of Crown minerals. 

 

With those comments, Mr. Speaker, I move second 



May 15, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 453 

reading of The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 1992. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again because 

this Bill was presented to the House yesterday, we've not had 

an opportunity to review it and to study its implications. It's a 

fairly complex Bill. It covers not only Crown lands but also 

private lands. I was glad to see, though, that the minister has 

taken into account native land treaty settlements which the 

previous government put into place; and also that he is taking 

into consideration the drilling of deep wells. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because we haven't had the opportunity to study 

this Bill, at this time I would move that debate on this Bill be 

adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 

 

The Chair: -- Mr. Minister, will you please introduce your 

staff. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Seated 

with me is Mr. Don McMillan, who is the acting president; to 

his right is Barry Hilsen, the assistant vice-president, human 

resources services. Immediately behind Mr. McMillan is Norm 

Drummond, the corporate comptroller. And immediately 

behind me is Rob Isbister, director of financial planning. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Firstly, just a 

comment pertaining to the House Leader. We're off to maybe 

not too good a start in Estimates. Yesterday our House Leader 

was not in attendance and the member from Moosomin was 

making agreements with the House Leader and they were going 

to bring in Public Service Commission. And then at 10 o'clock 

last night he brings over a document to change his mind. If 

we're going to have agreements . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

It's absolutely a fact. And then at 10 o'clock last night -- just 

before 10 -- he brought over a folder saying that it's going to be 

SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) but 

never said it had to come in that order. 

 

So if we're going to go through Estimates in a right and proper 

manner and bring things forth, we got to have a little bit of 

come and go. There has to be, Mr. Chairman. We have 

members on our side and we have . . . Like today you couldn't 

bring on Women's Secretariat because the minister is going to 

be away. 

 

So we expect, when you can't bring on as it's on here . . . It's on 

today's agenda that Women's Secretariat is on but still you can't 

have it because the minister's away. And that is fine. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- On a point of order, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: -- What is your point of order? 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- My point of order is this: that for 10 

years as House Leader of the opposition, I never got one 

written agenda from that group of people over there -- not one. 

And I'll tell you I won't stand by while you talk about your lack 

of information or consultation on the operation of the House, 

because it's completely unfair and inaccurate. I give you an 

agenda every day early enough for you to provide . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- 9:30. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, 9:30 on Fridays. I'll tell you 

when I got them from you when you were House Leader, Mr. 

Member from Rosthern, I would get them when I'd sat in my 

desk and you would bring your officials in. That's when I 

would know who was coming. And for you sanctimoniously, as 

you have on every occasion in the House for the past three 

weeks, lectured us about how we run government, I'll tell you, 

you are the biggest hypocrite that I've ever met. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- May I speak on this point of order? 

 

The Chair: -- Yes. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I think 

the public of Saskatchewan has just seen, Mr. Chairman, some 

of the problems and some of the difficulties that we as an 

opposition are facing when we're looking at an arrogant 

government, that because of their majority, thinks that they can 

run roughshod in this House. 

 

The Chair: -- Order. I'm having difficulty hearing the speaker 

and I ask members to observe some decorum. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I think 

it's extremely unfortunate for the Government House Leader to 

come, stand up, and in such a tirade undo much of the good 

will that this House has been experiencing for period of time 

from this morning on when you as a matter of fact, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, gave the report . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order. You should not involve the Chair in any 

of the debate. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman. And of course I 

realize that and I apologize for commending you on the job that 

you are doing. 

 

But I think it's very unfortunate that the House has deteriorated 

so rapidly, so rapidly right at the beginning of our session. And 

we had high hopes that we were going to continue on this 

harmonious type of path that we had embarked upon. 

 

But if the Government House Leader is going to continue on in 

tirades like that, then I don't think that this augurs well for the 

future of the proceedings here. 

 

Now I grant you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in response to this point 

of order, that I was not here in the House during the 



454 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1992 

afternoon yesterday when my Deputy House Leader informs 

me that this was a commitment that was made that we were 

going to be looking at the Public Service Commission as 

opposed to this particular one, because my member was going 

to have difficulty. 

 

Now we have to work in a spirit of co-operation here, 

otherwise this House will not work. We have to have that form 

of communication. And if I get a document showing that it's 

going to be a certain one, that's what we expect. And if things 

are going to be changed, then we're going to run into difficulty. 

 

Now our only recourse as members of the opposition is going 

to be to talk, to give speeches. But we will ask our questions. 

We will ask our questions when we are properly prepared . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . The member asked, who's stopping 

us? 

 

We are working under the burden of 10 members to take care 

of the entire . . . so therefore we are going to do a good job. 

And we will not be rushed, and we will certainly, Mr. Speaker, 

not allow the massive weight of 55 members to steamroll their 

way across the opposition. 

 

We promised the people of Saskatchewan that we will be an 

effective opposition, and we will do an effective job. And the 

only way we can do that is to have the time to prepare. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Chairman, all I am saying here is that today 

we will go on with SPMC, but I do not think that there will be 

much progress made. 

 

The Chair: -- The item under discussion, although is an 

interesting item of debate, is not strictly speaking a point of 

order, and therefore I encourage us to move on. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There wasn't 

really a problem here. I don't know why we got into such a 

hustle bustle. 

 

Because I say to the member, I say to the House Leader, Mr. 

Chairman, in due respect, I say to the House Leader that it was 

my true understanding that if it has to be SPMC, that's not a 

problem, but when you start changing the rules in the middle of 

the game . . . and that's what he's done. And I'm sorry if that 

isn't what I understood. But I was told by the member from 

Moosomin that it would be Public Service Commission. And 

that's what I understood. 

 

Now to make it very clear that it also says on here that today 

the Women's Secretariat will come up today also if we move 

along fast. And I just want to make this . . . if there's going to 

be for one, it can be for the other side. 

 

The Minister of Health is not here so we're not going to be able 

to do it, regardless. So they put it on the agenda for today 

knowing that she couldn't be here. So I ask for the same 

courtesy. I'll just be asking for the same courtesy if we have 

someone on our side that has to be out seeding or away on 

business or whatever, that we have the same courtesy, that 

theirs won't come up if they can't be here. We ask for the same 

courtesy and that's not a problem. That's all I ask. That if 

someone on our side of the House, 

the same as the Minister of Health, is not here today, and that's 

not a problem. But why put Women's Secretariat on the agenda 

at all for today if you know that she wasn't going to be here? 

Why put it on? 

 

Mr. Chairman, the minister responsible for SPMC has been 

around for a while. He's not like one of the new members that 

are ministers. Just to have it for the record, I'd like for him to 

give all the responsibilities your department, SPMC, is 

responsible for, in detail please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's a rather unusual question. I 

guess I could read the annual report. I'll try summarizing it and 

perhaps if there's some detail that you're particularly interested 

in, you could ask me. 

 

The function of the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation is to provide space, supplies, goods and services to 

government. It is now the function of the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation to supply those at the least 

possible cost. 
 

It used to be the function of the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation also to act as an appendage of the 

Progressive Conservative Party with respect to patronage. That, 

Mr. Minister, is no longer part of the function of the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. It now 

serves the taxpayers and not the Progressive Conservative 

Party. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

(1145) 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, I wasn't asking for him to get 

into all the details. I understand that. But he didn't even cover 

the highlights of that department, what they're responsible for. 

But we'll let him get away with that. That's all right. If he 

doesn't know what is the responsibility of his entire 

department, I guess the people in TV land will know that this 

morning. Because if that's all that they're responsible for, why 

such a large staff? 
 

Mr. Chairman, let's start with your own staff. Give us a list of 

all persons working in the minister's office or otherwise who 

report directly to you. 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If I could get the attention of one of 

the pages, I will send it over to you . . . have it in writing. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the minister for his 

quick response in sending those over. And now I ask if he has 

their titles and . . . I see he's got the salaries here, but their titles 

and their job descriptions. 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The first named -- Darlene and 

Myrna and Karen -- and perhaps the member will forgive me if 

I don't use the last names here; I think that'll sufficiently 

identify them since you have it in writing. Darlene and Myrna 

and Karen provide stenographic services. They are . . . Darlene 

being the senior of those. She's in a sense the minister's 

secretary. Myrna and Karen provide additional stenographic 

services. 
 

Heather Padfield is the senior ministerial assistant responsible 

for managing the office in a sense, also 



May 15, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 455 

responsible for ensuring the orderly flow of work through the 

office, ensuring that reports and responses are drafted. 

 

Bill Davies joined our staff somewhat recently. He has, in 

addition to his other qualifications, a doctorate in English. He 

is there primarily as a writer. His responsibilities are primarily 

to write letters and so on. 

 

Tim Whelan is there primarily with respect to communications 

in a sense. He's responsible for the communications of the 

office. 

 

That I think roughly, Mr. Member, describes the 

responsibilities of these six people. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Could you also give us a little run-down on 

their employment history including their last place of 

employment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm not entirely sure I can give that to 

the member. I can undertake to provide that in writing. I 

frankly don't know that information offhand. 

 

These are people by and large, Mr. Member, who came 

recommended to me by Executive Council. I simply took the 

recommendation without making any extensive inquiries on my 

own. I can say in all respects I've been well satisfied with them. 

However, if you want their previous employer, I will undertake 

to give you that in writing; I just don't have it with me. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

yes, I'd appreciate if we could have that, and no hurry today, 

but if we could have that some other time. 

 

I'd just like to ask a question about the statement you sent me 

over here. It's just not clear to me. You've got the three people 

-- Heather, Darlene and Myrna -- working in the Department of 

Finance and the others the Public Service Commission. We're 

not doing Public Service Commission. Do they work for the 

Public Service Commission or is it SPMC? Could you explain 

that please, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I can. Actually, as a matter of 

interest, the SPMC doesn't pay for any of my office staff. If the 

member were familiar with the comments of the auditor, in a 

special report took exception to the practice of funding staff for 

the government out of the Crown corporation. In order to 

comply with that, we have funded three out of Department of 

Finance, three out of Public Service Commission. 

 

I recognize we're not dealing with those. However, I thought 

the substance of the minister's question is, who's working in 

your office, so I provided that. As a matter of interest, none are 

funded actually out of SPMC. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- But my question in the first place, Mr. 

Minister, was, let's start with your own staff -- the list of all 

persons working in the minister's office or otherwise. So that's 

all of them? Is that . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, there are six people. Yes. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So I'm of the understanding that that's 

the six that work for you completely, whether it's what 

departments they're involved with. 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's correct. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you. I'd like to know if any worked 

or were paid by any other part of government before being on 

your payroll. 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I didn't catch the member's 

comments. I'm sorry, I didn't hear you. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I'd like to 

know if any of those six individuals that you gave me here 

worked or were paid by any other part of government before 

being on your payroll. 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think Darlene, Myrna were working 

in Executive Council before they came to work for my office. I 

think they were employed in Executive Council. The answer to 

the others is no. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay, the ones that . . . You're saying that 

three have worked for government before and three are 

brand-new? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Two; Darlene and Myrna had worked 

for Executive Council before coming to my office. They came 

on the recommendation of Executive Council; it's the second 

and third of the Department of Finance. The others, to my 

knowledge, had not worked for government immediately 

before coming. I don't know what their past employment with 

the Government of Saskatchewan might have been. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right, Mr. Minister, if you could just tell 

me when they started -- the ones that didn't work for 

government before -- what dates did they start? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It's in the second column from the 

right. The columns aren't very clearly listed, to be fair to the 

member. It's the second column from the right. You'll see that 

Ms. Padfield started on March 23, etc. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now, let's go to the department of SPMC -- 

a list of all positions that have been eliminated in the 

department since November 1, 1991. 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Again, if one of the pages would 

assist me. Perhaps the page can come here for a minute. The 

list which the page initially left with, entitled position abolition, 

is the list of positions that were deleted in the budget 

down-sizing. The member from Arm River will be aware there 

were some positions, some terminations, on March 5, '92. That 

is on a separate sheet which will be delivered to him as well by 

the page. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, I haven't had a chance to go 

through these. But my next question would be: a job 

description of each of these people that are eliminated. It just 

says, permanent or otherwise, in here. It doesn't say a job 

description. Will you be able to supply the job description of 

each and every one that's been eliminated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I rather thought it was on the sheet 

that I gave you. I thought the job title was on there. If 



456 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1992 

the member wants a more complete job description, we can 
certainly provide that to you. But the job title is on the sheet 
which you got. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, it'll take a little 

while to go through this, so maybe I'll just ask another question 

and then I'll get a chance maybe to glance through that. It's 

hard to look through that and be able to ask a question right 

away on it or respond to it. 

 

So if I may, could you tell us what was the reason for any of 

the people that got fired or eliminated since that . . . (inaudible) 

. . . What was the reason for it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The reductions on March 5 had to do 

with a corporate reorganization, with one exception which I'd 

rather not get into in a lot of detail, although I'll give the 

member information in writing -- with one exception they were 

without cause. 

 

The positions which were eliminated last Thursday on budget 

day were a matter of down-sizing and reducing staff. And that 

is the case in all cases without exception. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, would it 

be fair in asking you if you know or if you can get me the 

information of how many of these people were just let go or 

fired or eliminated just because of cut-backs. How many are 

straight political firings? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Oh I think none were straight 

political firings. None were political firings. I can't entirely, 

Mr. Member . . . in the case of the terminations of March 5, all 

of those were terminations, although I'm not entirely sure of all 

the in-scope people. 

 

The in-scope people have the right to bump. That's why all 

your question's difficult to answer. The in-scope people have 

the right to bump, and they may bump and go elsewhere. 

Out-of-scope people generally do not have that right. 

 

Thus with respect to the positions which were down-sized on 

budget day, I can't give you that because it will still be 

undetermined; they will still be exercising their options. I'm 

sure I can tell you -- I'll give it to you in writing another day -- 

which of the in-scope positions on February 5 were resolved 

through bumping. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- My question was, your . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm informed that -- if I can interrupt 

the member -- I'm informed by my officials that none of the 

in-scope terminations on February 5 were resolved through 

bumping. They all departed. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you'll be able 

to supply more detail on all these, and then ones that are March 

5, you'll be able to soon supply that information. And when 

could you exactly supply that information? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- With respect to the ones on February 

5, I've given you that, I think. None of them were resolved 

through bumping, or they've all departed. 

With respect to the ones on May 7, we will give it to you as 

soon as it's available. I don't know precisely how long it will 

take for the employees to determine where they are going. 

Certainly at the end of the day when everybody's settled I will 

give it to you. I'm reluctant to give you a firm date because I'm 

not sure how long it takes for those positions . . . I'm certain 

before the session comes to an end we can give it to the 

member. I can give you that commitment I think. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- That's a pretty . . . before the session ends. 

That's a long time. I understood that you said before the end of 

the session. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The problem is, though, you asked 

which of these were resolved through termination. I don't know 

that yet and it isn't determined yet. And it may be some weeks 

before it is, given the nature of the collective agreement under 

which employees have the right to bump and to be 

re-transferred to other departments. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, will you 

undertake then as your department . . . there'll be somebody 

that's already been taken care of today. There'll be some of 

those now that have new jobs or whatever or moved the 

province; a lot of them have probably left the province already. 

But as each one comes to you, will you commit to get that 

information to me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I have no objection to doing this. It's 

an enormous amount of work. I would prefer to simply give the 

minister the commitment that as soon as we can after they're 

resolved . . . It depends when the session ends too. I might have 

been a bit optimistic in thinking I could do it before the session 

ends; it depends when it ends. Some of these aren't resolved 

until July 3; some of them don't actually take place till July 3. 

 

So perhaps I could undertake to give it to the minister as soon 

as we can collect the data. We're happy to provide it with you. 

To give you a firm time limit actually is very difficult, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, just to leave it open-ended like 

that . . . and you can understand what I'm trying to get at here. 

We know there's been massive firings by this government. And 

I want the names and I want to know . . . you gave me the 

names here, but I want to know where they're going and what 

jobs, if they've got bumping rights or they're even allowed 

because I think there is political firings here. You said there 

wasn't any, and I'm sure that you would . . . It would be almost 

impossible, this many names, to have somebody not included 

was their own political stripes. 

 

Can you stand up here and say, Mr. Minister, very clearly that 

there was absolutely, to your knowledge, that there was on this 

list . . . there's no political firings, that no one got put on there. 

Nobody got bumped in your department's knowledge? Ask 

them. Is there anyone that you know of, because we know that 

there was massive firings that had Progressive Conservative 

political stripes. 

 

(1200) 



May 15, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 457 

So I'm just asking if you . . . because I don't know these names. 

I haven't been through them yet, and we will. But I want to get 

to the bottom of it and find out because your promise always 

was that . . . and there's quote after quote from your Premier, 

quote after quote from many of your ministers, quotes from 

yourself that we'll never do this, that there'll be no political 

patronage will ever happen in our government, just will not 

happen. 

 

And last night when I spoke in the House here, Mr. Minister, 

we talked about 200 OCs (order in council) -- 200. And then 

we had another 500-and-some appointments. You can't tell me 

those aren't political appointments. I want to know, and I want 

it assured from you and said as the minister stated in this 

House, that there's no political firings. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I was not a member of Executive 

Council on February 5. However I'm assured that's the case 

with respect to those . . . that those were . . . it was legitimate 

reorganization. 

 

With respect to the firings, with respect to the down-sizing on 

May 7 on budget day, I don't have to ask the officials now 

because I asked that question in advance of it happening. I 

wanted assurance that this was being done for legitimate 

reasons of down-sizing, and not for any political or other crass 

reasons. I was given assurance by the officials who are with me 

that it was legitimate, and the only reason the positions were 

being deleted was for reasons of budgetary economy. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you still 

haven't stood up in this House and said, I absolutely guarantee 

you that there was no political firings. That's what I want you 

to say -- there was absolutely any. And if you can't say it, well 

then I guess it must have been. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There were absolutely no politicals 

firings. Will that satisfy the member? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Maybe the political firings are this way. 

They said it wasn't a political firing when they fired George 

Hill and put Messer in his position. That's happened all the way 

through. That was just down-sizing salary, it wasn't political. 

 

They give an open-ended . . . to Jack Messer, he ends up with 

an open-ended contract. Voluntary, no contract, so we don't 

know. But your government says that these kind of people, the 

George Hills of the world . . . And I can see why you'd want to 

put your campaign manager in a good position like that. Why 

wouldn't you? But why don't you, why don't you admit it? 

 

And in every department . . . because I still believe that there's 

political firings in every department that you had down-sizing, 

whatever. You've picked them out because there's departments 

right in this government where you've reclassified their 

salaries. And you know it's happened. But you'll never admit it 

because your department's done it for you. 

 

And I want to be assured . . . you give your assurance that 

there's no political firings. I'm going to hold you to that. 

Because when we can find someone in there in that 

department, when I go through these names, I'm telling you, 

Mr. Minister, you're going to be in a lot of problem when we 

find out there's someone in those departments that has brought 

us a Conservative card publicly, and he knows he got fired 

because of those reasons. Because it's happening every day. 

 

You didn't even make a good job of your firings. When you 

were doing it, you missed some of the people who spoke out 

against the government the last few months. And they got . . . 

They were your own people -- NDP (New Democratic Party) 

card holders. And they got cleaned up in it because you kind of 

thought maybe because they spoke out against your 

government you better get rid of them. 

 

Everybody has to be on your side. Everybody has to be more 

than . . . They got to more than have an NDP card, Mr. 

Minister. They got to more than have an NDP card. They got to 

be out there, never say a word against this government -- can't 

say one word. You speak out against the government, your 

job's in jeopardy. They know that. 

 

So anyway, Mr. Minister, I've had your commitment there's 

been absolutely no political firings in the department of SPMC. 

So we'll take some time. We'll wait on your information. 

 

But I don't like that open-ended date you give us. So I think 

what I'll ask you again on that one is what I asked you before. 

As each one is available -- you may have some available today 

-- will you send that to me in my office as each individual has 

been decided upon where they are going, or what new jobs or 

whatever, or haven't been any, as you have it finalized? 

Because you might hold it off for four years on me if one or 

two people in the department hasn't . . . didn't know where they 

were going or whatever. 

 

I don't like that open-ended. Will you just commit, as the 

department has the answers to these, whether it's all or in full, 

that I get it? Because I understand that you can't pin you down 

to having it all right on July 1 because it's not a reasonable 

request. But would you commit that as your department gives 

you the information, as it comes in, that I will get it as it comes 

in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If the member has questions about 

individuals, I'll certainly answer them. I'm reluctant to give him 

a commitment that as each individual bumps, we will notify 

them. 

 

First of all, it's an enormous amount of work. And whatever the 

member may think, we are not overstaffed. We are going to 

continue down-sizing and economizing. 

 

But separately, Mr. Minister, there is a question of the privacy 

of the individuals here. They will be bumping . . . and it sets off 

a chain reaction -- one bumps, another bumps. Until the 

process is complete, I am reluctant to make the information 

public. And I can understand how the member might be 

somewhat suspicious of an open-ended commitment because I 

suppose you're going to have difficulty holding me to it. 

 

All I can say to the member is, I am trying to be as 



458 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1992 

forthcoming as I can. We will provide the information as soon 

as you can. I respect the right of opposition members to 

information, legitimate information. I think this is legitimate 

information. I'm just not sure I can provide it on the basis that 

you ask and I'm not 100 per cent certain I should until the 

bumping process is complete. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you make me 

believe that you don't want to because . . . you just finished 

saying, Mr. Minister, that you're not too comfortable of giving 

individual information out. But still when the whole package, 

you've already agreed when the whole package is finished you 

will. Are you just trying to delay this so it'll be maybe a year or 

two down the road that we'll get this information? 

 

What difference does it make whether I get part of it tomorrow, 

another part in June or another part in July and the rest 

whenever you have it. What's the difference does it make? Why 

do I have to have the whole package? I didn't ask for that. I've 

asked for it as it comes to you. As your department officials 

knows these requests, I want them turned over. There's no 

reason to say, we want to wait till the whole package together. 

I'm not satisfied, Mr. Minister. It's open-ended because you can 

go on for ever. We'll never get that information and we want 

that information. 

 

When you were on this side of the House, I've seen you hold up 

for days and days and days when you couldn't get some 

information. I have no intention to do that. I want to make a 

commitment here for right now, because you're the ones that 

said you're going to be the open government. We're going to 

have books wide open. There is nothing that isn't going to be 

available to the public. Well if it's not available to us, it's not 

available to the public. So if you got nothing to hide -- as it 

brings that information in, turn it over to me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I regret very much that the member 

from Rosthern assumes that this government is conducting its 

operations the way you did when you were in office. We are 

simply not doing that. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Member, these positions were deleted for 

budgetary reasons and had nothing to do with the politics of the 

individual. You may well find people with Conservative 

memberships on that list. I don't have access to that list so I can 

neither deny nor confirm that. 

 

I can tell you, if you had access to the NDP membership list, 

you'd find people on that list who have NDP memberships. 

That was not a consideration in why they were terminated. 

They were terminated for legitimate reasons, something I know 

you would have difficulty understanding having watched the 

former administration in operation for 10 years, because 

legitimate motivations had precious little to do with your 

terminations. 

 

I say to the member opposite -- having got that off my chest -- I 

say to the member opposite that the positions are eliminated. 

They then moved elsewhere in government. I don't think I am 

able to provide it on a move . . . each time someone moves I 

don't think I'm able to provide it. It sets off a chain reaction. 

I would expect within a matter of weeks following the end of 

the session, I would be able to give you the complete list. And I 

think that's the best I can do is to provide you with the 

complete list as soon as it's available. It will not take four 

years; it will take a matter of weeks. 

 

I say in closing though, Mr. Minister, please don't judge 

everybody by the abysmal standards which your government 

set when they were in office. Very few governments sink to 

that level. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now that's quite an accusation, Mr. 

Minister. But this is the accusation I'm giving to you: that some 

of these people that's been eliminated from their positions and 

you don't want to say where they're going or what's happening 

to them or whatever, is happening because you're afraid that 

we'll find out how many of the people with NDP cards get a job 

some place else in government. Because I do believe you'll be 

taking care of your own. The NDP have been known for that 

for ever -- take care of your own people. 

 

And don't say that the way this government handled it . . . 

because I can take you to department after department after 

department where we did not do that. Go to the Department of 

Agriculture, go to SPMC, and see how many of the average 

people that we kicked out and brought in -- we didn't do that. 

It's you people that's doing that. 

 

It's you people that's laying off all over this province. You've 

laid off and you've laid off and you laid off. And we're going to 

follow where those people go. Because if they're your 

card-carrying people, they'll get a job some place else in 

government. That's why I want to know where they're going, 

what job did they go to next. I want to see the people that are 

out of scope that are your people, and find another job in 

government or the people that had the bumping rights. 

 

Mr. Minister, you're saying to me you will not provide the 

package until you have it completed. Are you saying you will 

not give us a breakdown as information comes in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I am saying when the process is 

complete, which I expect will take a matter of a few weeks, I 

will give it to you. You will have it in time for my Estimates 

next year, if I still have this portfolio. And I think that's all that 

makes sense to you. 

 

Frankly, I don't know why the member wants it item by item, 

piece by piece. Surely when you get the whole picture, then 

you'll be in the position to judge it. Or is the member going to 

continue doing what members opposite have done for so long 

and that is run half-cocked with ill-conceived information and 

make false judgement? Surely you'll want the whole picture. I'll 

give you the whole picture. 

 

I've every expectation you'll get it before the Estimates come 

up next year. And you can return to the subject if you think the 

public servants weren't fairly dealt with. 

 

As for rehiring people, there's no particular reason why the 

member should know this, and it's not actually part of these 

Estimates. But when the Public Service Commission 



May 15, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 459 

Estimates come, you will be told that everybody goes on a 

re-employment list. All the ones who were laid off go on a 

re-employment list and they're given first dibs at jobs as they 

come up. 

 

And that's true whether they hold Progressive Conservative 

cards, NDP cards, or what is the case in 99 per cent of them, 

they don't hold a card at all. Everybody goes on a 

re-employment list. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, it's just not 

good enough. The minister stands there and says, I'll be able to 

supply it to you, I think, in a few weeks, but I won't guarantee 

that. And you'll have it in plenty of time to ask more questions 

a year from now in Estimates if he's still the minister. Now 

that's a pretty open-ended answer to my question. You 

double-tongued yourself when you were talking. 

 

You said, I'll have the information maybe in a few weeks. All 

right. I haven't seen you ask your officials when that 

information could be available. If there's one or two or three 

you don't know, ask your experts there when will that 

information be available. What's the last date that they're 

saying? You said July 3 once. I want a date put on it. Will it be 

in July or August? I don't want it open-ended when this session 

closes this year and I don't get a chance to ask questions about 

it. I don't want it open-ended. 

 

We must have it while this session's still sitting. We'll stay here 

all day and again another day until you commit that I'm going 

to get those answers before this session ends -- well before -- in 

case there's something we want to come back on in some other 

method, even if we're through with this department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't need to ask the officials the 

answers to the questions you've asked. I know the answers. I've 

been trying, with as much patience as I can muster, to explain 

to the member opposite that we have no way of knowing 

precisely when the process ends. One person bumps. That will 

cause another person to bump. That may cause another person 

to bump. And the process goes on. It's a complex process. 

 

It doesn't in a real sense begin until July 3. And I would be 

pleasantly surprised if it were over by the time the session's 

over, but I frankly don't think it will be. It goes on longer than 

that. I can't give you a precise time. 

 

I can give you an undertaking as one veteran member of this 

legislature to another veteran member of this legislature, you'll 

get it as soon as I can make it available. And that's the best I 

can do for the member. 

 

(1215) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's quite easy to see 

what you're talking about, all this bumping and moving around, 

and you got the bumping privileges. I guess we'd be able to put 

a date on here much easier if we knew exactly how many NDP 

card holders were there, or supporters, so when the bumping's 

done they all got the positions. That's really what you're saying, 

when the bumping is all over and the NDP people all got their 

positions. 

I'm not going to leave this, but I'm going to get off it for now 

because I'm not satisfied. We're going to come back on it 

before we're through. I'm going to go ahead with some other 

questions, Mr. Minister, because I'm not just going to have you 

stand up here, Mr. Minister, and say, oh we're going to be 

different than the other government. We're just going to hand 

you anything; it's wide open. And then the first estimate that's 

up, the first one up, I asked you these questions and you're 

going to leave it open-ended for another year. 

 

It's not good enough for you to say it's just going to be a few 

weeks. You've never asked your officials. Mr. Minister, if he 

knows the answers, I wonder, Mr. Chairman, I wonder why he 

bothered with his officials. Because maybe they're sitting there 

telling him something they can take care of. 

 

Mr. Chairman, will you provide in respect of those persons not 

terminated due to the elimination of their position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's the same question as you asked 

the last time. I've given you the undertaking it will be available 

as soon as possible. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I want a list of all employees fired, laid off, 

retired, or otherwise terminated since November 1, 1991 -- of 

all. And they're not all here in this list. Or did I misunderstand 

you that they were all here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, these were all the positions that 

were eliminated in this department. That's all I can answer for. 

In this Crown corporation, these are all the positions that were 

eliminated. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay, I didn't understand that. This is all of 

them. I'm sorry, okay, I understand. The salary and benefits 

associated with each position including related costs such as 

office equipment, furniture, and space costs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We can give you the salary. That's 

easy; that's a matter of public record. I'm not sure we can give 

all of that information. Perhaps I'll ask the minister to repeat it. 

You're asking for an enormous amount of detail here. And I 

might say, there's a cost to providing the detail. Members 

opposite, when they were in office, might not have been 

conscious of the cost of running government. We've tried to be. 

 

I'll say to the member again, I can supply the salary; that's not a 

problem. I'm not sure if all of that detail is available. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I just sat 

in that side of the House over there while you people just got 

into every detail of this expensive, elaborate furniture we had 

for all our departments and what not. And so I don't see 

anything wrong with asking, questioning. You should be able 

to say, and your department should know that. 

 

And I'll go through it again. Salaries, fine. I understand you can 

get that to me very easily. But including related costs such as 

office equipment, furniture, and space costs. Now that shouldn't 

be a difficult question for your 



460 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1992 

officials to answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, I think that's almost impossible to 

answer. For one thing, it changes while you're preparing the 

list. With this many employees, they'll move, they'll use 

different equipment, jobs will change. I think . . . I'll give you 

the salary. I can give you the standards which are applied to 

positions of this sort. But to give you the detail of each 

employee, first of all, it would be of encyclopediate length. 

And secondly, it's going to change as you prepare the list. 

 

I will undertake to give the minister the salary. I'll undertake to 

give you the standards which are normally associated with 

positions of this nature. But to give you the detail of each 

individual one, first of all I think it's unreasonable; secondly, I 

don't think the list could ever be completed. It would be 

changing as you completed it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- That's not good enough, Mr. Minister. You 

can cut off as of today and your department could say . . . You 

don't have to change it as you're doing the list. Just say, we'll 

pick a date, and give us the costs at that date. Take June 1 or 

May 15, whatever. 

 

You know that's just an excuse, saying that it may change 

while we're getting the answer for the next two or three 

months. That's hog-wash. Mr. Minister, you can have your 

department cut off and give us that information because I've . . . 

There's nothing wrong with us asking that question. If you've 

had cut-backs in expensive furniture -- maybe you've bought a 

bunch of new furniture. Maybe you have, maybe you haven't. 

But how are we going to know? 

 

So I don't think that's an unrealistic question to ask, including 

the related costs such as office equipment, furniture, and space 

costs. If you don't know that, you have no idea where your 

department's at. That shouldn't be a difficult one at all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Is the member asking for the 

furniture and equipment before they left SPMC, or are you 

asking for that in their new positions? If you're asking for it in 

the new positions, I don't know that we have that. I mean that's 

. . . They go to other departments. They're gone; they're 

somewhere else. I don't know that we have that information or 

would we have access to it. If you want the equipment and 

furniture and fixtures which they had before they left, I guess 

we could provide that, although I want the member to be 

conscious of what you're asking. That is a very great amount of 

work. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Mr. Minister, each and every person 

that was eliminated, either they did or they didn't have office 

equipment, furniture, etc. Okay, somebody came in and either 

replaced that job, or that furniture is not being used. That job 

has maybe been deleted. 

 

So there should be a statement . . . We'll say it this way. If a job 

has been eliminated and the furniture's not needed any more, 

who has it and where's it going? You want to sell, or did 

somebody come in and replace that? Well the members laugh, 

but if you've eliminated a job, where's the furniture going to 

go? And the office space -- I said office equipment, furniture, 

and space. So there's three 

things there. And that's not an unrealistic thing to ask. So the 

people that have been eliminated from their job and what's their 

saving there, or the people coming in, what is left there for 

office equipment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- As I now understand the member's 

question, I think that's not unreasonable. We will tell you not 

only the positions but what furniture and space we were able to 

save at the same time. I think that's not unreasonable, and when 

we answer this, we'll provide that to you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you. Could you also, when you're 

going through all these people that have been terminated, could 

we get a breakdown on whether the employment was by way of 

a contract or salary, contract or salaries. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There were no contractual 

employees. I want to say to the minister again, we eliminated 

the positions. These were all public service appointments. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

All right. I'd like to ask now the names of the people replacing 

the terminated employee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There are none. The positions were 

eliminated. There were no replacements. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So you're saying this entire list, Mr. 

Chairman, they've all been eliminated then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes. That's accurate. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- And, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 

they've been eliminated and there must have been positions 

there that they had duties, and who's doing the duties of these 

people that you've eliminated? Where's it going? Can you 

explain that? Who's looking after all their duties? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I say to the member . . . I should 

clarify, with respect to the terminations on February 5, the top 

four named are vice-presidents and the positions have . . . those 

positions may not be eliminated but may reappear in a different 

form as we reorganize. 

 

So of the list of March 5 -- I want to be perfectly candid with 

the member -- as the reorganization occurs, there may be some 

vice-president positions reappear. But of the ones of May 7, 

those are all abolitions. Nobody will replace them. And the 

work will be shared by others. 

 

When we took office we found in some areas the government 

was overstaffed. In some cases people seemed to be hired more 

with a view to giving friends of the government a job than with 

a view to providing services to the taxpayer. And these 

positions recognize that latter problem. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- See, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, that's 

what bothers me. Just what the minister just said there -- that 

we've eliminated these positions. That's it. 



May 15, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 461 

But then through reorganization we maybe need the four 

presidents back and then we'll have to bring in some of these, 

bump people, and start all over again. 

 

That's what scares me, of all this elimination of jobs. They 

were doing something. And you're just reorganizing to fool the 

public, is what I believe. 

 

And you pretty well just summed it up right there. First the 

minister got up and he said very clearly that they're all 

eliminated. Then he got up and said, and I appreciate that, he 

got up and said . . . that he probably realized what he said. He 

got up and said, except for the four presidents, that it depends 

what happens on the reorganization. 

 

All right. What I'm asking, in the new organization, is the same 

thing going to take place exactly? Is there going to be more 

employees, less employees, or a different type of organization 

taking place in SPMC? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, I say to the member, there are 

going to be fewer employees. We think that we can provide 

better service with fewer employees, and these positions are 

not going to be refilled. This is a permanent down-sizing. The 

reorganization of May 7 was a permanent down-sizing. I want 

to make that clear that those positions will not be refilled. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay, that's fair enough. We'll take the 

minister's word for that that they're going to definitely be 

down-sized. But the job has to be done by someone. And I got 

nothing against that, if you can reorganize and still give the 

same service to the public. We'll watch, and if they do, I got 

nothing against that. If you can get by with less people, then 

that's fine. But we're going to watch you very carefully to make 

sure you do, and see how much down-sizing. 

 

You don't get rid of all the people on this list and then bring 

them all back by three or four or five in such a big down-sizing 

and then do the same thing you done before. So we'll watch 

you very carefully. 

 

In your department, will you provide a list of all positions that's 

been created since November 1, 1991? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There are none. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, will you provide a list of any 

space rented, leased, and owned by the department, and the 

purpose of which that space is being used. Have you got any . . 

. I'll repeat that again. A list of all space rented, leased, and 

owned by the department, and the purpose of which the space 

is being used. Do you have a list of that under the department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We can provide you with the list you 

request. And we'll get that to the member as soon as it can be 

churned out. It is spit out of a computer. As soon as it's churned 

out, we'll send it to you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- When can you provide that information? I'm 

talking about all space throughout the whole province of 

Saskatchewan that's under SPMC -- rented, leased, or owned 

by the department. When can you supply that? 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I understood the member's question. 

I'm informed by the officials they can have it ready at an early 

date next week. It is on a computer, and we'll generate a 

computer list for you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you. Would they also be able to 

supply all costs associated with each rental agreement or lease? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, I think we can't. It's been the 

practice of both governments, both the Blakeney government 

prior to 1982 and the administration of which you were a part, 

not to supply the lease figure, not to supply the lease rate. Well 

I'll answer the question to the member from Morse. 

 

In determining what questions we would refuse to answer, we 

decided that if it wasn't protected information under the 

freedom of information Act, we were going to give it. 

 

This, we think, would be because it would operate to our 

commercial disadvantage. We negotiate with landlords. We are 

afraid -- as I think previous governments have been -- that if 

the cost of all leased space is available, the rental rates will 

tend to gravitate to the highest rental. And sometimes you can 

negotiate a better deal with one than you could with another -- 

one landlord may be hungrier. For a variety of reasons, the cost 

of space may differ. We're afraid if we made the cost available 

and it was available to those with whom we had to negotiate, 

everybody would want the top rate. 

 

That's been the practice of governments during the 17 years 

I've been a member of this legislature. So we can't provide you 

with the cost, I think, Mr. Member. 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- What about the total? Like, say you haven't 

got a breakdown on all your leases, the cost, and so you're not . 

. . could we have a breakdown or just to have a figure what all 

leased property is costing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We'll certainly give you that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, one of my colleagues says maybe we 

should have on it what it would be on an average square foot. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No. We can give you the total now, 

I'm told. I don't think they can break it down. It takes a bit of 

mathematics. The total cost of the leased space -- and keep in 

mind, Mr. Member, no leased space has been added from the 

days when your administration was in office -- the total cost is 

$44.231 million. I think in a moment we can get to the total 

leased space. 

 

I'm told that may be more difficult. It may take more than just a 

moment so we may have to . . . if you want the average per 

space figure, I can get it to you first of the week. I think they 

just don't have it with them. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay, I'll take a commitment that we'll be 

supplied with the average square footage. Okay, the 



462 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1992 

operating and maintenance cost of all space occupied by the 

department, broken down by the owned, leased, or rented 

space. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We inherited from . . . I just want to 

remind the member what he's asking for. We inherited from 

your government over 1,000 leased spaces, if I recall the figure 

correctly. To provide the details of each one is a mammoth 

task. I wonder if . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And they would embarrass you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes indeed, the member might not 

want to read or hear it all. I wonder if the member would be 

satisfied with global figures that we could provide without 

unduly burdening the officials. I'm afraid the information you 

ask for is truly gargantuan in size. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- No, I think I'm brave enough for you to 

come up with that answer. I wanted operating and maintenance 

cost of all space occupied by the department, broken down by 

the owned, leased, or rented space. 

 

Now if it's been so terrible under the past administration I'm 

sure you've already done something about it. You've been in 

government six, seven months, so it's today. We're not talking 

election day. We're not talking here, Mr. Minister, about the 

previous government. We're talking about today. You've been 

in government six or seven months. I want to know what it is 

today. And it's your problem, not ours. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'll give you what is available on the 

computer. I'll make this arrangement with the member. I'll give 

you what is available on the computer. What would have to be 

assembled manually, I will ask him to consider the cost of it. 

I'm told that the following is available on the computer: 

breakdown with respect to owned space, that's available. With 

respect to leased space, with respect to each space we have the 

total cost. We don't always have the breakdown because 

sometimes the arrangements of the lease are we simply get that 

from the landlord. 

 

I'll give you whatever's on the computer. You can have it, and I 

think that's a fair arrangement. I'll give you what's on the 

computer, what might have to be assembled manually. I'll 

perhaps ask you to address a letter to me if you have some 

specific questions which aren't on the computer print-out. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, when can you . . . what's on 

the computers, when could we have that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I am informed by the public servants 

that it will be available at an early date next week; it's just a 

matter of us getting a computer run. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right. The names of each principal 

leasing a renting space to the department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I think that will be provided as 

well on the computer run. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you. And the member from 

Morse is going to have a few questions. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I'd 

like to have you tell us the policy on your CVA (central vehicle 

agency) fleet as it exists today. Give it to me for ministers, for 

presidents of Crown corporations, for administrative staff in 

whatever form they come, and for the ministers too, if you 

don't mind. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I assume the member meant CVA 

executive air. Did you? No? You want, oh, for the vehicles. 

Oh, okay. So far as I'm aware, I genuinely think this has not 

changed since I was a minister back in the '70s. I think it's 

exactly the same policy. 

 

With respect to the line departments, the ministers are entitled 

to a vehicle. The deputies are entitled to a vehicle or $100. The 

departments are entitled to make use of pool cars, and in the 

discretion of the deputy, if the work of an employee is such that 

it makes sense to assign a vehicle to them rather than give him 

the option -- him or her -- rather than give him or her the option 

of utilizing their own vehicle, they may assign a vehicle to 

them. I think that's been unchanged since the '70s. The only 

wrinkle in the system is that the nature of this changed with its 

transfer to a corporation. 

 

With respect to the line departments . . . with respect to the 

Crown corporations, the member might consider asking that in 

Crown . . . there is I think a statutory appropriation for Crown 

Investments Corporation. I'd have the officials there and I 

could answer it with respect to the Crown corporations at that 

time. I don't think these people will know. 

 

What happens with respect to the Crown corporations is we 

receive an order for vehicles and we supply it. We simply act 

as sort of a purchasing agent for the Crown corporations. We 

don't have any role to play in the policy. And it varies from one 

Crown corporation to another as the member will be aware by 

reading recent press reports. 

 

So that's the policy with respect to vehicles with line 

departments. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, is there a limit to 

what the government pays for a deputy and for a minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes. Perhaps the chairman can assist 

me. I'm sending over with the page a written description of it 

rather than reading it into the record. But you'll find on that 

page the cost per vehicle. I think, apart from inflation, that has 

not changed since I was a minister in the '70s. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, is 

the department . . . or the Property Management Corporation 

adjusted the mileage. Like when the minister reaches a certain 

mileage, is there a limit to that or is that . . . Can he supply that 

to me too? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member is right. That has 

changed. In the '70s we used to sell them at 40,000 miles. 

There is now no upper mileage limit. And we have some 



May 15, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 463 

very high time vehicles, some that are years old. 

 

There is now no upper mileage. There's now no ceiling at 

which we sell them. It is in the discretion of the fleet manager. 

And the question which he or she must ask themself is: is it 

costing more to repair it than it would to replace it? But now 

it's done on an ad hoc basis, vehicle by vehicle. There is no 

cut-off. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, am I given to understand then, 

that if a vehicle that a minister had that was costing more to 

operate at 40,000 klicks than a new one would at the same rate, 

he'd be given a new one? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think it would be in the highest 

degree unlikely that the vehicle with only 40,000 kilometres on 

it would be cheaper to replace than it would to repair. The ones 

that I'm talking about are pool vehicles. Some of them have 

very high mileage on them. But certainly a vehicle with 40,000 

kilometres on it would be certainly cheaper to repair. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So my question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: 

do you have a ceiling on ministers' cars? As I recall -- because I 

believe it was at 150,000 kilometres. Is that in existence today, 

or is the repair line and the repair cost line going to change 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There's no such mileage limit now. I 

would add for the benefit of the member that there actually 

have been no executive vehicles purchased since 1990. The 

latest executive . . . the newest executive vehicles are now 1990 

models. It's been a couple of years since we replaced them. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- To introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Mr. Deputy Chair, I would like to introduce to 

you and through you to the rest of the Assembly here today, as 

we go through financial Estimates and try to determine the 

province's budget, 84 grade 7 and grade 8 students from 

Lakeview School in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan in the riding of 

Saskatoon Wildwood. 

 

They are here today -- that's right, they're up there waving, 

obviously very excited about seeing democracy in action -- 

they are here today with their teachers, Mike Luciuk and Judy 

Pidskalny. And they also have a couple of chaperons with 

them, Margo Rashley and Mary Ann Amos. 

 

And as you can appreciate the logistics of moving 84 grade 7 

and 8 students around, I'm sure that you will join with me in 

welcoming and encouraging the chaperons and teachers, and 

also welcoming the students to observe our proceedings here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Has there been a 

process for tendering for new vehicles from SPMC to the 

province recently? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There is a process which again is 

unchanged since the '70s, since I used to be minister in charge 

of this in the '70s. It's exactly the same process. A tender goes 

to North American manufacturers and . . . As I say, the process 

is unchanged. If the member has some questions . . . And it's a 

complex process. 

 

As the minister may or may not know, the vehicles may be 

serviced through local dealers. They're not all serviced through 

the same dealer. It is a complex process. If the member has 

some questions, I can answer them. The tendering system, 

however, hasn't changed in the last 15 years. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Was a tender called for recently? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, it was. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- For how many vehicles? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'll send the . . . I need the page's 

assistance again. I'll send you a description of what was 

tendered for. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. Have these been 

purchased already? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The tender has closed. It was just 

done recently and the officials do not have the details of who 

got it. Delivery will be taken, I'm told, around the end of June, 

of the vehicles. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How many vehicles do you have, Mr. 

Minister, on hand for the departments, and how many vehicles 

do you have in the Crown corporations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'll ask the page to take that to you. I 

think that page contains the information you want. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. We'll take a look at 

that and probably come back with some more questions. 

 

On average, how much is the cost of maintenance for the 

department vehicles on an annual basis for the vehicles that 

you have listed here? 

 

(1245) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The total operating costs of the 

vehicles are $9.270 million. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, are those for the departments or 

for all of the vehicles here? 



464 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's all the vehicles including the 

Crown corporation vehicles. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How are the vehicles costed out to the 

departments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm going to send the member a 

written description of this. It's rather complex and varies 

between the Crown corporations and the department, and I'm 

also told is unchanged in many years. I'll send that to the 

member. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. We will take a look 

at these two and probably have some more questions on them. I 

want to ask about airplanes, and how many have you got that 

are used for Executive Council travel? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There are two. These are Piper 

aircraft. Piper heavy twins. There are two Cheyenne and one 

Navajo which are used for executive air. There is a third 

Cheyenne which is used for air ambulance. 

 

Fire-suppression aircraft, which are completely different 

armada, have all been transferred to the Department of Natural 

Resources on April 1. My colleague, the member from Canora 

can answer questions on that one. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So the department of . . . or SPMC does not 

handle the Parks' firefighting equipment? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's affirmative. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay. On the three planes that you have, or 

the four -- the three Cheyennes and the Navajo -- are they . . . 

how many staff do you have in relation to those aircraft? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There are 19 staff. That includes air 

ambulance as well. That includes the pilots, the nurses who are 

part of this group who work with air ambulance. The positions 

are unchanged since October 21, 1991. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Are those four aircraft the only aircraft, other 

than what is in Parks, that the government owns? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's affirmative. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- I'm just going to make a point on the vehicles 

that the ministers use. And I'll ask a question first. You 

indicated that there was no limit on the volume of miles per 

vehicle. You also said there were no vehicles beyond 1990 that 

were being used by ministers. However, is that policy the same 

policy that will apply to deputy ministers? Will they be under 

that same qualifier? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's affirmative. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- What kind of policy are you going to have 

that when ministers want to have a change of a vehicle, or 

deputy ministers, that you will allow them the opportunity to 

change? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The best answer I can give the 

member is that that has not yet occurred. And I'm not sure we 

do have any sort of a policy as to when a minister may 

come back and request a better vehicle. It's not occurred. 

 

The best I can do, I think, is tell you that we've been in office 

six months. It has not occurred. The vehicles my colleagues in 

Executive Council drive are not lavish, to put it mildly. But 

none of them have complained. None of them have been back. 

And we have not yet determined that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Will you give me a commitment that when 

you do, that you will provide that to us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I just want to point out that it's kind of a loose 

kind of an arrangement to have, and that when I was on that 

side we did have a kilometre ceiling that was first of all 

established at 120,000 and then we moved it to 150,000 in 

order to deal with some savings. 

 

And I would just like to point out to the minister that to have 

no reasonable amount of kilometres for the vehicles to achieve, 

I think it would beg the question.  And I want to have the 

minister assure me that some qualifier will be put into place for 

that to happen. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I say again, as I said to your 

colleague from Arm River, this government is run on a 

different basis. Members opposite may have viewed public 

office as an opportunity for aggrandizement. 

 

The Premier has made it crystal clear that with respect to this 

government, austerity, like charity, begins at home. Ministers 

are expected to practise what we've been preaching. They're 

expected to set examples. So long as the vehicle is serviceable 

and in reasonably good condition, they're expected to keep it. 

We don't intend to do that. And the member from Riversdale 

has made it crystal clear. He expects members of this Executive 

Council to set an example of what we expect the public service 

to do and not set the sort of example which members opposite 

set when they were in office, which was an example of what 

should never have been. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to point 

out to the member opposite that their Crown corporations' 

executives were driving Lexuses up till less than a month ago. 

And I want to assure the minister that this government . . . or 

this party, when they were government on the other side, never 

ever drove one. And I just want to point that out to the member 

opposite. And I hope that the same frugal nature applies to 

what you attach your executives of your Crown corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I could remind you of the 

vehicle driven by Mr. Hill when he was in office. But I expect 

the member didn't ask it and doesn't want to hear it. I would 

only say to the member opposite that members of Crown 

corporations now are not driving Cadillacs. The car allowance 

has been cut. 

 

But I can give the member the assurance that the same frugal 

approach which applies to members of Executive Council and 

deputy ministers is also going to be applied to the Crown 

Investments Corporation. 



May 15, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 465 

We inherited a system from the former administration in which 

executives of Crown corporations pretty well set their own 

limits. That's come to an end, and they will be expected to 

follow the same . . . set the same frugal example as members of 

this Executive Council are setting. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

we've just got a few minutes left, and we definitely won't be 

finishing this today, so I want to go back on the office space. 

 

My question is, with the cut-backs, the elimination of jobs, 

there must be some changes of organization all right 

throughout the province. And my question would be is, what 

are you going to do with any space that you have left and 

there's already a contract on that for a long term? Or whether 

you may be an organization, you may need new space -- what 

is your plan for new space? Will you -- I've asked a lot of 

questions there at once -- will you be purchasing new . . . will 

the government be purchasing or will you be renting it? And 

what will you do with the old contracts and new contracts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No. We anticipate, as government 

becomes more economical and more efficient, we'll have 

excess space. We in fact have leases now which we are not 

going to renew but which we are paying for on a month to 

month basis and we'll be moving out of and letting the lease go. 

It is our expectation that we can reduce substantially the 

amount of lease space which the taxpayer of this province pays 

for. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, okay. You've 

got a . . . say an individual out there, which I know there's lots, 

maybe has a 5- or a 10-year contract and he built a building or 

whatever, and there's lots of them out there. And maybe 

through circumstances . . . and this has been happening for 

many, many years in this government, prior to our 

administration, and there's nothing wrong with that. So if that 

comes to an end and you don't need that any more and he's still 

got four or five years left on his lease, will there be kind of a 

buy-out of that lease? Or could you explain just what you do 

with someone that's left holding . . . maybe he built a new 

building; he's kind of left holding the bag. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The question asked by the member 

from Arm River was, what are we doing with the mess 

bequeathed by the former administration when they followed 

the dictum or the advice from the former member from 

Redberry who said we ought to make the leases so expensive 

they can't get out of it. And there are cases, I may say, Mr. 

Member, when you seem to have followed that advice, as 

regrettable as it was. 

 

What are we doing with it? Well I'll tell you what, we are going 

to honour all contracts. This government lives up to its 

commitments and will continue to do so. We will attempt to 

make use of the space. We will attempt, if we can, to negotiate 

an end to the lease. But I can say to the member opposite that 

you bequeathed, you left to us, a very expensive bequest for the 

taxpayer when you got into some of these long-term leases. 

These 10-year leases which you people got into were a very, 

very expensive bit of patronage. 

And that's all it was, was patronage. 

 

So what are we doing with Tory patronage? We are trying to 

bring it to an end, but we're going to live up to the contracts. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, that was quite 

a speech you just made there. He's made a comment that all 

these here rich, elite leases and what not . . . Will you table 

each and every one of these leases then if you're saying some 

of them are so terrible. I do want absolutely individual leases 

that you said are out of reason. I want them tabled and I want 

those leases. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, there's no reason why you can't be able to 

do that because you're the one that just made the statement that 

the past government give out some unreasonable leases. And 

you called it patronage. Well if we want to talk about 

patronage, Mr. Minister, we can talk about it. And I want to go 

back on some of the questions that you didn't answer here 

properly today. And we'll be coming back on this in a short 

time. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, the questions I asked you about your 

department and all these people that's been laid off, and the 

bumping rights and all this, you think you're fooling the 

member from Arm River because you're not. You're not fooling 

the people on this side of the House. You're not fooling the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan because what you're 

doing is just having bumping rights and a time element to get 

your people with NDP cards new jobs. That's why you left it 

open-ended. 

 

You're not fooling us over here, Mr. Minister, so I ask you 

when we come back on again, when we come back on this 

department, that you come back with the facts, absolute facts, 

that you can say that here's where these people are going. You 

just left it open-ended. You're not going to get away with that, 

Mr. Minister. You left it open-ended that maybe we can talk 

about it in the next session. 

 

You said very clearly that it would only take maybe two or 

three weeks, two or three weeks to put the answers together. 

You said two or three weeks, but then you stood up and said, 

well, if I'm still minister, we'll have it to you in time to be able 

to . . . you can ask me questions if I'm still minister a year from 

now. 

 

Well talk about arrogance. I have never heard such arrogance 

come from a government in my life, when they come up and 

said, it'll take two or three weeks, but you may be able to 

answer these questions a year from now, and now maybe I'll 

ask you again. You, Mr. Minister, I'm asking you when we 

come back on this department that you'll be able to give us a 

real breakdown of where these people that have been 

eliminated, where they're going, who they are, and where they 

ended up because that's what's important. We want to know 

where your NDP buddies end up, and that's . . . 

 

The Deputy Chair: -- It being one o'clock, will the committee 

grant leave to rise and report progress and ask leave to sit 

again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 



466 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1992 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:01 p.m. 

 


