




















































Hansard: May 13, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 359 

 May 13, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to take the 

opportunity to introduce to you and through you to members of 

the Assembly, the members of the Saskatchewan real estate 

board who are here in the Assembly today to meet with 

members and to observe the House.  I want to welcome them 

here today.  I know that I look forward to meeting with them 

later this evening at a reception, I believe, down at the 

Saskatchewan inn.  I think that's correct.  And so I'm sure all 

members will want to join with me in welcoming them here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to join with the 

Government House Leader in extending a warm welcome to 

the folks in the gallery today.  They play a very important and 

integral part in our economy of Saskatchewan and I think all 

members are looking forward to the dialogue that will take 

place later today.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm happy today to introduce to 

you and through you to the members of the Assembly, a group 

of students from Athabasca School in Regina.  Every day as I 

step out the back door of my apartment I can see Athabasca 

School, and one of the young women in the gallery lives in the 

apartment below me on Regina Avenue.  So we'll see you later 

after the question period for drinks and discussion about the 

legislature, and thank you very much for coming. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure for me to introduce to 

you, and through you to all members of the Assembly, a group 

of 22 grade 4 and 5 students from Mayfair School in my riding 

in Saskatoon seated in the west gallery.  They are accompanied 

by their teachers, Barb Wright and Val Garbe, and also 

chaperons, Kathy Schell, Donald Gallo; and bus driver, Allan 

Mattrello. 

 

They've had a tour of some of the historic sites here in Regina, 

and now they're touring this building and I'll be meeting with 

them.  I know all members would like to join with me in 

extending a warm welcome to the students from Mayfair 

School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to 

you, and through you to all members of this Assembly, 19 

students from Wishart School.  They're seated in your gallery, 

Mr. Speaker.  The teacher is Mrs. Virginia Latoski.  They are 

accompanied by Gloria Stefanson and Jodie Bachinski.  The 

bus driver is Ed Weldon. 

It is a school that is very dear to my heart, Mr. Speaker.  It is 

the very school I graduated from in 1974.  And there are a 

couple of students as well that are quite close to me.  They are 

my niece, Sarah, and my son, Tyler.  I'd like all members of the 

Assembly to greet them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Consultations on Health Care Changes 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My 

question is to the Minister of Health.  Madam Minister, you 

and your NDP (New Democratic Party) colleagues have been 

saying that you consulted with everyone on this budget of 

betrayal that the Finance minister let loose on the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It's interesting to note that not one interest group is able to 

confirm this.  And I doubt you talked to anyone about your 

plan for health care, simply because you didn't have a plan. 

 

Yesterday, Madam Minister, you confirmed that you had no 

idea what you were going to do for or to the dental plan.  The 

chiropractors and optometrists say that you didn't have the time 

of day for them.  Now we see that you have cut 139 nursing 

and support positions, and have closed 87 acute care beds in 

Regina hospitals. 

 

Madam Minister, can you tell us who you consulted with on 

this latest betrayal?  Did you talk to nurses, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the decision with respect to 

staff lay-offs and bed closures in Regina was made by the 

Regina Health Board, Mr. Speaker.  I understand that there has 

been ongoing consultation with people in the health care field, 

with the hospital sector, and with workers.  And there has been 

considerable consultation in this regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the same 

minister.  Madam Minister, you and your NDP colleagues are 

very fond of blaming everybody but yourselves for the attack 

on medicare.  You blame the Tories; you blame the feds; you 

blame the farmers; you blame the media.  Your Finance 

minister blames the women in Saskatchewan Pension Plan for 

contributing to the deficit. 

 

Very simply, Madam Minister, now you just said that you're 

trying to blame this super-board that you have created, that it's 

the board's fault.  Very simply put, Madam Minister, are you 

telling the public that you set up this new super-board simply to 

do your dirty work? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Excuse me, Mr. Speaker.  I think that 



360 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1992 

the Regina Health Board was established for the purposes of 

developing health care reform in the city of Regina.  They have 

a very broad mandate -- to remove duplication, to co-ordinate 

and integrate services, and to provide a continuum, a real 

continuum of health care services in the city. 

 

The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, this sort of reform 

should have occurred years ago -- years ago.  And many of 

these staff lay-offs today would not be necessary if the 

government opposite had had the courage, the insight, and the 

creativity to come forward in the last 10 years with a long-term 

strategic plan for health care.  Instead, they chose to virtually 

bankrupt this province, Mr. Speaker.  That was their choice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- New question to the same minister, Mr. 

Speaker.  She says it should have been done years ago, and I'm 

going to come back to that in a few questions time, Madam 

Minister.  But consultation, I want to get to that issue once 

more. 

 

Madam Minister, you knew full well that you talked to nurses.  

Yes you did talk to nurses.  However, it was after you had 

announced the decrease in hospital spending.  In fact we just 

see that last week you told the Saskatchewan Registered 

Nurses' Association that bedside nurses would be the last to go.  

That's what you said, Madam Minister. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, one would think that after you broke 

every promise in opposition and during the election, that you 

would have stopped misleading the public after you were 

elected.  But evidently, Madam Minister, that is not so.  A very 

simple question: are you saying that you had no idea what the 

impacts of your cuts were going to be when you talked to the 

nurses last week? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, there were some 27.9 

out-of-scope positions which were reduced and a number of 

middle management positions earlier in the week, Mr. Speaker.  

These people were not bedside nurses, or earlier in the last 

couple weeks.  The fact of the matter is, is we knew that the 

impact of the budget cuts were going to be very hard on 

workers and the people in the province of Saskatchewan.  We 

were hoping that we could, through this health care reform, 

reduce the impact on workers and bedside nurses and I believe 

that we have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Because of initiatives that we have taken 

to address reform in health care in Regina and Saskatoon, we 

are moving, we are moving.  The member opposite laughs at 

this.  The fact of the matter is, is health care professionals 

across this province know that these measures are the right 

direction.  The fact of the matter is the budget cuts are as a 

result of the financial mismanagement of the government 

opposite, and it is not going to stop us from moving on with 

needed health care reform. 

Unfortunately, we do have to cut back on budget, but we will 

also proceed with our reform. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- A new question to the same minister, Mr. 

Speaker.  Surely, Madam Minister, you would have had some 

idea of the impact of cutting the funding was going to have.  

Madam Minister, when the former administration gave 

hospitals a small increase in funding last year, you predicted 

that there would be massive bed closures, nursing cuts, and a 

long waiting-list.  People were going to die. 

 

That was your opinion last year, Madam Minister.  You had no 

problem with analysis then.  Now, believe it or not, you are the 

minister.  Please assure the public that you knew what you 

were doing when you cut hospital funding by 2.3 per cent.  

That's not a difficult question, Madam Minister.  Will you table 

the analysis that you did on the impact of decreasing hospital 

funding, that this would have on nursing positions, bed 

closures, and waiting-lists.  Would you table that, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite knew 

what they were doing when they blew some $160 million in 

privatizing Cameco.  They knew what they were doing when 

they blew another 422 million in privatization of potash shares.  

They knew what they were doing. 

 

What they did is they virtually bankrupted this province with 

their measures of incompetence and financial mismanagement 

so that now in the province of Saskatchewan we have to look at 

health care cuts because of your incompetence and because of 

your privatization.  We are trying to save the medicare system 

and our fundamental programs for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan in face of the hugest per capita debt in this 

country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Another new 

question to the same minister.  And I want the public to note as 

her voice rises in agitation as she refuses to accept the 

responsibility of being a minister in this government.  Blame, 

blame, blame. 

 

Madam Minister, you have laid off nurses, you have laid off 

health care professionals, something that you promised and 

your government and your Premier promised that you would 

never do -- you would never do that.  And anything that you 

say is not going to make that go away.  And I suggest that 

many of these nurses and health care workers campaigned for 

you and your colleagues, that they campaigned and knocked on 

doors for the Premier in Saskatoon in the mistaken belief that 

they could trust him. 

 

Madam Minister, you made a pledge to help health care 

workers last year.  You said, and I quote, a very brief quote: I 

want to say to the doctors and the nurses out there that the NDP 

are very concerned about these proposals and these cuts, and 

that we have been criticizing them and that we will continue to 

criticize these wrong choices 



May 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 361 

in the legislature and outside the legislature. End quote. 

 

Madam Minister, were you wrong then, or are you wrong now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, we were right then.  We 

criticized their wrong choices, Mr. Speaker.  We criticized their 

wrong-headed priorities, their Tory-driven, selfish, get 

re-elected priorities.  That's what we were criticizing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

They had absolutely no long-term strategic plan, and obviously 

today do not understand yet today, Mr. Speaker, what can be 

achieved in the institutional sector by moving toward 

community-based services.  They're still light years behind the 

rest of the country, Mr. Speaker, and that's the problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I want to say is that the government 

opposite have made decisions that virtually bankrupted this 

province, virtually bankrupted this province. That is now 

making it necessary for our government to make some very, 

very tough decisions in order to preserve our social programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I must commend the minister, Mr. Speaker, 

on the false bravado that she is showing.  But I want to agree 

with one thing that you've been saying, Madam Minister.  

Making health care funding more efficient is a reasonable thing 

to do if you know what you're doing, Madam Minister.  It is 

painfully evident to everyone that you have no idea. 

 

Madam Minister, my office has been flooded with calls from 

Saskatoon and Saskatoon area.  All are very concerned about 

what will happen in their community.  And the Premier makes 

fun of it.  The Premier makes fun of it.  They recognize, my 

constituents and the folks in Saskatoon recognize, that they can 

no longer believe anything you say, Madam Minister, and they 

fear for their health care. 

 

Can you tell us what effect your cuts in hospital funding will 

have on the Saskatoon hospital beds and nursing positions?  

Can you give us your analysis of what's going to happen in 

Saskatoon? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- What will happen in Saskatoon, Mr. 

Speaker, is what the Saskatoon Health Board will decide to do 

with their funding. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- They have been asked to consult with 

health care professionals and workers and other organizations 

as they implement a very difficult budget, there is no question.  

But the Saskatoon Health Board will make the decision as to 

where they are going to cut, what programs they may reduce, 

what sort of duplication they may eliminate.  And I hope, Mr. 

Speaker, that they will be 

looking at duplication of programs before dealing with bedside 

nurses.  But it is their decision, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- New question to the same minister.  Mr. 

Speaker, this is absolutely unbelievable -- no acceptance of 

responsibility whatsoever in this minister, in this government, 

in this Premier, in this Minister of Finance. 

 

Madam Minister, Saskatoon has three hospitals and a similar 

population base as does Regina.  And as with Regina, many 

patients come from rural Saskatchewan, and they want to know 

as well.  Could we then correctly assume, since you refuse to 

answer another question, could we correctly assume that there 

will be similar cuts in Saskatoon, cuts, Madam Minister, that 

the NDP said would never happen under their administration? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, let's talk about acceptance 

of responsibility.  Let's talk about the need for even one 

member over there to recognize that they drove up the 

provincial debt in this province to numbers that were 

astronomical and unprecedented in the history of this country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Let's talk about the need for those 

members opposite to accept some responsibility for the fiscal 

situation and the financial debt that this province creates 

because they have very correctly been labelled the wrecking 

crew, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have taken some very tough measures.  We have instituted 

reforms in the health care system that will move institutional 

care toward more community-based services, and it's supported 

by health care professionals.  We have established a utilization 

and health research commission which will be looking at 

hospital procedures and institutional utilization, and will be 

bringing some of the facts forward to the public in 

Saskatchewan so that we can make our hospital system more 

efficient.  We have . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I allow the next question, I would 

remind the members who are asking the question, the minister 

is answering it.  We're getting very lengthy on both sides.  Let's 

cut down the length of the . . . Order.  Let's cut down on the 

length of the questions and the length of the answers. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I make my one commitment.  

I'm going to allow this minister to come at ease; this is my last 

question to her.  Madam Minister, you talk a lot about how the 

deficit is out of control and how health expenditures need to be 

brought under control.  That's very interesting, Madam 

Minister. 

 

I want you to listen to this, and I want the public to listen to 

this next little quote that I have.  Madam Minister, last 



362 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1992 

year, just last year you said, and I quote:  The PCs (Progressive 

Conservative) spread the myth out there that health costs are 

out of control.  They are playing politics, because health care 

costs are not out of control.  They are not out of control, but the 

PCs are playing politics with medicare because they have no 

commitment to medicare. 

 

Last year, Madam Minister, you said. 

 

Madam Minister, can you confirm your statement that health 

care costs are not out of control?  And if they are not, can you 

tell the public why you are taking such dramatic, drastic 

measures? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, it's the debt that's out of 

control in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- When you don't have any money you 

can't spend it.  Haven't you learned that fundamental issue -- 

that fundamental fact of life? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The debt is out of control, Mr. Speaker, 

and it's out of control because of their incompetence, their 

mismanagement, and their absolutely destruction, their 

absolute, total destruction of the economy of this province, or 

the fiscal situation of the government.  And they still refuse to 

accept responsibility. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, just the other day there was a young man I 

met riding on a bicycle, about 16 years old, who said to me, are 

you Louise Simard?  And I said yes. And he said, you know 

you spoke to the LeBoldus School during the election and at 

that time you said you wanted to get the deficit under control.  

And I didn't believe you because I didn't think a New 

Democratic government would do that.  But I take that back, 

Ms. Simard.  I believe you and I support the NDP for the 

measures they're taking to protect my future.  That's what he 

said. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Extension of SaskTel Cellular Network 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to direct 

my question to the minister responsible for SaskTel.  We've 

been talking about decisions and choices here today.  I'd like to 

talk about some 1992 decisions and choices. 

 

Madam Minister, can you confirm that SaskTel plans to build a 

cellular network in the Kindersley-Kerrobert area at an 

estimated cost of $5 million? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite 

knows, the telecommunications industry is highly competitive 

and plans for extension into new areas ahead of public 

announcements are never made known. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, in a February 6 report in the 

Leader-Post it was reported that SaskTel intends to build eight 

cells in the western area of the province by mid-1992.  When 

your government is asking the people of this province to pay 

more in taxes, more in prescriptions, more in heating, more in 

insurance, more for electricity, how can you justify a cost of $5 

million, which by the way is for an estimated 650 customers, 

with no expected profit for 50 years? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I am astonished that the 

member opposite would stand up in this House one day and 

talk about economic development and encourage that, and the 

next day, criticize the expansion of our telecommunications 

company. 

 

I would like to add that the reason at this time for the expansion 

of the mobile network, the cellular network, it is one of the 

only areas of potential profits for the company which will 

subsidize the domestic rates because the Conservative 

government in Ottawa is determined to deregulate long 

distance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In February -- 

apparently you've just confirmed this -- in February you 

announced that you had to increase the charges for basic 

telephone services and I quote:  to make sure the company has 

the money to expand its profitable cellular services.  Which 

you've just said today.  Talk about voodoo economics. How 

can you call no rate of return for 50 years profitable? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I have no idea where the 

voodoo economics from the other side of the House originate, 

but the cellular and mobile portion of the telecommunications 

industry is highly profitable.  And where the numbers come 

from in 50 years, I have no idea, because that is not correct. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If you'd like 

some Estimates, I can give them to you.  Reliable sources 

indicate that with a population of 65,000 people in an area . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I ask the members on the 

government side to please let her ask her question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- With a population of 65,000 people in this 

area would be a typical cellular phone user population of about 

1 per cent, which equals 650 people.  The average bill per 

month, Madam Minister, is $52.70 or $632 per year.  

Twenty-five per cent of that bill or $133 per year is profit.  You 

multiply that by 650 users and that's going to end up with 

approximately $86,000 to direct at paying off this $5 million 

investment.  That amounts to about 50 years to pay back the 

taxpayers' investment before a profit is achieved and that's if 

you don't borrow the $5 million.  So don't talk to me about . . . 



May 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 363 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  If you have, please ask it. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- How do you justify a decision to cut the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan, eliminate the Department of 

Science and Technology, cut 139 positions at Regina hospitals, 

then turn around and spend $5 million on a project that will see 

no return on the taxpayers' investment for 50 years? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, in a highly competitive 

environment, which the cellular telephone business is, we do 

not, as our competitors do not, discuss our returns and our 

market share in public.  But I can assure the member opposite 

that her information is highly inaccurate because it is a very 

profitable business.  The expansion of it will help to keep down 

the domestic telephone rates.  I can't believe that the member 

opposite would have us reduce our economic development in 

this area and shut down the cellular system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I therefore ask 

the Madam Minister if she would table this information for us 

to know just how profitable this will be in future. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, last year's financial 

statement and annual report for SaskTel's operations was tabled 

in this House several days ago. 

 

In terms of tabling other specific information, as I've said, in a 

competitive environment we're not able to do that.  But if the 

member opposite is interested in the value and the growth of 

the mobile and cellular business, she might ask some of the 

business people in Saskatchewan, including the ones in our 

gallery, what they think. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Changes to GRIP 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Minister 

of Agriculture.  In light of the fact that farmers are finding out 

late about the changes you made to GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) and agents are having to re-establish 

contact with farmers to sell them the variable price option, and 

in light of the fact that you only gave notice after March 15, 

will the minister extend the deadline past May 16 for farmers to 

sign up for the GRIP? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, farmers were originally all 

visited, virtually all visited before April 30, the original 

deadline.  We extended the deadline in order to facilitate the 

reconsideration of the question the member opposite raises.  It's 

my understanding that the agents have made those contacts, 

and farmers are ready to make those choices.  And there is no 

value in extending the deadline further.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

Teen Pregnancies 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today on an issue of importance to the people of 

Saskatchewan.  And I may go on a little longer than one would 

anticipate, and I just hope you'll bear with me because of the 

importance of the matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I rise today to report to the Assembly on the 

action my government is taking to address a serious problem 

facing Saskatchewan -- unintended pregnancies, particularly 

among teenagers. 

 

Statistics show that although the teen pregnancy rate for our 

province has declined, the magnitude of the problem continues 

to be alarming.  In 1990 there were more than 1,600 babies 

born to young women under the age of 20 in this province.  Mr. 

Speaker, this is the second-highest teen live birth rate among 

the provinces. 

 

Further alarming statistics show the extent of the problem.  In 

1990 young women and girls between the ages of 10 and 19 

received 26 per cent or 328 of the 1,261 abortions performed in 

the Saskatchewan hospitals that year.  Although the pregnancy 

rate for girls under the age of 15 shows signs of decreasing 

nationally, in 1989 it increased in our province.  In addition, a 

disproportionate number of the births to girls under the age of 

15 in Canada occur in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is unacceptable and of deep concern to my 

government.  Unintended pregnancies have serious health, 

social, and economic consequences for the individuals 

involved, their families, and society as a whole.  In addition to 

the health risks and social consequences, pregnancy and early 

parenting in adolescence frequently interrupts education and 

eliminates many of life's options for young parents and their 

children. 

 

A 1980 study found that the average sexually active young 

person in Saskatchewan has their first sexual experience at age 

15.  And more recent Canadian studies suggest that close to 

half of Saskatchewan teens over the age of 15 are sexually 

active.  Many of these young people are sexually active without 

having had any information or education to help them 

understand the consequences of an unintended pregnancy or a 

sexually transmitted disease and the dramatic impact these may 

have on the rest of their lives. 

 

Other jurisdictions have found that comprehensive family 

planning and sexuality education programs are key factors in 

reducing unintended pregnancies and abortion rates, especially 

among teenagers. 

 

For example, these kinds of programs contributed to a 23 per 

cent reduction in pregnancy rates and a 38 per cent reduction in 

the birth rate among Ontario adolescents over a 10-year period 

and have contributed to a reduction in the abortion rate among 

adolescents in that province.  Compared to other provinces, 

Saskatchewan lacks programs and resources which directly 

address sexual health and family planning issues.  Access to 

services is restricted in general in our province and is even 

more 



364 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1992 

difficult for adolescents, members of minority groups, and 

people living in rural or isolated communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government will work with the members of 

our community to take decisive action to address the problems 

of unintended pregnancies and sexually transmitted diseases 

and the social, economic and personal hardships these 

problems bring. 

 

The budget, which my colleague, the Minister of Finance, 

introduced last week contains funding for the development and 

initiation of family planning programs to contribute to better 

reproductive health and to reduce unplanned pregnancies.  As 

the first step in that process, my department is setting up a 

committee to provide direction to my government on the 

development of family planning programs for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This committee will be made up of individuals with 

knowledge, expertise and interest in family planning issues.  It 

will include teenagers, aboriginal women and immigrant 

women.  We will also be seeking input from representatives of 

churches, teachers, school trustees, parents, community 

organizations and health professionals. 

 

The committee will recommend ways in which we may best 

implement family planning services in Saskatchewan.  It will 

also examine the broader economic and social issues which 

contribute to unintended pregnancies and bring its 

recommendations back to me. 

 

My department's northern health services branch will also, in 

consultation with northern people, work on the development of 

family planning strategy which will best meet the needs of 

northern residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just part of what's needed to deal with this 

problem.  It's just the first step.  This initiative shows how 

different parts of our society can and should come together to 

deal with a problem which affects us all and work together 

toward a common goal of reducing the number of unintended 

pregnancies.  By reducing unintended pregnancies we also 

expect to bring about a reduction in the number of abortions 

obtained by Saskatchewan residents, a goal which all people in 

Saskatchewan share. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have also examined the question of 

de-insuring abortions.  A number of legal experts from both 

within our Department of Justice and from outside the 

government have concluded that it would be illegal and 

unconstitutional for the Government of Saskatchewan to 

discontinue medicare funding for abortions in the province.  

Mr. Speaker, de-insuring abortions would contravene the 

Canada Health Act, the Canadian Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms, and the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code and 

would be unconstitutional. 

 

My caucus and cabinet colleagues and I have discussed this 

issue from a philosophical and a legal point of view thoroughly 

and at great length.  We have decided that it is not legally 

possible for our government to de-insure abortions.  It is also 

our intent to provide access to needed abortions in hospitals in 

Saskatchewan.  We will therefore 

provide balanced counselling to women who find themselves in 

this very difficult situation. 

 

If, in consultation with her doctor, a woman chooses to have an 

abortion, we will provide access in a hospital and we will fund 

the abortion.  We remain strongly opposed, however, to the 

establishment of free-standing abortion clinics in our province. 

 

The issue of access to abortion is a symptom of the real 

problem -- unintended pregnancies.  We have chosen, Mr. 

Speaker, to deal directly with the problem and not merely 

address the symptom.  Our goal is to reduce the number of 

unintended pregnancies and to work toward reducing the 

number of abortions obtained by residents in Saskatchewan.  

The development of a strategy to develop accessible, 

responsible, and comprehensive family planning programs is 

the first step in achieving this goal.  Thank you. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would very 

much like to commend the minister for bringing forward this 

proposal by her government -- these undertakings.  One of the 

things that I have been able to do in my past in direct result of 

the research I did for my doctorial dissertation was to look at 

this very issue, and I applaud all of the efforts that you've 

made. 

 

The research has shown that increased knowledge about 

sexuality equals a more positive attitude, equals a delay in 

becoming sexually active, and when one does, they contracept.  

What this does, of course, is lead to a much healthier view of 

life overall of children being brought into our world and greater 

care of them. 

 

I think that one of the things I'd like to point out to people here, 

and in fact even the words that were used and an example used 

-- that abortion is but a symptom of the problem -- is what I 

raised during the debate with the now Premier and the previous 

premier.  It's something that we very much wanted to do as a 

party, was to put aside the differences between those who are 

pro-choice and pro-life and look at the one thing that we have 

all in common.  And what it is that we all have in common is 

that we would prefer that there would be no need for abortion. 

 

I applaud each and every one of these undertakings.  I feel that 

everyone in this Assembly should be very grateful that this 

approach is being taken. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too 

would like to respond to the minister's statement.  

Unfortunately I will not be able to be quite as gracious as the 

previous speaker in commending the minister for this particular 

initiative. 

 

Firstly, on the procedure, which was highly unorthodox, I 

might add, in terms of the length of the ministerial statement 

that is charting direction, but I will go along with that particular 

part, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In reaction to some of the issues that she has said, I will be 

gracious, first of all, in also recognizing that there are many 

unwanted teen pregnancies, and I think that is a blight on our 

society.  It is something that has been with 



May 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 365 

society, I suppose, for evermore and will continue to be there.  

It is a symptom of society. 

 

But, Madam Minister, unwanted pregnancies are not only a 

symptom of society.  We are talking about life, and we are 

talking about babies.  We are talking about the real thing.  And 

I would not want to simply categorize that -- a very, very 

important issue in our society -- as a symptom only.  I 

recognize that teen-age pregnancies must be addressed in a 

very compassionate way. 

 

And as minister of Social Services, I was very pleased to have 

been able to do something about the situation that many of 

these young, 13, 14, 15-year-old girls find themselves in.  Yes, 

they become pregnant; yes, they become mothers; and yes, they 

are not fit at that stage to adapt to society.  They must be given 

support.  They must be given counselling. 

 

And that is exactly what we were doing, for example, in 

Saskatoon in Walter Murray, Mount Royal; in Regina here as 

well, Mr. Speaker, with the day-care centres that were 

established to assist these young mothers so that they would be 

able to attend school, so that they would be able to complete 

their education, and indeed have at least a chance to become 

productive members in our society.  And it's very significant 

and it's very important, Madam Minister.  And from that aspect 

I commend you on your initiative and I do wish you Godspeed 

in being able to solve many of their problems. 

 

However, Madam Minister, I want to take issue with some of 

the things that you're bringing up.  For example, the committee 

that you are going to be establishing, we will be looking very 

closely at that.  We will be looking at its composition, its actual 

composition when it is set up.  And we will be looking at its 

cost, because we are concerned about the taxpayers having to 

pay for yet another committee that you're establishing.  We are 

looking forward to results and we will, Madam Minister, hold 

you accountable for that. 

 

I'm wondering, Madam Minister, is this an indication now that 

many of the counselling aspects that you're going to be 

establishing or that the committee is going to be recommending 

to be established . . . for example, teen aid.  Is teen aid going to 

be emphasized?  Is that going to become an integral part of this 

entire system that you are planning to establish to help young 

mothers and so on?  Because teen aid is not only interested in 

birth control but rather emphasizing the ultimate healthy 

life-style for teenagers which is the emphasis of abstinence 

rather than just the healthy safe-sex type of model.  And that is 

a concern that I would have. 

 

Madam Minister, another concern I have about this 

pronouncement of yours is your abortion stand, where you are 

saying that you . . . and you say quite categorically, and I give 

you credit for taking a stand so that we know where we were at 

-- you say we will fund abortion, that is the ultimate goal that 

you are saying. 

 

And yet, Madam Minister, as an open, honest, forthright 

government that is consulting and responding to people's 

wishes, I just remind you of the plebiscites that were given, the 

65 per cent or give or take a few percentages of 

people that said: yes, Madam Minister, yes government . . . 

pardon me, yes whoever forms the government, because it was 

part of the election process -- we want you to stop publicly 

funded abortions. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It can't be done 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You say there that it cannot be done.  You say 

there it would have contravened some of these.  I say to you, 

Madam Minister, that's a cop-out.  You will never know until 

you give it a try, and there is as much evidence that points in 

the other direction as there is evidence that points in this 

direction. 

 

Madam Minister, I suggest to you that this is another example 

of where you are bowing to the wishes of outside forces that 

are superior to that of your government as we've seen evidence 

many, many times.  So, Madam Minister, while there is some 

good in this, I have very severe reservations on other issues of 

that. 

 

And I would just end, Mr. Speaker, by simply saying that we 

will be watching very, very carefully.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1445) 

 

The Speaker: -- Before we proceed to the next issue, I do want 

to make a comment on ministerial statements.  I have noticed 

that the statement was a lengthy one.  I recognize however the 

importance of the topic.  But I do want to warn ministers that in 

the future when they make ministerial statements they must 

find a way of shortening the ministerial statements. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 4 -- An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley 

Authority Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Wakamow Valley Authority Act be introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 5 -- An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Wascana Centre Act be introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 6 -- An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 

Authority Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Meewasin Valley Authority Act be introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 



366 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1992 

Bill No. 7 -- An Act to amend The Assessment Management 

Agency Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Assessment Management Agency Act be introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 8 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 
 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act be introduced and read a 

first time. 
 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment 

thereto moved by Mr. Toth. 
 

Mr. Koskie: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just want to say 

at the outset that I am very pleased to enter the debate on the 

budget.  You'll have to excuse my cold, but I want to indicate 

that recovery is imminent because I am being treated by one of 

the members of our caucus, the good doctor from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 

I want also at this time, Mr. Speaker, to indicate what a 

pleasure it is to have joined with some 55 members of the New 

Democratic Party to form the NDP caucus and the Government 

of Saskatchewan.  And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, before I get 

into the main comments, I want to extend a deep appreciation 

to my constituents in the Quill Lakes who did in fact have the 

wisdom again to choose the party that will represent them, and 

on five separate occasions I have represented the riding of 

Quill Lakes. 
 

Mr. Speaker, before I get into some major comments in respect 

to the contents of the budget, what I'd like to do first of all is to 

pay a tribute to our Minister of Finance who has done an 

excellent job in presenting the budget which will help to 

rebuild Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Koskie: -- And I want also, Mr. Speaker, to outline some 

of the circumstances confronting the Minister of Finance and 

this government as it developed this budget.  For almost 10 

years the previous Tory administration literally destroyed this 

province of its wealth, its dignity, and its very future.  As a 

consequence, the people of this 

province must now pay for the sins of commission and 

omission of the Tory administration. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, what a legacy they leave 

behind.  And I say, history will record that this was a 

distasteful time for the people of Saskatchewan.  No better, I 

may say, than some 60 years ago when we had the last Tory 

government under the Anderson administration. 

 

And what kind of a legacy did they leave this province, Mr. 

Speaker?  Let's take a look again at the massiveness of the debt 

that they left to burden the people of this province.  Mr. 

Speaker, we had some idea of the mismanagement, but in no 

way did we possibly foresee the magnitude of the 

mismanagement, waste, and indeed corruption. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we did open the books with the Gass 

Commission.  We also opened the books in respect to the 

Crown corporations.  And we also had a special report of the 

auditor.  And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the situation was 

far worse than anyone could have possibly anticipated. 

 

Here we have a million people, less than a million people, and 

they have placed a burden of debt of $14 billion on the backs of 

the people of Saskatchewan -- $760 million just to pay the 

interest.  And can you imagine the sacrifices that the people in 

future generations will have to make in order to get rid of that 

astronomical debt that was placed with the waste and 

mismanagement of the previous administration.  The 

Philippines had their Marcos, in Saskatchewan we had a Tory 

administration, and the results are not much better. 

 

But that's not all.  During this time when they placed about a 

billion dollars of extra debt per year on average, this 

administration also embarked on a high taxation policy.  And 

you'll recall that in respect to the income tax we had the highest 

income tax, when they left office, across Canada.  They had 

placed on a flat tax of 2 per cent.  They even went so far as to 

harmonize the E&H (education and health) tax with the federal 

GST (goods and services tax).  And as you look across the 

board, every single fee schedule was increased 2 and 300 per 

cent.  Debt increased, massive taxation on the backs of the 

people, and what is worse, services were cut.  Think of it -- 

debt increased, taxes increased, and at the same time cutting 

services. 

 

Dental program gutted, revenue sharing discontinued, highway 

equipment sold off -- and the list goes on.  Just follow it, 

people of Saskatchewan.  Debt increased massively, taxes 

increased, services were cut, and then assets have been given to 

their friends. 

 

Let's take a look at some of the assets that were paying to 

provide services to the people of this province.  And where are 

they?  Gone.  Sask Minerals, SaskCOMP -- gone.  Saskoil . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Gone. 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Sask Potash . . . 



May 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 367 

An Hon. Member: -- Gone. 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- And the list goes on and on. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Where did all the money go? 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Well I'll tell you.  They were so anxious to 

fulfil and to rape this province, Mr. Speaker, that in the dying 

days of their operation they had the utter audacity to go 

forward and to sell off all the shares of the people of 

Saskatchewan in Cameco at a loss of $120 million -- a loss to 

the people of this province. 

 

Same thing happened in respect to potash.  Over $362 million 

they lost in the sales of the potash shares.  Boy, were they 

representing the people of Saskatchewan.  Well I think Chuck 

Childers thinks they're a great bunch, but I'll tell you, the 

people of Saskatchewan didn't get the benefits out of it. 

 

But it doesn't stop there, Mr. Speaker.  Think of this 

administration, the dastardly deeds they did to the people of 

this province -- debt, taxes, cut in services, assets disposed of.  

And then you go to what they were . . . had the audacity to ask 

questions in respect to patronage, if you can believe it. 

 

I'll tell you, you go across this province and the horrible story 

of how half of the population, if not more -- actually more 

because there's only about 32 per cent at best in the province 

that are Tories . . . but every conceivable appointment to any 

government job, whether it was rural service centres, crop 

insurance manager, bin cops, summer jobs, civil servants, no 

matter where it was, legal work, advertising, every single thing 

was sent through and it had to be a Tory in order to get it.  And 

that outfit stands up and wants to wonder when we hire an 

individual with the competence of a Jack Messer, and start to 

scream. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that that was a sad day for the 

people of Saskatchewan when young people across this 

province were denied summer jobs because they were 

hand-picked by Tory hacks.  That's exactly what was 

happening.  Every individual job was hand-picked.  They 

contacted no one.  The minister of Highways would send out 

into Watson or to Wynyard his hand-picked individuals. 

 

I'll tell you there was no fairness with this government and the 

people of Saskatchewan knew there was no fairness and they 

kicked them out and they did a good job doing it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't want to spend a lot of time 

in respect to the auditor's report, but I have to draw a couple 

things to the attention.  Because first of all they say we should 

have known. 

 

Well I want to tell you that they wouldn't even supply the 

information to the Provincial Auditor, a representative of the 

Assembly here, of the people of Saskatchewan.  They denied 

that which was legally binding on them to provide to the 

Provincial Auditor. 

And we've had a report in this legislature never before in the 

history of any provincial government, a report by the 

Provincial Auditor saying that they denied to account for.  And 

in fact he couldn't account for more than 50 cents on a dollar 

because they denied the information to the Provincial Auditor. 

 

(1500) 

 

But if we take a look at what the auditor says -- review not 

complete. He said: 

 

 We could not do our review at Westbridge Computer 

Corporation: 

 

 Information Systems Management Corporation (ISM), 

formerly Westbridge Computer Corporation, did not provide 

the requested information.  ISM stated they could not provide 

"confidential information" to us.  ISM's concern was that they 

are a publicly traded company and are answerable only to the 

shareholders.  Those shareholders are entitled to receive 

consistent, timely and equal disclosures. 

 

But at the time that they were denying it, who owned it?  That's 

right. 

 

 For the years under review, the Government of Saskatchewan 

representing the people of Saskatchewan owned more than 

50% of the . . . shares at Westbridge. 

 

And they denied that information to them.  That's one example. 

 

And one can go on, Mr. Speaker, into the operation that they 

carried on in this province.  Take a look at page 10 of the 

Special Report by the Provincial Auditor.  And it says, 

"Payments to employees not working for employer 

organizations."  And he goes on to say, ministerial assistants.  

Remember they used to have these ministerial assistants, had 

about four or five that they would report and then they had 

another four or five or more hidden off into the corporations.  

Ministerial assistants, listen to this, what the auditor says: 

 

 The following corporations reported that they hired 32 people 

at a cost of (almost $2 million) to work at the offices of the 

ministers responsible for the corporations.  These ministerial 

assistants were not hired according to The Ministerial 

Assistant Employment Regulations (Act). 

 

 Generally, the law allows corporations to hire employees for 

the conduct of their business.  But, Treasury Board's policies 

say ministerial assistants are not employees.  Therefore, there 

is no authority for corporations to hire (them). 

 

But they went ahead, and they buried their political hacks.  And 

it's interesting: 

 

 Also, corporations did not know (the corporations that were 

paying for these services) the services these employees 

provided for the corporations. 



368 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1992 

Therefore, payments to these employees are not properly 

supported. 

 

And the list goes on, Mr. Speaker.  The auditor goes on to say, 

"The following organizations reported that they made payments 

of ($3.4 million) to 79 employees not working for their 

organizations."  And they list them. 

 

 While the organizations listed above (he goes on) incurred 

costs of (3.4 million) for the 79 . . . the following . . . 

received, at no direct cost, the services of 79 employees." 

 

And guess what?  The premier, Office of Executive Council, 

49 people at a cost of 1.9 million, which he hid from the people 

of Saskatchewan, for the premier's office -- 49 people, hidden 

from the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the list goes on and the story that the auditor indicates here 

demonstrates actually the government was prepared not to 

follow the law, but merely to hire their political hacks . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Cronies. 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Cronies, and give them positions in the 

government.  And that's partly why we have a debt today. 

 

But let's see what else they were doing, this great 

administration, this Tory administration. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Self-righteous bunch that they were. 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Yes.  Really working for the people, weren't 

they? 

 

Well, I don't want to read the entire auditor's report, but I'm 

going to read one more headline, Mr. Speaker, and this is on 

page 16:  "Payments to advertising agencies for goods and 

services not received."  Here they had a system set up, having 

agencies of government paying for advertising which the 

agency wasn't even getting.  That's in fact true. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Where did that money go? 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Well I'll tell you where it went.  I'll tell you 

how fair they were, too, in the allocation.  It says: 

 

 Generally, the advertising expenditures reported below were 

initiated and approved for payment by the Office of the 

Executive Council (Premier's office).  In these cases, the 

organizations that made the payments were unable to 

determine that specific services were received by the 

organizations. 

 

And he lists where this money went:  Department of 

Community Services, 9,314;  Dome Advertising, Dome Media 

Buying Services Ltd.  Take another one -- Department of 

Health, $15,000;  Roberts & Poole, Dome Advertising. 

 

And the list goes on, Mr. Speaker.  Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation, 162,000.  Guess who got it? 

Dome Advertising, Roberts & Poole, Dome Media Buying 

Services Ltd.  And the auditor goes on to indicate there's 

payments, as I said, to advertising firms for goods and services 

not even received. 

 

And this is why we have that mammoth debt that we're facing 

here today -- the mismanagement, the total mismanagement, of 

the members opposite.  And I say to them that they should be 

ashamed to face the people of Saskatchewan for what they 

have left behind, the wreckage of this province, and for future 

generations. 

 

They go on to say, Mr. Speaker, that the overall situation 

confronting Saskatchewan is not really . . . is compounded 

really by the actions of the federal Tory government in Ottawa. 

 

And I say here that the people of Saskatchewan got rid of the 

Tories here in Saskatchewan and I say that the people of 

Canada will get rid of the Tory government federally when 

they're given the opportunity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Let's take a look at agriculture.  And we had the 

former premier who was calling himself Mr. Agriculture.  Well 

I'll tell you he didn't help Saskatchewan farmers, and I'm going 

to demonstrate how he didn't. 

 

But as I'm saying, we've got a problem federally because we've 

got a Tory government, and they have absolutely no plan for 

agriculture.  They gave a commitment to the people of 

Saskatchewan, and when they introduced the GRIP program, 

that there would be a third line of defence.  And now the 

members opposite, the provincial Tories, are voting against the 

federal commitment of $500 million as a third line defence.  

And they stood in this House and voted against it. 

 

I want to say that we have a critical situation in agriculture.  

And I say this because what we have here is a federal 

government that is not committed to a planned way of assisting 

our farmers during these difficult times, because they are 

competing in a world market against American farmers that are 

subsidized by the federal treasury and against European 

farmers that are supported by the treasuries of the government 

of the European Community. 

 

And I say to you that's where the problem is -- it rests with the 

federal Tories in Ottawa as well as it rests with the provincial 

Tories here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- And what is happening, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

federal Tories have been down-loading something awful.  They 

have been transferring what was their responsibility onto the 

backs of the producers and on the backs of the provincial 

governments. 

 

I have statistics here indicating the impact of the federal 

off-loading.  The federal off-loading for Saskatchewan '92-93 

is estimated at over $500 million -- $500 million of off-loading.  

And let's take a look at how that comes about: established 

program financing, $247.9 million 



May 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 369 

off-loaded; agricultural programs, 218 million; other programs, 

51; for a total of $517 million. 
 

This is the problem that we're confronted with here in 

Saskatchewan.  And I say to the farmers of Saskatchewan and 

indeed to the constituents of mine that this government here is 

going to Ottawa.  We're going to demand payment; we're going 

to demand an agricultural policy that will protect our farmers.  

And I say that we're going to either defeat the next Tory 

government when they call it or we're going to get a program 

for the farmers that makes sense. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Koskie: -- The sad part, Mr. Speaker, is this -- not only 

have they no plan for agriculture, not only are they 

down-loading their contributions to programs, they've cut their 

share of crop insurance.  They cancelled out the western grain 

stabilization program where they were putting in $4 for every 

dollar for the farmer.  Instead they put in a GRIP program 

where now they put in 41 per cent. 
 

So there's no plan, there's down-loading, but they aren't 

finished yet.  The Tories federally are saying they want to get 

those marketing boards that give some security to the farmers, 

milk producers, chicken and turkey producers.  And also they 

are determined to change the method of payment in respect to 

transportation.  And they spent several millions of dollars with 

a road show last winter trying to convince farmers here in 

Saskatchewan that the method of payment should be made to 

the farmers and not to the railroad, which is no other than a 

plan to get rid of any subsidization to transportation for the 

farmers. 
 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it would seem that there is no 

plan, either by the provincial Tories or the federal Tories -- that 

they're really just drifting, reading the polls. 
 

Well I want to say, don't be mistaken, because they are dead on 

course federally and when they were in office provincially.  

Because they achieve a portion of their goals: privatization at 

any cost, whether it was good for the province or not; 

deregulation, oh yes, that's going to save us; free trade 

agreement, and now they're going to expand it over to include 

Mexico.  And even the former premier of Alberta, Mr. 

Lougheed, indicated that he's nervous in respect to entering 

into the free trade agreement with Mexico as to what the 

consequences are going to be on Canada.  And they're going 

ahead. 
 

So they privatized, they deregulated, got the free trade 

agreement, and finally they're on their last mission and that was 

to nuke out universal social programs, safety net program, 

across Canada. 
 

And they started. They tried it with the seniors until the seniors 

turned on them and stopped them in their tracks -- partly, 

because a part of it now, old-age security, is taxed back, surtax 

on it.  And then they got to the family allowances, the Tories 

federally, and they said, oh we'll get off paying that family 

allowance to those rich bankers and executives of corporations, 

and we're going to give more to the needy.  Well take a look at 

their plan, and what hypocrisy again.  I'll tell you, if you're 

poor, you'd better not trust a Tory, because they'll never 

deliver. 

They nuked the family allowance program and initially . . . 

families who are working, working poor will initially get extra 

money.  But a year or two down the road there's no indexing, 

and as a consequence they fall behind.  But what they did do, is 

they left out all of those that were unemployed, and those that 

were on social assistance they excluded.  Now they really 

addressed poverty by getting rid of universal family allowance. 

 

So I say they have an agenda and their agenda has been 

exposed.  And I think if you ask the financial institutions they'll 

agree that the Tories have an agenda.  And I think if you ask 

the multinational corporations, they'll agree.  They'll say yes, 

they have a good agenda.  Right. 

 

I think if you ask Chuck Childers he'd say they have a 

wonderful plan; I just snared off the best potash in the world 

and run it off to the States and now I control it. 

 

And you know what?  Even George Bush would agree that 

these Tories have a plan. 

 

You know as I speak here today, Mr. Speaker, some will say 

that I'm fighting the ideological battles of the past.  That there 

really is a new politics undefined by principles and party 

affiliation, but governed by polls and slick advertising.  Well I 

say to the adherents of the latter, that style is not substance, and 

leadership is not equated to reading polls. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- And I'll tell you, that's the type of government 

that we had for 10 years in this province -- style, slick 

advertising, and lots of polls. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that last Thursday we introduced 

our budget.  And as the Minister of Finance indicated, a budget 

that was founded on fiscal responsibility, public accountability, 

fairness, compassion, economic reality, and I believe that 

makes sense.  A budget fashioned to help rebuild 

Saskatchewan from the wreckage of the Tory mismanagement, 

waste, wrong priorities, and indeed corruption. 

 

I want to say that this was indeed a tough budget.  It affects all 

segments of society: labour, professional people, business 

people, farmers -- all are affected.  But I say, we had no choice.  

The finances of the province was in crisis, and the only choice 

that we had were twofold: make the budget as fair as possible, 

and secondly, protect those who are most vulnerable. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, we aim to achieve those objectives and I 

think we did.  And I hope that the public will believe us when 

we tell them how difficult it is to make those tough decisions 

which really affect adversely, people around the province. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, it causes me a great deal of pain to see 

people lose their jobs.  It causes me a great deal of pain to see 

programs cut that farmers previously depended on.  But I say, 

we had no choice. 



370 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1992 

In fairness, I think, Mr. Speaker, that there really should be an 

exemption to all this for the people of Quill Lakes.  And I say 

that because they never were a party to electing a Tory to this 

legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- And I congratulate them, and I want to say, 

promise to continue to work with them to get out of this Tory 

mess that we've inherited with the least possible amount of 

hurt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some people have said we've gone too far.  Some 

people say we didn't go far enough.  Some people said we 

increased taxes too much, and some people will say we cut 

programs too much.  Difficult choice, but overriding it was the 

concept of being fair and protecting the most vulnerable. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the other day I listened to three 

economists, and the question that was asked was this: in view 

of the present interest rates -- they're fairly low -- what advice 

would you give a new home buyer?  Should he take a 

short-term mortgage, a three-year mortgage, or a five-year 

mortgage? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, three economists; one recommended a 

year-long mortgage or less, one said take the three-year 

mortgage, and the last one said take the five-year mortgage.  So 

it's a matter of choice, Mr. Speaker.  Well I guess the moral of 

the story is, don't ever elect an economist to be premier of 

Saskatchewan again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- I want to turn just briefly to agriculture, Mr. 

Speaker.  And Tories used to go around saying: NDP had no 

agricultural program.  Well I want to remind the member 

opposite, I want to see your flagship that you after 10 years can 

raise and say, this is agriculture and it benefitted. 

 

Let me tell you what we did until you came into office.  We 

had a beef stabilization program that protected the beef 

producers and gave them a cost of living . . . a 

cost-of-production formula.  We had a SHARP (Saskatchewan 

hog assured returns program) program for the hog producers of 

this province which gave them stability of cost of production.  

And what did we get?  A watered-down Tory version of a 

tripartite beef stabilization and hog stabilization program that is 

virtually useless to the hog producer or the cattle producer. 

 

We established SHARP, farmstart, farmlab, crop insurance.  

We worked, fought for, the two-price wheat system.  We 

fought and got back the cash advance to the farmers.  We 

fought for the Crow benefits; we fought for marketing boards.  

We are fighting for the method of payment that it continue to 

be made to the farmer. 

 

What are the flagships of the Tory administration?  I say they 

don't have one, Mr. Speaker.  And the record shows as farmer 

after farmer went to the poll and supported New Democrats 

across this province because they had been hoodwinked long 

enough by the so-called premier of 

agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Speaker, I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, 

that few of us are given the opportunity to serve in this 

legislature, and fewer are given the honour to serve for five 

consecutive terms of office, as I have.  And I say, Mr. Speaker 

-- call it experience, hindsight, or intuition -- I knew as soon as 

those Tories walked into this legislature that a mess was 

imminent.  No doubt about it, there was trouble on the horizon 

immediately after the election. 

 

And during the last number of years, many in our caucus have 

worked hard to expose the sins and omissions of the former 

premier and his colleagues.  And we organized and we went on 

constituency blitzes and we organized to prevent privatization 

of SaskEnergy.  We helped to work out a blueprint for the 

future and I say the people of this province deserve no less. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan, as I say, responded on October 

21, 1991 by electing 55 New Democratic members to the 

legislature.  And we know that on assuming office that we were 

in serious problems, but never could we imagine the magnitude 

of the devastation that this great province had undergone under 

the previous administration.  Unfortunately what they did to the 

people of the province reflects on all politicians.  I say they 

gave politics a bad name, and the burden is one which they 

alone should carry. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, while our task is compounded by the mess 

left behind, I say to you, Mr. Speaker, our determination is 

strong.  Our commitment to serve the interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan is even more strengthened. 

 

Saskatchewan under the leadership of Tommy Douglas and 

Woodrow Lloyd blazed the trail to a new dawn of social 

progress and social justice here in this province with health 

care and medicare and the infrastructure that Tommy Douglas 

built throughout this province.  And Saskatchewan under Allan 

Blakeney established an economic base that placed 

Saskatchewan for the first time as a "have" province with 

balanced budgets and social programs unequalled anywhere in 

North America. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is our determination that Saskatchewan 

under the leadership of the member from Riversdale, our 

Premier, we will in fact take the task of rebuilding 

Saskatchewan from the ashes of 10 disastrous Tory years.  The 

people of Saskatchewan deserve no less, and I'll tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan people shall receive no less. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my 

pleasure to rise in this Assembly today to speak in support of 

our 1992-93 budget presented by the Minister of Finance last 

week. 

 

First, however, because I have not spoken in this House before, 

I would like to take this opportunity to 



May 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 371 

congratulate you on your election as Speaker.  I know that you 

are determined to restore the public's respect for this institution 

and their faith in our democratic process.  Without question, 

you will succeed.  I believe that during your tenure this 

Assembly will once again be a place to exchange meaningful 

ideas and serious ideas in a calm and rational manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have the privilege of serving with a Premier and 

a caucus who are dedicated to restoring the fiscal integrity of 

our province and overcoming the overwhelming cynicism of 

the public.  We may make mistakes, but they will be honest 

mistakes -- ones that we'll learn and grow from, not cover up. 

 

I am confident that the history books will write that the NDP 

government of Roy Romanow took this province from the 

brink of bankruptcy . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I must remind the 

minister, you do not use the names of individuals in this 

legislature.  You may refer to them from their constituency. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- . . . and made it once again a place of 

economic security and social equality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a newcomer to this Chamber, I am constantly 

amazed and at times entertained by the members of the 

opposition.  Truly I am astounded at their distorted sense of 

reality and their perverted sense of logic. 

 

I have come to the conclusion, however, that they must be in a 

total state of denial.  They are too ashamed to admit the truth.  

That truth being that the former government, through its greedy 

schemes and its silly dreams, destroyed the very foundations of 

our great province. 

 

But perhaps, Mr. Speaker, they are more to be pitied than 

scorned.  For who would want to admit to the legacy that they 

have left behind?  Indeed it will be a very, very long time 

before the people of Saskatchewan forgive them for their 

negligence and excesses, for their corrupt and incompetent 

government.  Now we must all pay the price.  And today we 

start to rebuild. 

 

The people in my constituency of Melfort are willing and eager 

to begin a new era.  They are resilient and courageous and 

determined, and they know about hard work and thriftiness.  

They can turn challenge into opportunity and dreams into 

reality.  And they know that security for tomorrow starts today. 

 

This budget is our hope, our opportunity, and our security.  

And this budget is a hope for all residents of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget calls on all of us to make sacrifices.  I 

know the tough choices that went into this budget.  And as a 

former mayor and now as a Minister of Community Services, I 

feel very close to our municipalities and I've talked to most of 

the mayors since that budget.  I know the challenge of doing 

more with less to maintain the local services that residents have 

come to expect and rely on. 

(1530) 

 

And over the last 10 years the economic viability of our 

villages, towns, and cities have greatly deteriorated while the 

Tory government played its silly games.  The emphasis in 

resources that the former government placed and gave to big 

corporations has wasted huge sums of money -- money that 

would have been better spent on local government. 

 

The Tories did nothing to enhance the quality and economic 

life of urban communities in Saskatchewan for 10 years.  For 

example, if they would have given the $305 million that went 

to Cargill to urban governments, the economic security of 

many of our communities would have been greatly enhanced. 

 

Now we have no resources left.  They have given away $441 

million in the sale of PCS (Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Inc.).  They have wasted $145 million in the 

Rafferty fiasco.  At the same time, I know that local 

governments badly need money.  The cuts to local 

governments are painful but necessary.  We cannot continue to 

spend money that we just do not have. 

 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), at 

their last convention, requested that the provincial government 

get its financial house in order.  Urban municipalities 

understand fiscal responsibility; our budget is one of fiscal 

responsibility. 

 

The urban revenue-sharing program had to be cut by 15 per 

cent for 1992-93.  Municipalities of the province will be 

challenged to find new ways of doing things to maintain local 

services.  This will call for increasing co-operation between 

levels of government and intermunicipal co-operation.  It will 

mean increased communication and co-operation among 

governments at the local level, like urban, rural, and school 

boards.  These governments are interdependent and must foster 

a spirit of co-operation and partnership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the hard choices we made, the Saskatchewan 

community builds program had to be suspended for 1992-93.  

Notwithstanding that suspension, I am very pleased that our 

government was able to make good the broken promises of the 

last government.  We were able to make good the payments to 

communities who had already approved and completed their 

projects, thus easing the additional financial burden imposed 

upon them by the changes the Tories made.  This pay-out 

actually totalled $3 million more than the annual community 

builds program unconditional budget allocation. 

 

So while the government is unable to provide new funds for 

this year, we were able to finish up on prior projects and the 

mess that was left behind by the last government.  The legacy 

of nine years of mismanagement, irresponsible spending, 

misguided priorities, and political manipulation has left us with 

few choices, and those few choices are very hard choices to 

make. 

 

To meet these challenges the provincial government and in this 

case municipalities will be severely tested.  The 



372 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1992 

government values its partnership with the cities and towns and 

villages in Saskatchewan and I am in close contact with the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association and individual 

communities in the weeks ahead to find new ways of doing and 

co-operating on new projects. 

 

The same holds true in other sectors under my jurisdiction.  

Urban park funding will be reduced by 5 per cent for Wascana 

Centre Authority, the Meewasin Valley Authority in 

Saskatoon, and the Chinook Parkway in Swift Current.  The 

Wakamow Valley Authority in Moose Jaw will receive a small 

increase to help correct an historical inequality in their funding. 

 

Provincial grants to libraries had to be reduced.  There will be a 

25 per cent reduction in Regina and Saskatoon libraries and a 5 

per cent reduction in the eight regional libraries.  Libraries will 

be challenged to find new ways of getting the job done with 

fewer resources.  Here also we must look for greater 

co-operation with other libraries, with other levels of 

government, and with other people in the community.  Again, 

these cuts are necessary here as they are in other areas of the 

department. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in spite of funding cuts, we are still able to focus 

on new initiatives that are both timely and necessary.  These 

new initiatives include additional funding for water and sewer 

projects in northern communities to deal with health problems.  

Our government has committed $4 million in '92-93 to these 

projects in 16 communities in the North.  This is four times as 

much as the last government allocated. 

 

This morning I met with those communities and we had a very 

good and frank discussion about the needs of those 

communities in the North and they are very excited about this 

allocation and the prospect of finally, at long last, receiving the 

kind of services that most people in Saskatchewan have taken 

for granted. And yet they were operating at a third-world status 

for the last 10 years.  They have a very, extremely limited, 

property tax base and a gross lack of economic activity.  The 

Tory government did nothing to bring these communities to an 

acceptable level of basic services that are taken for granted 

everywhere else in the world. 

 

A new rural and native housing program will focus on new 

alternatives such as self-build and log housing.  This will be a 

major emphasis placed on providing new homes in northern 

Saskatchewan to reduce the terrible overcrowding and the 

situation in regards to the substandard housing units that are 

there now.  Additional funding for rehabilitation of northern 

housing units will provide an additional $500,000 for 

renovation and repair in the northern housing stock and this 

will lever 1.5 from the federal government. 

 

As well, co-operation from the federal government has allowed 

us to eliminate duplication of services and create operating 

efficiencies.  The Tory administration for the past nine years 

opted out of the federal rural and native housing program.  This 

caused a decrease in the maintenance of the provincial rural 

and native housing units and less dollars were expected to go 

the same distance.  We are proud that we have renegotiated that 

program and now, under our new initiatives, we'll be able to 

allocate more resources to northern people. 

 

We have allocated $150,000 to a healthy housing project to 

allow senior citizens to remain independent in their own 

residence by facilitating an integrated service package for 

them. 

 

Redirected money to enhance intermunicipal co-operation will 

fund pilot projects investigating and implementing means of 

expanding co-operation and sharing among local governments 

and boards.  In 1992-93, $500,000 will be made available for 

pilot projects. 

 

Our government clearly will not pursue restraint in a 

single-minded fashion.  These initiatives show our commitment 

to pursue restraint, but in a fair and progressive manner.  New 

approaches, innovation, partnerships -- that's a new era in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

On other budget initiatives, there has been a 15 per cent 

increase in funding that supports special transit systems for the 

physically challenged.  This translates to $283,400 extra for 

money for approximately 70 communities.  It will assist in 

addressing the backlog of requests for replacement vehicles 

and communities planning to offer services for the first time. 

 

New initiatives in fire prevention and training are also part of 

this new budget.  The fire-fighting training and support 

program will put $250,000 into communities to expand and 

revitalize their fire prevention training programs and to reduce 

mortality rates and property losses.  A public awareness 

program also will be introduced. 

 

Community Services is taking on the responsibilities for sports, 

culture, and recreation.  These programs fit with the delivery of 

services at both the provincial level and the local level.  

Co-operation and elimination of duplicating services and the 

creation of operating efficiencies will be the key to the success 

of this integration.  I look forward to working with the sports 

and culture and recreation groups and associations in the 

province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a moment to speak 

about the environment.  This budget carries a strong message 

of environmental responsibility.  This government has 

demonstrated its firm commitment to a healthy and safe 

Saskatchewan environment. 

 

In maintaining the budget level for the Department of 

Environment and Public Safety, I believe that this budget 

recognizes that our entire economic future and stability rests on 

sustaining and improving our environment.  Our major 

environmental initiatives will be continued and new ones will 

be launched. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of our environmental activities will 

continue to be supported by the environmental protection fund.  

This fund is being carefully applied to important environmental 

protected projects.  Among these initiatives are the major waste 

minimization and management initiatives, employment 

opportunities for 



May 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 373 

students in the summer, water quality protection initiatives, 

environmental education information programs, and public 

information programs. 

 

Also there will be an environmental technology development 

and corporate environmental management program.  We 

clearly understand that a healthy environment is essential for a 

sustained future. 

 

The Conservative government repeatedly sacrificed 

environmental activities in its budget and policy decisions over 

the past 10 years.  This era of irresponsibility is at an end.  A 

glaring example of the Tory lack of co-ordination and foresight 

is seen in the way they handled the chemical waste collection 

program.  They did the collection of waste but they failed to 

plan safe storage of these wastes.  Their commitment to the 

environment was superficial at best.  The result of course was a 

near disastrous fire at Grand Coulee in December. 

 

As Minister of Environment and Public Safety I carry a 

provincial mandate for protecting the environment, but that 

department alone cannot create a healthy environment.  If we 

want to achieve adequate, immediate action to protect our 

environment and to pursue sustainable development, then we 

must pool resources of all and from all levels of Saskatchewan 

society -- from the kindergarten class-room to the executive 

board room and everyone in between.  It is through partnership, 

co-operation, and shared action that we will achieve a healthy, 

sustained environment. 

 

We are strongly committed to openness, to consultation, to 

public involvement, and to working in close partnerships with 

all sectors of the province.  Every one of our initiatives will be 

developed and implemented based on consultation, partnership, 

and public involvement.  This year for the first time we will see 

an environmental charter of rights and responsibilities.  This 

charter will guarantee the public's right to participate in 

environmental decisions and will protect those individuals who 

report environmental accidents, incidents, and practices, 

something the former government circumvented and avoided 

wherever possible, and whenever possible. 

 

In 1992 and '93 we'll initiate stronger legislation governing the 

environmental assessment and review process.  This is 

necessary.  We have only to look at the fiasco the 

Conservatives made of the Rafferty-Alameda project.  The 

political agenda overrode the environmental agenda.  We must 

ensure that the environment is protected. 

 

A white paper will be released for public discussion, and it will 

propose the establishment of an independent environmental 

assessment commission to administer a more open and 

effective assessment process for all major projects in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speech from the Throne committed this government to 

sustainable development.  Very soon we'll be receiving from 

the Round Table on Environment and Economy the 

conservation strategy for sustainable development in 

Saskatchewan.  We anticipate that this document will be a 

springboard to develop new policy initiatives and launch 

new activities to better protect our environment. 

 

This year we will examine the ongoing role and direction of the 

round table and other groups that advise the government on 

sustainable development and environmental protection and 

enhancement.  We are developing more permanent long-term 

advisory vehicles through which the government can keep in 

close touch with the needs of the stakeholders and the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We will introduce changes to upgrade standards and 

regulations that protect our environment.  For instance, last 

month we amended regulations to improve the storage of 

hazardous materials and waste dangerous goods. 

 

We'll change provisions to The Environmental Management 

and Protection Act to bring us closer to equivalency to the 

Canadian Environmental Protection Act.  We will be giving 

more teeth to our Ozone-depleting Substances Control Act and 

The Clean Air Act by adding control order and injunctive 

provisions.  There will be a major expansion of the SARCAN 

recycling system as part of our provincial waste minimization 

strategy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, fiscal and environmental responsibility go hand in 

hand.  And I believe the people of Saskatchewan want full 

accounting of environmental costs.  They want to see 

environmental protection costs distributed in a manner that 

reflects the cause of environmental problems. 

 

For that reason I believe in the polluter-pay principle.  Clearly 

those who pollute the environment should be responsible for 

the cost of cleaning it up.  This is both fair and sensible.  We 

will therefore be looking at effective and innovative cost 

recovery initiatives in the months ahead.  In the Environment 

and Public Safety department there are already some excellent 

examples of how this can be done equitably and fairly without 

placing unfair stress on organizations or disadvantaging the 

industries. 

 

Saskatchewan is fortunate.  Compared to many jurisdictions, 

our environment is still relatively clean.  We will be able to 

achieve all our goals.  I call on everyone who depends on the 

environment -- that means everyone in the province -- to join 

us in a commitment to make our environment the healthiest and 

safest in the world. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn from my role as Minister of 

Environment and Public Safety to my role as minister in charge 

of the Saskatchewan Transportation Company.  This company 

was virtually looted under the Conservative government of the 

last nine years.  They stood by and watched it happen.  Unable 

to privatize this transportation utility and unwilling to have it 

continue its proud and historic service, they chose to ignore it. 

 

The result -- fiscal irresponsibility, callous treatment of career 

employees, an accumulated operating deficit of $35.8 million, 

and a capital debt of $18.4 million as of October 31, 1991. 

 

(1545) 



374 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1992 

In only five months the following initiatives have been taken to 

overcome this disaster.  We have appointed a new board of 

directors to STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company).  

We have reinstated regular board meetings.  The company 

reorganization has taken place to focus on revenue and expense 

centres; accountability through the structure of implementation 

of performance planning; and improvements in revenue 

tracking, customer billing, and financial statements. 

 

The previous administration let customer billing and financial 

statements fall over a hundred days behind.  The Tories' 

solution to this mismanagement was to hire more staff and 

purchase a $1.6 million computer.  We have abandoned the 

computer purchase and with effective management, principled 

-- and reduced -- staff, conscientious employees have brought 

the billing process up to 30 days and we are continuing to 

improve that process. 

 

Our other initiatives include plans to . . . are under way to have 

communities define their passenger and express needs to STC 

and thereby achieve a consensus as to route adjustments.  

Passenger programs are being developed.  These include 

student pass programs, the family program, improvements to 

senior programs, the medical users' pass, and the business and 

civil servant travel pass. 

 

Internal efficiencies as well as employee efficiencies are under 

way.  These programs are fundamental to creating a healthy 

work environment within that corporation.  STC will establish 

a focus of direction and financial accountability that the 

corporation has not seen in the last 10 years. 

 

The changes made in STC are good common sense combined 

with good business practices, each of which were a commodity 

sadly lacking under the Progressive Conservative 

administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to state it again that as Minister of 

Community Services, and Environment and Public Safety, this 

government is committed to open, honest, and fair government.  

I am adamant that we must all work together co-operatively to 

move into a brighter, fiscally responsible, and positive future. 

 

We must now act to overcome the legacy that has been left 

behind by the former Tory government and to create a province 

where our children will be proud to call home.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this is my second opportunity to stand before 

this Assembly and give a speech.  The first time was a new 

experience and somewhat overwhelming.  This time is to rise 

and stand firmly in support of the budget speech. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am proud to be a part of the team that 

knows where it's going, proud to be a part of the team that 

knows what is stands for -- fiscal responsibility, public 

accountability, fairness, and compassion. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know precisely what we're going to do 

for the next eight years or more -- rebuild Saskatchewan 

together. 

 

We stand at a very critical point in time in our destiny.  The 

previous administration added $10 billion to the public debt in 

just 10 years.  Interest costs alone to service this massive debt 

will be 760 million this year.  We cannot, and will not, allow 

this to continue.  Eight years or more of a committed, 

dedicated, and caring New Democratic government will do this 

province a world of good after the last nine and a half years of 

terrible Tories. 

 

We have seized the reins of irresponsible fiscal spending and 

taken decisive action.  Our budget speaks for itself.  It will 

reduce the deficit to 517 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We have quite obviously established a clear downward trend 

after 10 years of spiralling deficit spending; established a clear 

downward trend after 10 years of graft, corruption, greed, 

sweetheart deals that cost us dearly, and financial 

mismanagement so rampant it spread like wildfire -- spread 

like the vicious and oftentimes fatal disease, cancer. 

 

Because of the Tory cancer, this province is in a lot of trouble.  

There's no other way to put it but to tell the people the plain 

and simple truth.  And that truth is that the Tory government 

ran us into the ground so badly that it will be some time before 

we see the light of day.  And if that sounds scary, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, perhaps it should, because we need to drive home this 

message time and time again. 

 

The Tories' most famous line uttered by a boisterous and 

self-satisfied premier was, and I quote: Saskatchewan has so 

much going for it that you can afford to mismanage it and still 

break even.  Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, mismanage it they did, 

and those words will now haunt us for years to come. 

 

Yet even in the darkness, there's light.  Spending restraints will 

start at the top.  That has already been demonstrated clearly by 

cabinet ministers taking a 5 per cent salary cut, by government 

members with extra duties having their allowances reduced or 

removed, by the 25 per cent reduction of communication 

allowances for MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly). 

 

Even further, operating expenditures will decrease by 3 per 

cent this year.  Out-of-scope salaries have been frozen.  

Advertising and communications budgets in government 

departments will be cut by 29 per cent. 

 

While some of these measures may sound scary, I must get 

back once again to the reason for these measures -- 10 years of 

mismanagement by the Tories. 

 

Let me give you some examples of this mismanagement: 

$230,000 for buying and furnishing a new Regina 

condominium for the Lieutenant Governor; 9 million to 

celebrate Saskatchewan's 85th birthday in 1990 and promote 

the PC Party in what could have been an election year; 

$146,440 to cover additional salaries for four extra cabinet 

ministers that the former premier added 



May 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 375 

to his cabinet; 86,295 to cover additional salaries for the cost of 

11 PC MLAs that were appointed as legislative secretaries; 

$1,524,600 to pay additional staff, office and travel expenses 

for the four extra ministers and 11 legislative secretaries; 

$1,343,495 for an eight-month period for advertising for 

SaskTel paid to Roberts & Poole, and we all know what 

happened to them when the Tory patronage came to a 

screaming halt; $212,750 for a research grant to Supercart for 

the development of a plastic shopping cart which the company 

never produced; $485,988 paid to S.W. Warburg Consultants 

for a study on the privatization of the Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation. 

 

I could go on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I think the point is 

evident.  The waste, the unrestrained spending, the 

misrepresentations, all spread slowly and insidiously 

throughout government like a creeping, festering disease.  A 

disease that started quietly and without much notice, perhaps 

with a few pains here and there, perhaps with some signs of 

sickness, perhaps with a few people raising questions about 

things going on around them, and even perhaps with a few 

people getting a little bit worried that things didn't seem quite 

right. 

 

But the frightening thing was that no one was really overly 

concerned because they kept getting soothing words -- 

reassurances from the Tories that what they were doing was in 

the best interests of the people and the province.  After all, who 

would know better than they did? 

 

Those people who were quite concerned and raised an alarm -- 

and I compare them to people smart enough to see the warning 

signs of sickness and go to the doctor -- were silenced, often 

fired; or worse, they were told they were imagining things.  

And when you're told over and over again that you're 

imagining things, you come to believe that just might be the 

case. 

 

And so we have the scene, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the 

downfall of a once proud province, the seeds of disease sown, 

seeds seeking fertile ground to grow in, flourish, and feed on. 

 

For that is how it all began -- quietly.  And what followed was 

10 years of a Tory cancer ravaging our province and our 

people. 

 

We knew what was happening.  We saw it coming.  And we 

knew that when we came to power we could excise that cancer 

and treat the sickness with compassion, treat the sickness that 

had gone out of control, consuming things in its way; a 

sickness that also closely resembled madness.  And the 

madness continued, particularly in certain sectors, but 

particularly in the financial sector. 

 

While the PCs were in power, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 

overspent their budget every year -- every year for 10 years.  If 

I tended to my cheque book that way, I would have been 

bankrupt long ago.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, the deficits of the 

previous administration were nothing but deferred taxes, and 

now the bill is due and payable. 
 

But the frightening point here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that on 

average, for every dollar that the Tories collected, they spent 

$1.18.  And that does not include any of the Tory 

mismanagement in the Crown corporations.  I'm only talking 

about the operational side. 

 

And what did that gleeful spending spree cost us, the taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan? -- 8.8 billion.  A provincial bill of $8.8 

billion, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  That is totally out of line with the 

concept of fiscal responsibility.  In fact, totally out of line with 

the concept of responsibility period. 

 

If we were to pay back this debt in 10 years, for every dollar of 

revenue received we could only spend 71 cents; 29 cents from 

every dollar collected would go towards debt repayment.  This 

of course assuming that we have a constant revenue figure 

when in reality provincial revenues have been dropping. 

 

Our provincial revenue is 4.2 billion.  A 10-year repayment 

plan would require that 1.2 billion or 29 per cent be paid to 

deficit reduction, and that would leave 3 billion for all 

government expenditures.  By contrast, in 1991, 4.4 billion was 

spent on government programs and services.  In any event, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, a 10-year repayment plan would require a 31 

per cent reduction in services based on a 1991 program level -- 

a 31 per cent reduction. 

 

What on earth were the Tories thinking when they drove this 

province and its people to the edge?  Or were they thinking?  I 

would have to say they weren't.  Perhaps that's because they too 

became part of that disease eating away at our province.  They 

became a part of a larger organism, a greedy, voracious 

organism that destroyed anything in its path, that brought pain 

and suffering to untold hundreds of people in all walks of life -- 

our seniors, our nurses, our educators, our farmers. 

 

The Tory disease touched us all in ways that we have not yet 

even begun to understand.  That is just like the spread of a 

deadly sickness.  We don't know how it affects us in the quiet 

unseen ways until it gets discovered too late to do anything 

about it, until it has taken its toll -- its toll on individuals and on 

the province. 

 

What a depressing scenario, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  A disease 

running rampant and unchecked.  A disease that might have 

had no cure if it hadn't have been for October 21.  October 21 

was the first day of recovery, a start on the road to remission 

from the cancerous growth suffocating Saskatchewan, a first 

things first common sense approach to financial management 

that began to finally make some sense. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is what we have accomplished in part 

since October 21.  On November 13 the Minister of Finance 

announced that the true deficit, operating deficit was not 265 

million but 960 million.  We took immediate measures to 

reduce this to 888 million. 

 

On November 19 the financial review commission, the Gass 

Commission, was established to open the books and 

recommend how to keep them open.  On December 16 the 

Minister of Finance announced a revised deficit forecast of 852 

million based on a further 36 million in 



376 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1992 

reduced government expenditures.  On December 16 the Gass 

Commission pointed out that the 250 million dividend that the 

Tories said would be paid into general funds was simply not 

there and never was. 

 

And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was just the tip of the iceberg -- 

the commission's report of 189 interesting pages filled with 

damning facts and figures that dug the Tories a hole so deep 

they may never see the light of day ever again. 

 

Other findings, just to refresh the memory of the opposition, 

include the following. Several large projects had been 

undertaken without documenting fully and clearly understood 

business and public policy objectives. The financial 

implications arising from certain transactions had not been 

fully disclosed to the public, nor had they been recognized 

properly in the province's financial records. 

 

One hundred fifty-five and a half million dollars spent on 

Rafferty-Alameda dams and a cost overrun of 112.6 million.  A 

$121 million loss on the sale of Cameco shares.  A province in 

serious peril of losing its ability to borrow money if the debt is 

not brought under control. 

 

The timing of the sale of the province's shares in the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan was contrary to the advice 

provided by the Crown Management Board's external advisors.  

The timing of the issue resulted in a loss to the province.  Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the Gass Commission was unable to find any 

documentation to support the government's reasons for 

overriding the recommendations of its advisors. 

 

I think I need not go any further with the list of things Mr. Gass 

discovered.  It's more than obvious that the books of this 

province were in an utter mess.  We realized what a desperate 

situation we were in immediately and took decisive action to 

cut government waste. 

 

We closed the premier's office in Prince Albert at a cost saving 

of $150 a year.  We now mail SaskPower and SaskEnergy bills 

in the same envelope for a cost savings of $725,000 a year.  

Spending cuts on items like government supplies, acquisitions, 

advertising, and travel save $28 million this year.  We have the 

smallest cabinet this province has seen in 20 years, and that is 

saving the province more than $100,000 a month in salaries, 

expenses, staff, and office costs.  We closed the trade offices in 

Hong Kong, Zrich, and Minneapolis, for a savings of $2 

million a year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are things we know, things we can be proud 

of, things that have shown the voters of this province that we 

are deadly serious about trying to stop the cancer that has been 

eating away at our resources, our people, and our financial base 

-- deadly serious about getting down to business and making a 

difference.  And I believe that that was made even more 

evident in the budget speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

This spring is a time for renewal, a time for rebuilding 

Saskatchewan together, for working together today for 

tomorrow.  This is a time when we look at the budget as our 

blueprint, a road map to where we're going to go in 

the future, a beginning of the treatment needed to eradicate the 

terrible Tory cancer from our systems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget has shown us that if we work together, 

we can and will make a difference, much like an ancient 

Chinese saying:  Even the highest towers are built from the 

ground up.  We have to find the opportunities and create a 

feeling of security; create an atmosphere that gives people back 

the hope that was extinguished by the Tory government. 

 

The key to rebuilding Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

no secret.  It lies in people working together, people taking 

responsibility for the solutions to the mess we're in.  People 

helping people, and people creating a vision for the next decade 

-- a vision that will allow us to stand tall and proud to face 

whatever the world throws at us.  And I truly believe, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that we have started down that road to 

recovery.  And I believe that anyone who doubts that should 

take a good hard look at what is in the budget. 

 

The budget, as I mentioned earlier, is the start of the treatment 

that will once and for all purge the Tories out of our system 

like an effective medicine should. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a whole lot of things to look forward to 

in the next decade -- improvements in the health care system, 

the wellness model, improvements in GRIP, the start of a 

workable solution to the farm debt crisis, new economic 

development, a greater recognition of how precious our 

environment is.  Truly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many 

exciting things in store for this province. 

 

It will be a busy time of year for all of us -- politicians, civil 

servants, farmers, seniors, children.  But busy is the key to 

getting to where we want to be.  Just as Benjamin Franklin 

once said:  if you want something done, ask a busy person. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I would like to express my full 

support for the budget speech.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wanted 

to take this opportunity to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, say a few 

words about what we've experienced in the last few days since 

the budget. 

 

I can say to the members opposite I just returned from Moose 

Jaw where we attended the funeral of a family friend, and had 

the opportunity to talk to a nurse that had just been fired.  She 

put two children through university and she just received her 

walking papers today.  And she said, isn't it odd that after all 

this pain, that there's still a $517 million deficit this year. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm going to take the next few minutes 

and I'm going to outline, Mr. Speaker, why this budget is a 

sham and in fact the deficit this year is bigger than 7 out of the 

last 10 years in Saskatchewan -- bigger, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And secondly, I'm going to point out that this whole 



May 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 377 

process is a betrayal, of deceit. And the pain that's being 

inflicted on Saskatchewan people, whether it's farmers or 

nurses or young people or seniors is absolutely unnecessary.  

And on top of that they're saying, you mean you did all this and 

still you have a $500 million deficit? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm going to point out in some detail that people 

are asking why they have to go through this pain and where 

was all this information that the NDP are using, in the last 

campaign. 

 

Now I can't say that these people were misleading the public; I 

can't use the L-word, Mr. Speaker.  But it's deceitful not to tell 

the truth.  You can betray the trust of people.  You could say, 

no more tax increases, and then you can increase taxes.  It's 

called falsehood.  It's called misrepresentation.  It is called 

being unfair.  And they do this time after time after time in this 

House on the back and on the name and on the history of 

Tommy Douglas.  This is what Tommy would have done. 

 

Well I'm going to point out, Mr. Speaker, that they have just 

increased the deficit by $517 million which, Mr. Speaker, is 

greater than the deficit was in '82 or '83 or '84 or '85 or '86 or 

'88 or '89 or 1990, Mr. Speaker.  And after all this pain we've 

got a bigger deficit than all those years.  Year after year after 

year they said no, that's not the right thing to do.  They'd have a 

fancier way or a better way to do it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want the public to know that after all these 

taxes -- and I'm going to go through them -- and all the lay-offs 

and all the pain and all the broken promises and nothing for 

farmers and no cost of production and the bigger tax increases 

so we're the largest taxed place in the country, that this year 

there's still a $517 million deficit.  They didn't get the job done 

at all. 

 

The deficit in 1982 was 227; in 1983 it was 331; in 1984 it was 

379; and in 1985 it was 584; in 1986 it was 1.235 billion; in '87 

it was 568; and in '88 it was 328; 377 in '89; and 358 in 1990.  

And they're higher than seven out of eight of those, Mr. 

Speaker.  And they said they're here to do the job. 

 

I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the last time this 

Minister of Finance had an opportunity to bring in a budget he 

said, and I quote: 

 

 I am pleased to say that we will balance the budget for the 

coming year as well -- another balanced budget, Mr. Speaker 

. . . 

 

This was in March 18, 1982. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, we go on and look at the results.  And 

this was shortly after that in July of 1982, economic and 

planning position of the province of Saskatchewan.  More 

recent Estimates indicate that if the March budget of '82 had 

been passed and implemented, the province would have 

experienced a combined deficit for '82-83 of close to $200 

million. 

 

This Minister of Finance has brought in two deficits, one in '82 

and one in '92, and the combined deficit of both of them is 

almost three quarters of a billion dollars.  And he's 

supposed to be in charge?  How can you sit here and say that 

this is the right thing to do when in the last two budgets that 

you've had anything to do with, you've accumulated 

three-quarters of a billion dollars in debt?  The deficit this year 

in the NDP's new budget, with all of these taxes, is $517 

million -- over a half a billion dollars. 

 

Now what does this remind you of, Mr. Speaker?  Any other 

jurisdiction come to mind?  Anybody else think that this might 

have been the case in any other jurisdiction, like perhaps Bob 

Rae's government?  What do you find with the new NDP 

administration in Ontario?  The very same thing -- increased 

taxes, increased fees, charge people more, lay them off, be 

miserable to every sector you can find, from the business 

community to farmers to everybody else, and on top of that 

bring in billions and billions and billions and billions of deficit. 

 

The NDP in Ontario is the laughing-stock politically of the 

entire country.  They're a one-term administration, Mr. 

Speaker.  Everybody in Ontario knows it and everybody in 

Saskatchewan knows it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- And, Mr. Speaker, do you know what?  This is 

a one-term wonder here, because in their first move, their very 

first move to help fix things they come in with over half a 

billion dollar deficit.  Well, Mr. Speaker, in 1990 our deficit 

was 365.  We forecasted and we even did better than that.  And 

last year it was 265.  And this year these people are $500 

million in the hole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want the public of Saskatchewan and the 

people across the country to know, here is another NDP 

administration that said, no I won't raise taxes; no I will not shy 

away from my responsibilities for seniors or for health care; I 

will take care of farmers, give them cost of production; I will 

help people on reserves; I will help people in education; I will 

make sure that rural municipalities are protected and their tax 

load goes down; and I will protect urban municipalities and 

create economic wealth and balance the budget. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they campaigned on that as if it was magic.  

And what we get today after the budget, Mr. Speaker, is a 

betrayal, is a falsehood, is deceit.  They've done exactly the 

opposite.  And what really bothers the nurse in Moose Jaw, Mr. 

Speaker, is while she's fired and her family hurts and she voted 

NDP, was that they still have a $500 million deficit on top of 

all of this. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan might have some 

time of day for the NDP administration if they said, all right, 

we're going to balance the budget.  We're going to be able to do 

this.  We're not going to run a deficit.  We have some fidelity 

and we're going to be there. 
 

But to listen to all this rhetoric on the back of Tommy Douglas 

-- fire people, hurt farmers, renege, cancel contracts, deceive 

them, and then have the biggest deficit we've seen seven out of 

the last eight years -- they say, we were fooled; we were 

misled.  The whole campaign, Mr. Speaker, the whole 

campaign was one of deceit. 



378 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, I've talked to people across the province who've 

been fired.  I've talked to farmers who've lost their farms; I've 

looked at 1,200 more foreclosure notices now.  We've talked to 

businesses that are leaving.  We've talked to families that can't 

take the 10 per cent income tax, 30 per cent increases in utility 

rates.  We've talked to people who are diabetic, that it's going 

to cost them hundreds and hundreds of dollars more.  We 

looked at the prescription drug plan that was sound and now is 

up to $380 deductible. 

 

And these people are all saying, why didn't they tell us what 

they really had in mind last fall?  Where was their courage?  

What kind of a cowardly outfit is this, come in with all of this 

stuff and still have a $500 million deficit? 

 

What people are asking me, Mr. Speaker, is simply this.  Do 

you think the NDP might just come up with their missing 

brochure -- the one they failed or didn't have the courage to 

present to the public last fall?  Where is it?  Where is the truth?  

Where are the facts?  Where is what they really intended to do? 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of the people across the 

province have built one.  They put together the missing 

brochure.  This is what should have been presented to the 

people last fall.  Because you know what, Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP wouldn't have been in power; they wouldn't have got 

elected.  And these people across here in this legislature know 

that their days are numbered as sure as we're standing here 

right now.  They couldn't get elected on what they've just done 

and on top of that add to the deficit. 

 

What's their raison dtre?  They're doing this on behalf of 

Tommy Douglas -- laying off these people?  Do you know 

what they're saying in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker?  They're 

saying, you know the difference between the NDP and Fair 

Share?  Do you know the difference?  With Fair Share you get 

to keep your job.  You at least get to keep your job and the 

families are protected and they're looked after. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- With the NDP, no.  The unions knocked doors, 

they campaigned, and what happened?  You fired them.  You 

cut the civil service by 400.  Mr. Speaker, I want to go through 

what some people are calling the missing brochure, what the 

NDP failed to have the courage to tell the public.  The NDP 

promised to do this. 

 

Now imagine, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP had put this in a 

brochure something like this, it's called: the New Democratic 

plan for 1991-92.  This is the plan: tax the sick, increase the 

prescription drug plan deductible from 125 and 150 to 375.  

Cancel the Saskatchewan Pension Plan and cancel the 

insurance plan associated with GRIP. 

 

So charge people for cancer visits, charge them for chiropractic 

services, raise their deductible.  When they go for eye 

examinations, charge them for that.  So that you've essentially 

got a hold and said we're going to tax the sick, we the NDP.  

And that's the first part of our platform. 

 

No. 2, we promise to raise utility rates up 30 per cent.  Can 

you imagine getting elected with that?  It's the old 

Saskatchewan family of Crown corporations.  They didn't like 

the idea that well, maybe we could have harmonization.  We'd 

have had a choice to go buy a hamburger and pay 7 cents. 

 

No, that was unfair.  I'll tell you what we'll do.  We'll make 

senior citizens and low incomers pay 30 per cent on the 

utilities.  And if you don't pay your telephone bill or pay your 

power bill, they yank it off and cut it out.  And they know 

about that. 

 

And they said in their brochure, to tell the truth, we're going to 

raise utilities on the poor because we don't want to give them a 

choice.  Farmers that are going broke?  We'll raise their 

utilities.  Senior citizens?  We'll raise your utilities. 

 

Cut the senior citizens' heritage program.  Well how do you 

like that?  Campaign and knock doors in Nutana or Saskatoon, 

anywhere, and say to the folks: we're just going to cut the 

senior citizens' support, raise your utilities, raise your taxes, cut 

the senior citizens' heritage program.  And for senior women, 

I'll tell you what we'll do, we'll just scrap the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan.  Why didn't you tell them? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm going to go through this list of the hidden 

brochure because the people of Saskatchewan are talking about 

it all over the province. 

 

Close schools and hospitals and stop needed projects.  Did they 

campaign on that?  Did you hear about that in towns and 

villages and places where these people were elected by default? 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, did they campaign on saying, well, 

we'll really raise taxes.  What we'll really do if we win in the 

NDP is we'll raise income tax by 10 per cent and we'll raise 

sales tax from 7 to 8 -- which is a 16 per cent increase -- and 

we'll raise fees and we'll raise capital tax and we'll raise 

gasoline tax.  And we will make sure that farmers pay more 

and rural municipalities pay more and SUMA pays more and 

everybody pays more.  That's part of our plan.  That's the 

brochure to vote NDP. 

 

You betrayed the people.  People in the country are calling this 

missing brochure sheer hypocrisy.  How can you sit there and 

say Tommy Douglas made you do it?  What kind of an outfit 

have we got in this legislature, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And the next thing they do is say well, I'll tell you, for tens of 

thousands of farmers that come out here to see the man from 

Riversdale, he would promise that he would gut GRIP and 

scrap it. 

 

Take the predictability away, take the forecast ability away, so 

bankers don't know how to deal with it, the public doesn't know 

how to deal with it, credit unions don't know how to deal with 

it, and farmers are without money and without the cost of 

production.  And no money from Ottawa.  How's that so far?  

That's the first five points on the real NDP brochure. 

 

These people, Mr. Speaker . . . it's really difficult to know 



May 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 379 

how honourable people could stand up and say this is what 

Tommy Douglas is all about.  This is what we would do for the 

people of Saskatchewan.  And on top of that, come in with a 

$517 million deficit.  You've been snookered by the 

bureaucrats.  You know better than that, every single one of 

you.  You have been run.  Every one of you that is a rookie in 

this legislature, you ought to go home and you want to ask 

yourself, who's running this outfit? 

 

And you know that I'm right.  Every single one of you think 

this is absolutely pathetic.  It is pathetic.  A huge, huge deficit 

and you're taxing people and cutting people and hurting 

farmers and hurting seniors.  All in the name of what?  A $500 

million deficit in a brochure you'd fail to come up with?  You 

wouldn't have even consciously thought about doing this if 

anybody had asked you in the last campaign. 

 

Six: You would have had in your brochure, we'll have nothing 

to do with an energy agreement with AECL (Atomic Energy of 

Canada Ltd.).  You would have told the truth and said, by 

George, we're just agin it.  And all those thousands and tens of 

thousands of jobs that people were waiting for, people in 

Saskatoon were saying, boy, we'd like to vote NDP because 

they'll deliver.  They'd say, well, I guess maybe I might not, 

because if they tell the truth they're going to cancel this.  And 

that would be in the brochure. 

 

And we can look at all the energy options, look at the 

environmental concerns and examine everything else, but you 

would have to tell them, stop doing that. 

 

Seven:  In the real brochure the NDP forgot to put out, they 

would say, we'd stop money coming from Ottawa.  We 

wouldn't harmonize, we wouldn't get money for energy, and we 

wouldn't get money from agriculture.  We'll get them so angry 

in Ottawa, we'll just fight with them so much, that they won't 

put another dime into this province. 

 

And isn't that the fact?  And they're so proud of it.  They can 

stand here with their feathers all ruffled and say, those boys in 

Ottawa, aren't they awful?  And do you know what?  You 

missed $200 million here, you missed $400 million there.  You 

don't get another $200 million in GRIP, you don't get 

agriculture payments, and if you're going to do co-generation 

you're not going to get the money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can you imagine people in your riding reading the 

real brochure of what the NDP would do and then go on to say, 

we would stop all share and bond offerings?  Do you 

remember, Mr. Speaker, the NDP walked out for 19 days 

because we're going to offer shares in SaskEnergy?  Imagine 

that sinful thing.  We were going to let the people invest in 

SaskEnergy.  Imagine that.  Wasn't that just awful? 

 

And the NDP opposition went out in a tirade and said, oh, this 

is terrible.  It was $200 million for the coffers of Saskatchewan 

so you could have a natural gas plan and a rural distribution 

system for people.  And these folks . . . when communist China 

is opening up to share offerings, the NDP in Saskatchewan 

shuts them down.  Can you 

believe that? 

 

And they'd have to put that in their brochure: we're really 

against share offerings because the public shouldn't be allowed 

to invest in a country like Canada. 

 

No. 8 -- no. 9, pardon me -- we'll just make sure that all the 

construction contracts that we have, Mr. Speaker, in this 

brochure will go to union only.  Did you hear about that during 

the campaign?  Well, the Attorney General just announced it 

after he was elected.  He said, well everything in Saskatchewan 

will be union only.  Now that should have been in the brochure 

so the business community and farmers and seniors would 

know about it. 

 

No. 10, Mr. Speaker, what they would really say is: we will so 

use special warrants.  Do you remember how they criticized us 

for special warrants?  They said you should never do it, it's 

immoral.  The legal people say don't do special warrants, it 

doesn't work.  Well they'd have to put in their brochure, Mr. 

Speaker, that special warrants is something that they would do 

time and time again. 

 

The hypocrisy; $360 million in special warrants and they said 

never do it.  Vote NDP and it'll never happen.  What a bunch.  

They do this in the name of Tommy Douglas?  If Tommy 

Douglas says I won't use special warrants, Tommy Douglas 

wouldn't use special warrants.  If Tommy Douglas says I'm not 

going to tax the sick, he wouldn't tax the sick.  If Tommy 

Douglas says I'll give you the cost of production, he'd give you 

the cost of production.  If Tommy Douglas said, I'd balance the 

budget, he'd balance the budget. 

 

These people sit in the legislature and they laugh and they seem 

to revel in this betrayal of the public trust.  Because this 

brochure that I'm going through here, the unpublished, real 

NDP brochure, is all over Saskatchewan, and believe me, I'm 

going to make sure it's all over Saskatchewan. 

 

No. 12, there will be no help for rural and urban municipalities.  

They will cut their share of revenue by up to 30 per cent and 

cancel the rural gas distribution program.  Now wasn't that a 

nice thing to put in a brochure. 

 

No. 13 -- and this is a good one, this is a good one, Mr. 

Speaker.  No. 13, they'd have to say they will practise all kinds 

of patronage -- all kinds of patronage.  They'd have to put it in 

their brochure.  It says: the NDP will have patronage 

appointments over and over and over and over.  And even in 

the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, we will put, if we're elected, at 

least 500 patronage positions have been filled. 

 

Now do you think the folks would have voted for you if you'd 

put that in a brochure?  Mr. Speaker, they said . . . they'd have 

to say finally that they would fire 400 civil servants, and put 

that in a brochure.  Now how would you like to knock doors in 

Regina South or in Saskatoon or in Moose Jaw or Estevan or 

Weyburn and said: what we're really going to do is fire 400 

people. 

 

And the last point, Mr. Speaker, in the brochure they'd say: 

after we did all of this -- and they'd list them all in the 



380 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1992 

brochure -- after we did all of these things the final result will 

be a $517 million deficit in our first budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they can laugh and they don't want to pay 

attention, and they can go out and see constituents.  I think that 

they should go visit the nurses today and see how they're 

laughing.  Go talk to real people.  Go talk to diabetics and 

seniors and farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the real people are going to remember what these 

folks said and what they campaigned on the door.  They'll 

remember that they have taxed them like they've never seen 

taxes before, and on top of that now have a bigger deficit than 

we've seen before.  And in the last two deficits of that Minister 

of Finance, he's got three-quarters of a billion dollars chalked 

up already.  And he's put people through such pain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this administration, this brand-new 

administration, didn't have the courage to tell the people what 

they'd really do.  And now when they are in power they're 

doing exactly what they said they wouldn't do.  And the people 

of Saskatchewan will never, ever, ever forget that kind of 

falsehood, that kind of deceit, and that kind of 

misrepresentation, that kind of hypocrisy.  And the really 

difficult part for the public is they stand in here one at a time 

and said: and that's the way Tommy Douglas would have done 

it for the people. 

 

(1630) 

 

Well, a lot of us had family that knew Tommy Douglas.  And a 

lot of us even met Tommy Douglas and talked with him and 

worked with him and visited with him; gave him awards and 

recognized him.  He wouldn't . . . Mr. Speaker, he would be so 

ashamed of what we see here in this legislature in this budget -- 

absolutely ashamed of what these people are doing. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- He'd be very proud.  We're cleaning up 

your mess. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- The member from Regina Elphinstone chirps 

from his seat, Mr. Speaker, and he says Tommy Douglas would 

be proud of this.  Can you believe that?  Proud of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Tommy Douglas would be proud of a $517 

million deficit.  Your first shot at it is a half a billion dollars in 

the hole.  Can you imagine that?  And you're here to clean it 

up?  You're here to clean it up. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I go back and look at the budget 

address -- I go back and look at the budget address.  And the 

falsehood and the deceit in the first pages of this document are 

enough to make people crawl away from politics and 

politicians. 

 

They didn't have any thought at all, Mr. Speaker, of being 

honest with the public and saying:  you know, we could 

implement some of these policies so that in fact we can meet 

the targets.  And they didn't do it at all.  They backed off and 

they hid.  They loaded up everything they could think of, Mr. 

Speaker, and packed it up and loaded it up 

and then they came in with this hollow document -- the hollow 

document that people said didn't make any sense at all.  And on 

top of that end up with hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of 

millions of dollars in debt.  And they're there to fix it. 

 

I point out one more time, Mr. Speaker -- because some of the 

members of the legislature on the other side of the floor here 

have just come in to listen to it, because they hadn't heard it 

before -- the deficit this year is $517 million, forecasted.  The 

NDP administration has a deficit this year of $517 million. 

 

The last time the Minister of Finance put out a deficit in 1982, 

it was over $200 million in deficit, 200 million.  So his last two 

deficits are $700 million plus.  And they think they're here to 

fix it.  And his $500 million deficit is bigger than every deficit 

that we encountered from '82 to '85, right up from '88 to 1991.  

And they think that they have a plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment to talk about the fact that 

these people had choices.  These people had choices.  They 

could have treated people with respect.  The lady that I talked 

to today in Moose Jaw also mentioned the fact that some of her 

friends had participated in the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  

And if you look at the headlines in the papers, you'll find, Mr. 

Speaker, that the public is appalled at what the NDP in the 

name of Tommy Douglas, have done to the Pension Plan. 

 

Killing pension is a backward step, it says.  Women are the 

losers with the NDP killing the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  

Forty-four thousand women have lost the right to retire in 

economic dignity with some independence. 

 

The Minister of Health, who's the minister responsible for 

women, has to look at those women in the eye day after day 

after day and say, well really we had to have a $500 million 

deficit and raise all these taxes.  But what I really got to tell 

you is, while the very, very, very, very wealthy get free health 

care, I have to take your pension if you're a single parent, if 

you're a house-maker on a farm, if you're a senior citizen that 

doesn't have any money.  Forty-four thousand women in this 

province have lost the right, the democratic right, to retire in 

economic dignity.  And they just pulled it out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can you listen to those people chirp on the other 

side when they finally, finally realize that what they've done is 

absolutely wrong and deceitful and unfair to women, to 

farmers.  Mr. Speaker, isn't it interesting that they can't stand 

the heat when the truth comes out? 

 

They didn't tell the rest of their rookie MLAs.  They didn't tell 

them, Mr. Speaker.  The bureaucracy is running . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . You bet I enjoy this; you bet I enjoy telling the 

truth to the people of Saskatchewan.  It's a cinch that you 

didn't.  You didn't, and you didn't have the courage to tell the 

truth. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  Let the member have 

his say in the legislature. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I point out to the hon. 

members: 44,000 Saskatchewan women who 



May 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 381 

counted on a pension at retirement have lost it.  And you can't 

find anybody who sticks up for the NDP on that policy move.  

Why would they pick on the poor?  That's the reason you're 

CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation); that's the 

reason you're NDP.  Help farmers; help low income; help 

people with health problems; help people on social services; 

help people who are working in the public sector as nurses. 

 

Why do you pick on them?  Why do you let these bureaucrats 

and two or three cabinet ministers run your whole outfit?  The 

people of Saskatchewan can't believe what you're doing. 

 

I'm telling you, I've been in this House and in politics long 

enough to tell you you've made a serious, serious political 

mistake, when 44,000 women are going to come one by one, 

ten by ten, and by the hundreds to this legislature and say, 

where is the heart and soul of the CCF gone?  That's what 

they're going to say.  You betrayed us; you let us down.  We 

pay high taxes, our drug bills have gone up, you charge us for 

cancer research or even visits, and farmers have been betrayed.  

They've lost fortunes -- hundreds of millions of dollars. 

 

And these people, from the roots of the CCF with supposedly 

compassion, are responsible for this. 

 

Well do you know what, Mr. Speaker?  This little flag here I 

have on my lapel, it says: Don't blame me; I didn't vote NDP. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member, if he is not aware, 

is not allowed to refer to anything that another member or he 

himself is wearing, and I would ask him to refrain from doing 

so. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all over Saskatchewan we saw the sticker in the 

last campaign about the PST (provincial sales tax).  The NDP 

wore a button called: I'm PST.  Okay?  And now people are 

saying, do you know what?  That sales tax, provincial sales tax, 

has been increased by the NDP -- increased.  And they said 

they wouldn't do that.  They said they'd never do that.  But they 

increased it 16 per cent from seven to eight.  And then on top 

of that they had income tax, and on top of that gas tax.  And 

they said that button was so hollow, such a sham, so deceitful, 

so dishonest. 

 

They're calling it the big L-word, Mr. Speaker.  Out there all 

over, they said, uh, uh, they don't tell the truth.  They're going 

to see bumper stickers that say, they're deceitful; it's false; don't 

listen to them again.  Why would anybody ever listen to them 

again about a campaign platform or a promise?  Why?  You 

couldn't dare. 

 

Because I can find farmers and nurses and business people and 

seniors and public employees who say, I voted NDP; I thought 

they were going to stick up for me.  And they betrayed them.  

Forty-four thousand seniors and women of all descriptions, low 

income people particularly, have lost their pension plan, and 

there is no one defending you. No one.  And rightfully so. 

And 50,000 farmers have lost their ability to take their 

contracts for insurance to the bank to protect their farm.  And 

do you know what happened, Mr. Speaker?  You'd be aware of 

this.  Farmers looked at GRIP in 1990-91, '91-92, and they 

said, I can forecast my income and I can take that forecast for 

the next four years and I can rent some land, I can buy a 

combine, I can do some things.  And that's what they did.  They 

went out on the basis of that national and provincial program 

and they made big investments, and they made contracts with 

their neighbours, and they bought some farms, and they rented 

some equipment. 

 

And then along comes the NDP, which they campaigned and 

said, we'll make GRIP even better. We'll give you the cost of 

production. We'll make it even better for you, and we'll get 

more money from Ottawa.  Well that was what they 

campaigned on.  And then the truth is, Mr. Speaker, they gutted 

it.  And the farmers have hung the Minister of Agriculture in 

effigy outside this legislature.  And they come out by the 

thousands now and say, you didn't tell the truth.  And the 

Minister of Agriculture says, but we deem it to be okay.  And 

he's thinking about passing legislation here retroactively to say, 

well we really just did it before March 15. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, can you imagine?  These people have lost 

their right to take that contract to the bank.  How do they get 

back in their contracts, their legal contracts, with their 

neighbours, with the farm machinery dealer, for others?  

Because they went to the bank on the basis of crop insurance.  

And you've changed it.  And you didn't tell them about it, let 

alone campaign about it. 

 

You just now say, well I deemed to have done it.  It's 

retroactively okay.  It's one thing to retroactively fire people in 

the public service because you think they're Tories -- and you 

say patronage doesn't matter to you -- but to retroactively 

change 40 or 50,000 contracts is not going to happen, Mr. 

Speaker, because the people of this province won't let it 

happen.  That is shameful.  Retroactive legislation for 40,000 

farm families, 44,000 women who've lost their pension. 

 

I just say again, Mr. Speaker, I say to the rookie MLAs that are 

here that hadn't heard it before:  you were deceived.  You had 

campaign managers knocking doors for you and you had 

candidates knocking doors for you.  And do you know what?  

You were not told the truth.  And they went around and around 

and they said, vote NDP and you'll get heart and compassion 

and fairness and openness and honesty.  And do you know 

what we got?  We got farmers going broke, and they don't care. 

 

And do you know what?  We ask questions in the legislature, 

Mr. Speaker.  And as soon as we ask the question they get up 

and they go the bravado.  Well, well, well, there's a deficit, so 

we have to be evil and miserable, and we have to cut, and we 

have to do this because there's a deficit.  Well what a lame 

duck excuse, because they've got a bigger deficit in the last 

three years -- $517 million deficit this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I welcome the Minister of Agriculture in from 

Rosetown. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I think the member knows full 



382 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1992 

well that that's not acceptable to refer to the presence or the 

absence of a member in the legislature.  I ask him to refrain. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, it's always a pleasure to be in the 

company of the Minister of Agriculture, and I recognize your 

ruling. 

 

I would say to the Minister of Agriculture, tell the farmers that 

have made contracts and bought machinery and settled with 

banks and settled with the credit union and have tried to get 

themselves in order financially, despite his freeze during a time 

when there's been 1,200 foreclosure notices, the Minister of 

Agriculture, he should go to them and say, I'm here to help. 

 

But he doesn't do that.  He says, I'm here to hurt you because 

there's going to be a deficit this year.  In fact the NDP has $517 

million deficit so I'm here to hurt you even more because the 

NDP deficit's bigger than last year's deficit, bigger than the 

year before's deficit, and seven of the last nine deficits.  Isn't 

that one heck of an excuse to put pain on farmers? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget will be the absolute ruin politically, 

let alone economically, of the NDP whole philosophy in their 

heart and their soul and their raison d'tre.  They don't even 

remember what the CCF was all about.  If they can let two or 

three cabinet ministers and the bureaucracy stick it to them like 

this and run . . . Your caucus meetings must be something 

absolutely marvellous, eh?  You all sit there on your hands and 

say, oh well it's okay.  Just tax and tax and cut and hurt and tax 

and tax and cut and it'll be fine. 

 

And they laugh.  They laugh at the pain, Mr. Speaker.  Watch 

them.  It's too bad the cameras couldn't look at them laughing 

at the pain of 44,000 women who've lost their pension; 

laughing at the pain in agriculture; laughing at the pain of 400 

civil servants who've been fired.  What about their families?  

What about their families? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP must have some really, really 

fascinating caucus meetings if they're going to go through this 

and say, oh we're really doing the right thing.  This is really 

right on the money.  Boy, I'm proud to be a CCFer doing this 

stuff. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Speaker, gas tax for farmers, prorated to the size of your 

farm, like the old land bank days.  Money up front.  Then it's 

capped.  Everybody says, well we've got to limit farm size, in 

the NDP.  Just as long as it's only one-quarter section smaller 

than the Minister of Agriculture's we'll be all right.  The old 

socialist trick.  Well we got it here in gas tax, prorated to the 

size of your farm.  How do you like that?  And you're going to 

try to compete with Americans and Germans and Australians 

world-wide? 

 

Livestock cash advance.  What happened to it?  What happened 

to the FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment program)?  What 

happened to the livestock industry? 

 

Oh well, I got to tell you, this year the NDP will have a 

$500 million deficit; therefore we'll just make you 

uncompetitive.  We won't compete with Alberta.  Well if you're 

going to have a $500 million deficit, compete with somebody. 

 

What positive thing can you say over the budget of 1990?  

1990 we had a $365 million deficit.  You're in this year with a 

$500 million deficit and cut the heart and soul out of 

agriculture, let alone oil patch, industry, uranium, nuclear, all 

of that. 

 

The FeedGAP.  We're going to see the livestock industry and 

packing plants . . . And they're trying to do well -- Moose Jaw, 

Saskatoon.  Ten per cent income tax increase and then cut the 

heart and soul out of them in an international market. 

 

And then on top of that, if you look at farmers they're going to 

pay more for insurance, their crop insurance, the GRIP goes 

way up and the coverage goes way down.  And isn't it going to 

be fun?  And then you talk to those that designed it.  They said, 

well you're right; that's the case.  And do you know what they 

say?  Well it's going to be market responsive and we're going to 

reduce the moral hazard. 

 

Do you know what moral hazards are going on out there when 

people are going broke and they're losing their farms?  Can you 

imagine the pain and the suffering with no security when you 

had it before?  You have no idea what moral hazard is. 

 

And those that designed it, whether it's Professor Furtan and 

others, will tell me the moral hazard is there with any 

government program and it's not eliminated with these changes.  

And the real moral hazard, these people are worse off under the 

NDP and they're broke, and they need help and they're going to 

do what they have to do to survive. 

 

You want to see moral hazard.  I'll tell you, the NFU (National 

Farmers Union) isn't proud of you guys.  And the NFU 

supported the CCF.  The NFU thinks you are hypocrites, fools. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Where's the cost of production? 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Where's the compassion, let alone the cost of 

production?  Where's the understanding?  Why do you let these 

bureaucrats tell you that you have to wreck everything? 

 

SaskPower rates are up; SaskTel rates up; gas rates are up; 

school taxes are up; RM (rural municipality) taxes are up; lease 

fees are up; breeding fees in community pastures are up.  All of 

these things because you're there to help them? 

 

It's unbelievable, Mr. Speaker, what these people have got 

themselves into.  When if they'd have even dared campaign in 

front of thousands of people in the Agridome and say this is 

what we're really going to do, they'd have just backhanded you, 

Mr. Minister of Agriculture, right out the door, just like they 

did here a couple of months ago.  And you know it. 



May 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 383 

Where's your integrity?  Where's your idea of how you're going 

to make it work?  And you can't say, Mr. Minister, but the 

federal government has to have all the solutions.  The federal 

government has put more money into the province of 

Saskatchewan in the last few years than in the history of the 

province.  And you know that. 

 

Transfer payments are up.  Money is up; $13 billion we 

brought into the province of Saskatchewan just for agriculture 

alone.  And now they say, well I guess there's no need for more 

help because the Government of Saskatchewan has cut all help 

for farmers.  What kind of a signal is that?  Oh, we don't stick 

up for our farmers; we won't let them compete with Alberta. 

 

It's sinful to have a moral hazard in a government program.  

You don't think there's moral hazards in government programs 

or government, period, under NDP with patronage and the cuts, 

verbal agreements.  Verbal agreements aren't worth the paper 

they're written on, and every lawyer knows that.  What a 

lamed-up excuse for that kind of activity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to just . . . I want to summarize.  The 

Minister of Finance might think he's fooled his caucus 

members.  He might.  Because he can say on the first page of 

the budget that the deficit last year would be 265, but that's not 

true. 

 

And he maybe can fool them for a while.  But the public knows 

that we were even under our target the year before.  And you 

add harmonization to that, Mr. Speaker, and you know you've 

got a couple of hundred million dollars.  But he didn't 

implement that.  He said, I'll just stack this way up.  And then 

he says, well I'll take . . . I'll tell you what I'll do, I'll add on 

some high, high values for losses in privatization because we'll 

put in a book value of something.  And then the market value 

will be something else. 

 

And I just want to spend one little minute on this for anybody 

that cares to listen because . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No permanent impairment. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Exactly.  Anybody that cares to listen.  If you 

take something that you have bought or created and you put it 

on the market-place, you can imagine what the NDP will do.  

They'll say, well if the stock price goes up, you sold it too 

cheap.  If the stock price goes down, you didn't know what you 

were doing.  You can't win with the NDP because they don't 

believe in public investment.  And if you put it on the market 

and it goes up, then all of your shares go up and there is no 

permanent cost, no permanent impairment of putting those 

shares on the market. 

 

And when you look at Saskoil go up, you look at potash go up, 

you look at Cameco go up, those shares as they go up increase 

the value that the government owns in the shares.  So don't be 

fooled by this book value stuff -- and particularly if it was put 

in in the wrong value.  Because I've seen you guys complain 

every way.  If it goes up, it's wrong; if it goes down, you're 

wrong.  Do you want to breathe in or breathe out? 

It's a little bit like trade.  You didn't know.  You were just 

against it. You're just against it. 

 

That's the motto. I'm against public investment.  I'm against 

private enterprise.  I'm against farmers.  I'm against pension 

legislation.  I'm against people who want to have some 

entrepreneurial spirit.  So the Minister of Finance stacked all 

that up, didn't implement harmonization.  He said, oh, oh, last 

year there was a deficit. 

 

Now the real sin in this, Mr. Speaker, the real sin is simply this: 

when the Minister of Finance falsifies that debt in one year, 

adds all these things that he can stack up, doesn't implement the 

harmonization, the rating institutions say, oh, oh.  Oh, oh, what 

has he done here?  He's increased the debt this year therefore 

we're going to have to drop his credit rating and up go the 

interest rates that people have to pay in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And every government official across Canada knows that that's 

exactly what this man did.  And he didn't care because he was 

so driven politically it didn't bother him at all if the people of 

Saskatchewan had to pay higher interest rates. 

 

And that is the absolute truth because he could've met the target 

of 265 if he wanted to.  But he did nothing.  He did worse than 

nothing -- he even cost the province more because he just 

stacked it up.  Then he comes in this year with a $500 million 

deficit plus all these taxes and the credit rating's lower than it's 

ever been -- all for political purposes.  And the irony of this -- 

the irony of it for anybody that's been in politics for any 

particular time -- is that they did this on the soul and the heart 

and the memory and the history of Tommy Douglas. 

 

That is just sad, to say the least, for anybody that has any 

genuine respect for the man that was premier in this province 

for 15 to 20 years.  To say we're doing this because Tommy 

would have did it, he would have done it just like that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in democracy we know that truth is extremely 

important.  Not that large a percentage of people around the 

world live with the freedom of democracy.  Truth is important.  

To not be truthful in a campaign or in this legislature is serious, 

serious business -- to give false information.  I looked up the 

big L-word in the dictionary, Mr. Speaker.  I can't say it in . . . 

well I guess I could say the word, the word lie.  I'm not calling 

anybody that, but the word lie. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I think the member knows . . . I have 

listened very carefully and on a number of occasions I think I 

could have called the member, and I let it go.  To say that 

somebody falsifies in this legislature is getting very close.  And 

to call people fools in this legislature is very close to being 

unparliamentary.  And I think the Leader of the Opposition . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I'll throw somebody else out if he 

keeps on interrupting. 

 

I think the member knows that you cannot do indirectly what 

you can't do directly.  And therefore you can't use the word lie 

here even indirectly.  And I think the member, if he doesn't 

know it, I'm sure he'll abide by that ruling. 



384 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1992 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I understand 

completely.  I can't use the word, but I'm trying to find, in 

expressing the frustration of the public, what in the world went 

on last fall and what's happened now.  And they're saying 

things like: I didn't think they would do this.  It's not . . . it's 

false information.  They feel like they've been deceived -- 

cheated.  They think it's offensive that nobody told them this 

was what was going to happen.  They find it disgusting.  They 

think that it's . . . some say it's sinful.  It's painful.  To say the 

least, it's painful to go through what the public is going through 

today having believed in the CCF and the NDP.  It's miserable, 

the misery is there. 

 

And to see it happening over and over and over again with 

people in every walk of life -- I can't think of a group they've 

left out.  People call it treason.  People feel: I feel like I've been 

betrayed.  Now I can maybe not use those words, but I'll tell 

you, you go to people who were laid off today or you go to 

people who were hurt or you go to people who have lost their 

pension, and it's a break of faith.  It's pitiful, pathetic, weak, 

cowardly.  And you could go on. 

 

You find the words to justify to your wife and your family 

when you go home at night and say: is this why you got 

elected?  Is this what it's about?  So you could have a $500 

million deficit this year and cause all this pain?  And you'll say 

to your husband or you say to your wife: oh, yeah, that's the 

plan, and that's why we had to fire these people and cancel the 

pension plan and charge them more for health and hurt farmers 

and scare out business and raise income tax.  We had to do this 

because it's really the right thing. 

 

And your wife or your husband will say: but why didn't you tell 

the public that?  Why didn't you tell them that you were going 

to do things like that?  And you'll say:  well, they said there 

was a $265 million deficit.  Your wife would say:  did you 

believe that deficit?  And you'd probably say:  well, no, 

probably it was higher.  Well she'd say:  well how could you 

then promise to take the taxes off?  How can you sit across the 

table?  You've deceived them. 

 

We've had plebiscites in this province where people spoke up 

in democracy, and that's very important -- democracy.  And 

your wife would say, didn't the people speak to us and say, I 

want a pro-life stance in this province?  Didn't they say that?  

And your wife would say, why don't you honour that?  And 

you say, well we don't believe in democracy; the people don't 

really count.  Is that what you say?  Is that how you get away 

with it? 

 

And people will say, I want to see balanced budget legislation.  

And they voted for that.  And you come in with a $500 million 

deficit.  And your wife or your husband would say, is that what 

you meant?  Why didn't you tell them? 

 

And people want to vote on the Constitution.  And the Premier 

of the province of Saskatchewan today said: well, Mr. Prime 

Minister, we don't have to vote on the Constitution.  

Democracy in Saskatchewan doesn't matter; we'll deem it to be 

democratic. 

Well you go tell your wife and your mom and your husband 

and your friends just how democratic the New Democratic 

Party is.  It's undemocratic as we've seen in the history of this 

country.  You've cancelled contracts retroactively; changed it 

for farmers. 

 

But the real thing is, you can't look at yourself in the mirror.  

And you shouldn't be able to look at your wife and your 

husband and your family and your sons and daughters and say, 

well really we were just going to do this but we didn't want to 

tell them because we wouldn't get elected.  And they say, is 

that what you're all about?  Is that it? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They know what happened. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well I'm telling them what happens.  The 

member chirps up.  She says, well you know what happened.  

You've got a $500 million deficit, that's what happened.  You're 

worse than previous administrations -- 500 million. 

 

You go tell them.  You go tell them, Mr. Speaker.  You go tell 

them.  You tell your families that you have deceived the public 

and you've treated them this way.  And actually it was the plan 

all the time.  And you got elected on the big L-word.  The big 

L-word got you elected. 

 

The Speaker: -- I think on that note, it being 5 o'clock, this 

House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 


