




















































Hansard: August 12, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2369 

 August 12, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 87 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 87 -- An Act 

respecting amendments to Certain Farm Income Insurance 

Legislation be now read a second time and the proposed 

amendment thereto moved by Mr. Devine and the proposed 

subamendment moved by Mr. Muirhead. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 

spend a little time on this subamendment, Mr. Speaker.  The 

way I read the subamendment, Mr. Speaker, it has to do with 

the possibility of the Minister of Agriculture and the 

Agriculture critic from our side getting together and trying to 

discuss this Bill and come up with a bit of a consensus.  It also, 

I think, Mr. Speaker, allows me to mention a few words about 

closure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the idea of the Agriculture minister and the critic 

from this side of the House getting together, I believe makes 

eminent sense.  Possibly had we done . . . went this route 

earlier on, Mr. Speaker, we wouldn't be in the position tonight 

of trying to convince the government to change their mind after 

they had more or less got their mind set. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have said before that I have never felt it too hard 

to admit to an error and then try to do something about it.  And 

I think in this case, Mr. Speaker, there has been a very grave 

error made in the process.  The error, I think, was made in the 

process, and in the process the use of closure was used in this 

Bill before the House. 

 

Possibly, Mr. Speaker, had the member from Morse and the 

Agriculture minister taken that little bit of a train trip that the 

member from Thunder Creek mentioned in a jocular manner, I 

would say they probably could've come back with a consensus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you, sir, and to the members 

opposite that that could be expanded to a committee of maybe 

four people even.  And the people that talk about this would be 

people who are knowledgeable about the subject.  The minister, 

of course, I think we have to agree is knowledgeable.  The 

member from Morse, Mr. Speaker, on a practical level I think 

is eminently qualified to take on a job like this. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, had that been done earlier, we wouldn't 

have had the unilaterally use of closure which in my opinion, 

Mr. Speaker, is unfair.  In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, it's unfair.  

And I know that my opinion is shared by many of the members 

opposite.  Because when you look back, Mr. Speaker, when 

closure was first used -- at least the first time I saw it used in 

my short career here in this building -- there was a lot of 

opposition to it.  And I think possibly we went into that with 

some misgivings ourself, from the government side of the 

House. 

So I'm sure that, Mr. Speaker, over there there are some 

misgivings about  what they perceived is the need to use 

closure.  I'm not going to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we, when 

we were government, didn't have some misgivings.  And when 

you look at the remarks made by people in 1989, the members 

opposite -- and I have to think that they were sincere -- they did 

not like the use of closure.  And, Mr. Speaker, I don't like the 

use of closure either because, Mr. Speaker, in the words of a 

member who was on the other side of the House at the time this 

took place, regardless of what other people may have said in 

this debate, regardless of the length of time other people have 

used in this debate, Mr. Speaker, I believe that as the member 

for Wilkie I have the right and should have the right to speak 

for my members.  Even, Mr. Speaker, even to the point where 

it may, in your opinion, sometime sound repetitious. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have, and I am sure every member has, had 

phone calls.  I've had phone calls, another one today, Mr. 

Speaker, from one of my constituents, and he's telling me, Mr. 

Speaker, that I am doing the right thing . . . (inaudible) . . . 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would not be doing my job if I was to do 

like the member from Saskatoon Broadview telling me that I 

should be quiet. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm being insulted from the other side of the 

House, and let me say to you, sir, I would rather be insulted 

than be ignored.  So do your best over there. 

 

I have no problem standing up here and speaking for my 

constituents, Mr. Speaker.  And when they talk about us not 

having the right to speak, that we should be quiet because in 

the election we were defeated, Mr. Speaker, I wonder would 

that have been the same attitude if that had been done after the 

1986 election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we sit on the government side of the House and 

listen to day after day after day of what we, at the time, 

considered stalling tactics, Mr. Speaker. And with respect to 

you, sir, I know that you were in the House at the time and you 

know very well what I'm talking about.  We did not shut the 

members up, Mr. Speaker.  I can show you and I can read to 

you quotes from the members, and I, as I said, Mr. Speaker, I 

have to believe, I have to believe that they were sincere when 

they made those remarks, just as I hope you will agree with me, 

sir, that I am sincere when I make the remarks I'm making 

tonight.  I don't feel I could sit in my seat and not have my day 

in the House to say what I think my constituents have been 

telling me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this subamendment where we are suggesting that 

the Agriculture minister and the Ag critic from this side get 

together, I think we brought that forward because the first 

amendment we brought forward, Mr. Speaker, was not well 

received on the other side because it was suggested that the 

House leaders . . . I can accept that argument.  I can accept the 

argument from the other side that possibly the House leaders 

were not the best choice.  And I don't say that in a derogatory 

manner, Mr. Speaker.  I say that because the House leaders, the 

House leaders have a job to keep the House moving, and in all 

fairness to them, Mr. Speaker, they do have times when they 

don't agree, maybe, and where their aims and goals 



2370 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

are different, whereas in this other proposal that we're making, 

where the Agriculture minister and the Ag critic should be both 

on a level plane because they both have the same, and I'm sure 

the same, hopes of reconciling this impasse that we're at.  And 

so I say that possibly, possibly this is the better choice, and 

again I want to say, not in any way being derogatory to the 

respective House leaders. 

 

The House leaders, I believe, would be qualified to talk about 

House procedure.  Fine.  We're talking about an agricultural 

problem here and it seems to me to make eminent sense to 

strike a committee, if you will.  Mr. Speaker, I could enlarge on 

that and suggest to you, sir, and to the members opposite: what 

would be wrong with that, those two people or four people 

doing exactly what we're doing with the commission? 

 

We have formed a committee.  There has been some money 

found to send those out listening to the folks.  We could have 

some meetings.  These people could go around and talk to the 

farmers, come back with a consensus.  It makes eminent sense 

to me, sir, to shelve this whole thing for one or two weeks, 

have those people go and get out together, talk about it, come 

back with a consensus.  I believe we this time should . . . I 

think the members opposite should maybe listen to this 

proposal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, I don't think the members opposite 

really agree with closure, no more than we do.  Mr. Speaker, 

who were the people, who were the people who were always 

saying, let's debate, let's debate.  Debate this; we'll debate that.  

Mr. Speaker, if there are a group of people who likes to debate, 

I say it's the socialists -- the socialists and the radicals, Mr. 

Speaker.  They always want to talk and talk and talk. 

 

And yet those are the same people who are today suggesting 

that we don't have that same right, that we would not have the 

right to debate, that we must keep quiet simply because we lost 

the last election. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if you was to use that logic then we 

wouldn't even have to come down here.  Then you would just 

have the government people sitting here.  They could do 

whatever they like.  And the people we represent by the 

unfortunate . . . in that case, unfortunate that they elected an 

opposition member. 

 

Well then I begin to wonder then, if you carry that to its logical 

conclusion, then where does democracy come in here?  The 

idea, the idea of a government and an opposition is to be sure 

that the minority is heard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out another thing that I think 

should be brought out, and that is the committee that brought 

the first Bill in was not unanimous.  The decision was not 

unanimous.  And we've had the Minister of Agriculture suggest 

that it was an all-party or an all-committee agreement.  Mr. 

Speaker, that's not so.  There was a minority report. 

 

And the people that were in the minority didn't want their 

names mentioned, but I would suggest to the minister and to all 

the members opposite, that person will have to be identified 

when this ultimately goes to the courts. 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture seems to want to 

refuse to meet with the opposition critic.  And if you want to 

think about it a little, on going back to the committee, why 

wouldn't it not have been logical to ask the member from 

Morse to sit on that committee.  Now regardless of whether the 

first Bill was good or bad, that member was part of the people 

that put it together.  He would be eminently qualified to talk 

about it, and indeed, Mr. Speaker, he might have been 

persuaded to change his mind about one or two things. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, after all of the problems we had, I 

believe we're on the right track with this subamendment.  I 

want to suggest if we were to talk about our right to speak, our 

right to stand in the House, Mr. Speaker, and I would suggest 

to you, sir, that if you was to take and compare the words that 

were spoken when we were in government on the last one or 

two controversial subjects that was on this floor of their House, 

how many words were spoken as how many words has been 

spoken now, I don't think that you'd find an 

over-preponderance of words on our side. 

 

(1915) 

 

I would suggest to you, sir, and to those over there who would 

like to have us be quiet, we haven't even started to qualify for 

the records of words spoken on a controversial subject. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you took the last five years and compared it to 

this session, each year, I think we would compare quite 

favourably.  I wonder, Mr. Speaker, where that idea would 

have gone when we were in government had we suggested that 

because you were defeated, no one had the right to speak.  Mr. 

Speaker, the member from Turtleford was saying something 

about a letter someone wrote and and that we should be just 

locked out.  Well that's a little bit . . . I hope the member had 

his tongue in his cheek when he said that, because I don't think 

he really believes that that's the way this House should run. 

 

I wonder what would happen if we'd have said something like 

that or tried to do something like that when we were in 

government, Mr. Speaker.  There's only one or two reasons that 

a person would make a statement like that, I think, and that is 

that either the NDP (New Democratic Party) would like 

absolute and complete control or that they know right now that 

they're on some very thin ice when it comes to the 

constitutionality of the Bill. 

 

Or maybe, maybe, Mr. Speaker, it's frustration breaking out 

because they maybe thought that they could slip this through 

without a fight.  Now, Mr. Speaker, I can relate to the last part, 

the frustration.  I sat over on the other side and listened to 13 

hours of not the most interesting kind of a debate so I know the 

frustrations build.  But I say to you, sir, and I say to those, had 

we gone to, had they listened to, some of the proposals we put 

forward, in all likelihood this could have been settled and we 

could have all been home enjoying what was left of the 

summer, and I sincerely believe that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to wonder out loud to the Minister of 

Agriculture, now maybe one of the things they could discuss if 

they had this committee or this meeting, 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2371 

Mr. Speaker, as the subamendment suggests, now what 

happens . . . now what happens to the contracts that are now 

null and void?  Maybe a couple of questions.  If those contracts 

are wiped out, they're null and void, are the premiums going to 

be refunded?  Or are the farmers going to have to pay back the 

payments that they've received under the . . . These things have 

to be talked about.  Because I think there's some very serious 

consequences here.  Those are the things, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe, a meeting of the minds, if you will, could accomplish. 

 

I want to quote a few of the members.  And, Mr. Speaker, I'm 

not going to try to pick and make anyone over there feel bad.  

But I do want to remind some of the members what they said 

when they were in the situation that we are in. 

 

The member from Prince Albert Carlton who, once in a while, 

when he feels he needs to speak, speaks, and I have to suggest, 

fairly well -- and here's what he said: 

 

 What can we say about closure, Mr. Speaker, and closure, or 

in this case it's a matter of closure on closure.  Sitting back 

and listening to a lot of the arguments that have been 

presented, and listening carefully and knowing very well that 

this is the first time that closure has ever been proposed in 

this legislature and ever used in the legislature, I can say that 

to me it smacks somewhat of totalitarianism. 

 

 (Now, Mr. Speaker) I feel that closure is somewhat of an 

affront to democracy.  (And) I think and I believe that it is the 

antithesis of democracy -- the exact opposite -- because what 

it does is it stifles debate as opposed to what the democratic 

principle is of encouraging debate. 

 

 If democracy, Mr. Speaker, if democracy implies making 

decisions that reflect the public good and the public mood, 

then this motion of closure is definitely an affront to it, 

because closure offends the democratic principle of free 

speech.  I find it very distasteful; I find it a bitter pill to 

swallow, because it doesn't solve an issue, it smothers it.   

And that's not democratic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe the member was sincere and I have to 

agree with the part where he says, ". . . it doesn't solve an issue 

. . ." 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could suggest to the members opposite if they 

was to go and look and find out the progress we have made in 

this House when we were not under the threat of closure and 

the progress that we have made after it was apparent to us that 

we were being throttled or jammed, I can say to you, sir, we 

have not saved any time by this method. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Herman, he looks like a Rolfes with hair. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, I . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- He looks like a Rolfes with hair. 

An Hon. Member: -- Oh, far more handsome. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Better looking. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Your wife must be awfully pretty to 

make up for that. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, I have to concur with some of the 

off-the-cuff remarks that are going around here, sir.  And I also 

say that with respect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to suggest . . . I'd like to read what 

another member has said.  Now this member . . . As a matter of 

fact, I think you and I have the same barber, Mr. Speaker.  We 

have the same kind of a hair-do.  And we go for the best.  I 

agree with that too. 

 

The member from Humboldt, who in the opposition side spoke 

most of the time on agricultural subjects, he was probably the 

only member over there, Mr. Speaker, that did have a grass 

roots feeling for agriculture.  Now I'm not going to stand here, 

Mr. Speaker, and pretend that the member from Humboldt 

always was in agreeance with myself or I with him.  But I have 

to, I have to accept the sincerity of the person, because when he 

was in opposition he took up the challenge on the closure issue.  

And here's what he said, and I quote him: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, we are in this debate because this government, I 

believe, is drunk with power. 

 

As well, he goes on to say: 

 

 They are so consumed with themselves, so consumed with 

their friends, and so consumed by the power that they wield, 

that they just refuse to allow the democratic process to work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder if we aren't in this same situation now, 

where the hon. member from Rosetown will not agree to at 

least discuss some of the suggestions we have made.  Mr. 

Speaker, I am not so naïve to suggest to you or anyone else, sir, 

that all of the suggestions that we have made should have been 

agreed with, but surely, surely when we have people on this 

side of the House that have spent their whole life in agriculture, 

surely they would have some reasonable input to a meeting of 

the minister and the member from Morse.  I think it would be 

ideal on one side, and I want to be careful how I say this 

because I don't want to seem to be casting any aspersions to 

other . . . 

 

Here we have, on this side, a member who has been in politics 

for some little while.  He knows the political side of the story.  

He's been all of his life in agriculture.  His agriculture is 

diversified.  He's in cattle; he's in dry-land farming; he's in 

irrigation.  And on the other hand, the Agriculture minister, as I 

understand it, was in hogs and dry-land farming.  And in 

conversation with the minister, Mr. Speaker, he's expressed to 

me . . . Mr. Speaker, he has expressed to me the difficulties that 

he has had farming.  He has been in land that is less than the 

best.  He explained to me that he inherited down through the 

family.  And he also expressed to me, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 



2372 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

Ms. Lorje: -- Because, Mr. Speaker, I'm finding it difficult to 

relate what the member opposite is saying to the 

subamendment at hand and I'm wondering if you could give a 

ruling on that. 

 

The Speaker: -- Well, the member is attempting to relate the 

farming experience of the minister to the subamendment and 

that because of all of his experience in farming that he would 

be an excellent person to start the negotiations with the 

member from Morse.  And I think I will find him in order. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I'm not surprised.  It's not surprising she 

wouldn't understand that. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 

ruling.  And indeed, indeed what I think what I was trying to 

suggest that they . . . not only is the experience there, as the 

member from Thunder Creek pointed out, there was something 

like 75 years of actual experience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's a vast area that they would be 

knowledgeable about.  And that is why I say, Mr. Speaker, I 

suggest that this subamendment is an excellent suggestion to 

the members. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to go on, Mr. Speaker, and quote 

again because I believe the member from Humboldt was 

sincere when he said these words in 1989.  He said: 

 

 They simply do not respond to democracy in a traditional 

way in this province because they are so drunk with the 

power that they hold. 

 

And he goes on to say: 

 

 It sets that arrogant attitude, and let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

I think the reason they're doing this is because every time 

they do it it becomes easier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I concur with the remarks made by the member 

from Humboldt in this particular case, because as we saw, we 

are guilty when we were government, of bringing in closure.  

And to me that was the first time.  It may have happened 

before, but . . . And we are guilty of that. 

 

I suggest to you, sir, and to the others over there that it was a 

little different situation.  And I am prejudiced, I agree.  

However, as we saw in this session, we are only something in 

the day 60-some.  Mr. Speaker, we were 120 days before we 

invoked closure and, as the member from Humboldt says, and I 

quote him again: the next time it will be easier.  Well it is 

becoming easier and easier and easier as we go along. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every time the opposition gets frustrated a little 

bit, they bring in closure and I don't think that's what that 

option was there for.  I believe that option was there only if 

nothing else could be done.  The member from Humboldt is 

right when he says it can get easier and easier.  And that is 

again why I say the subamendment, where we are asking the 

government side of the House to 

consider a meeting of the member responsible for Agriculture 

and our critic . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest a committee like that out on the road 

today because the farmers are phoning in, particularly those 

farmers who are now in the drought area because the coverage 

is not that well.  They're getting very concerned.  They would 

be receptive, I believe, to meetings held by these people and we 

could certainly come back with a very concrete message from 

the Minister of Agriculture and the critic. 

 

(1930) 

 

The other thing I wanted to point out before I forget, Mr. 

Speaker, is -- and I want to point this out to the Minister of 

Agriculture -- is the position he's putting members of that 

committee that he talks about in, when they have said they 

don't want to be identified. If this continues the way it's going, 

Mr. Minister, I'm saying to you they will have to be identified.  

They will have to stand in court and be identified and they will 

have to, under oath, agree and admit what they told you, sir, 

when they first told you you were in trouble with this Bill.  

And I think you should think about that a little before you dig 

your heels in too deep.  Because you said, we'll get around it 

somehow. 

 

I think, Mr. Minister, in all fairness, you were only thinking of 

your own hide at the time and I don't think you really 

considered what you were doing to those people who worked 

with you and for you with sincerity.  And it said here, 

essentially he -- and it says Wiens -- don't seem concerned, said 

the committee member who asked not to be identified.  He 

thought we could get around that legal question.  He said he 

would get around it somehow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member is telling you that you have a legal 

question and you say you can get around a legal question.  Now 

that is putting that member in a very difficult position.  I look 

at an affidavit made by one Kramer who says in his affidavit 

the minister is going to go back and make retroactive 

legislation to make it legal. 

 

In the Bill, Mr. Speaker, there is no retroactive provision there 

to make it deem that the members got a letter.  The contract is 

null and void.  There is no contract, never was a contract. 

 

Somebody is on the hook here, Mr. Minister.  And in all 

fairness to you, sir, and to those people who helped you, I think 

you should think quite deeply before you allow this to go very 

much further. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to quote again from Hansard in 1989.  

This is from member from Churchill Downs and the member 

from Churchill Downs takes a prominent role in both as 

opposition and now in government.  I have to believe that when 

he said these words he meant them. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, I rise to take part in what I think is a historical 

debate, the first time closure has ever been invoked in this 

province.  And I sincerely hope it'll be the last time closure is 

ever invoked in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe the member probably believed 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2373 

that.  However, his actions today makes it a little difficult for 

me to believe that he really did believe that and even if I want 

to.  He goes on to say, 

 

 Mr. Speaker, it is undoubtedly another factor -- I wished it 

were not so -- undoubtedly another factor is simply the desire 

of members opposite to enjoy their summer. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we've heard some talk about people that 

didn't get holidays.  Mr. Speaker, is this why closure is being 

invoked time after time?  Just to go out and get holidays? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I went to the door of the people in the Wilke 

constituency and asked for a job.  When I asked for that job, 

Mr. Speaker, I didn't tell them I didn't want to work summers.  

I didn't tell them I didn't want to work at night.  I told them I 

wanted the job and I got the job. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have the member from Churchill Downs 

seems to be concerned about his holidays.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

as I have been looking the last few days over the benches on 

the other side, there must be quite a few of them having 

holidays because their attendance is certainly down.  And I 

want to go on to repeat, quote what the member from Churchill 

Downs also said: 

 

 They don't want to be here, Mr. Speaker, because they don't 

want to face the music. 

 

The member from Elrose-Rosetown said he's going to be here.  

I'll appreciate that.  I would also appreciate if you would take 

into consideration some of the suggestions we're making to 

you. 

 

 They don't want to be here, Mr. Speaker, because they don't 

want to face the music.  They don't want to admit and they 

don't want to be reminded that the public don't want this.  

They are acting contrary to public opinion and they're being 

arrogant, insensitive, and undemocratic. 

 

That's the quote.  Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you today the same 

thing is there.  They don't want to face the music because we 

are getting phone calls telling us that public opinion is not on 

their side.  This amendment may alleviate that a little bit.  If we 

could show the people out there that we are really and truly 

trying to reach an agreement on this subject, I'm sure that the 

people out in the countryside would agree with this, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to bring your attention to another couple of 

things.  I mentioned the fact that the committee member who 

did not want to be identified will eventually have to be 

identified if this process continues.  Some of the members told 

the member, the Agriculture minister, the government . . . They 

warned him about the deadline and were told it wasn't a 

problem.  Well, Mr. Speaker, again I go back to my question to 

the Agriculture minister. 

 

Now that the contracts have been declared null and void, 

closure has been invoked, there has never been a contract 

because it was null and void.  What's going to happen to the 

premiums?  Do they go back to the farmer now because you 

didn't have a contract?  And are the farmers 

going to have to refund all the money that they got under the 

program?  Because if we look at the unilateral use of closure to 

try and make this legal, then we find ourselves in a bit of a spot 

that I believe has to be reconciled.  And I believe a committee, 

a meeting of the Agriculture minister and our critic, or indeed, 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition who is well 

qualified also, to meet and reconcile some of these questions 

that are going to have to be, I believe, identified and resolved . . 

. The place to resolve that, I believe, is right here in the House.  

Those resolutions should be done right here, Mr. Speaker.  And 

I'm sure that we are prepared to listen to any other proposition 

from the . . . 

 

I want to quote a couple of things, Mr. Speaker, that indicates 

that we do have the public opinion on our side.  When I quoted 

from the minister from Churchill Downs, he suggested that you 

had to have the opinion of the people on your side.  And here's 

a letter from a Mr. Palmer, June 18, 1992.  And he said: 

 

 I think the farmers had a pretty good deal . . . and then (and 

he used the name of the Premier) Mr. Romanow turns around 

and tries to wreck it . . . I think Mr. Devine had every right to 

walk out. 

 

That indicates to me . . . and I have some others, and I'm not 

sure just how many of them you would allow me to use, Mr. 

Speaker, and I won't belabour it.  But I want to read another 

one.  It says: 

 

 Yes, I agree with them (the PCs).  Somebody's got to stop 

(this government), otherwise they'd pass laws and do 

whatever they want to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that points up the problem that we're having with 

the process that's being used.  When they use closure, on one 

hand, to stop us from talking; and on the other hand, when we 

make a proposal to the effect that we should get together and 

get a committee to take it out of the House and take it out of the 

confrontation that seems to be here, they won't listen to us 

either.  So I don't know.  It makes it a little difficult, Mr. 

Speaker, to understand and believe that those members were 

sincere. 

 

The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow had a very long 

speech about how he would stand on his integrity. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What do you say? 

 

Mr. Britton: -- What do I think?  What did I say?  I wasn't in 

the debate last time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh yes you 

can look it up, what I said. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We moved it to the Rules Committee; 

that's what we did. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- That's right.  Now I would wonder how your 

parishioners are going . . . how you're going to face your 

parishioners when you stand and vote for this after telling the 

people what your principles were. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What did you say? 
 

Mr. Britton: -- I'm not talking about what I said.  I'm talking 

about what you said.  I have no problem living up 



2374 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

to anything that I have said.  I want you . . . You just live up to 

what you said.  That's all I want you to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said again, I'm not so sure that I can really 

and truly believe that they were sincere in 1989.  Not at the 

time.  At the time they made those statements, I did believe 

they were sincere.  But now with the performance that's going 

on now, I have a little difficulty.  I have a little difficulty. 

 

Here's another quote if you think that we don't have the public 

opinion on our side:  They -- and it says the NDP government 

-- changed the program without doing it by the rules.  I signed 

a contract for four years and they changed the contract.  If I 

wanted to change the contract, I couldn't. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say: I'm just livid with anger.  

I can go on -- and I know that there are other people want to 

make some comments, Mr. Speaker -- but I find it very difficult 

to stand in my place, Mr. Speaker, and feel that there is any 

sincerity coming from that other side. 

 

When we heard those people stand up in their place and 

proudly say, I'm a socialist and I'm a radical . . . and they 

always wanted to talk and debate.  And those same people will 

turn around and tell me that I don't have the right to talk and I 

shouldn't talk.  I should be quiet.  Mr. Speaker, does that mean 

that if you're a free-enterpriser you don't have the right to 

speak, that only socialists have the right to speak? . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What did you say, though? 

 

Mr. Britton: -- What did I say on the debate?  You tell me 

what I said.  I can tell you what you said.  I'll tell you what you 

said.  You tell me what I said.  We took it to the Rules 

Committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I realize I've drifted away a bit and I apologize for 

that, sir. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, when is closure used unilaterally, I have 

to believe it was done unfairly.  When we used closure, Mr. 

Speaker, we did it with some misgivings.  And I'm sure that the 

first time that this was brought forward, there may have been 

some misgivings. 

 

However, I cannot believe that it was any sincerity in their 

remarks when closure comes and closure comes and closure 

comes and we're only 60 days into the session -- only 

60-some-odd days into the session, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That is not unusual circumstance.  If you look back into 1987 

and some of the other years, we put in many more years . . . 

many more, many more days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I've had my say and I think that some of my 

colleagues are interested in carrying on the debate.  And I 

thank you very much for your tolerance and your patience, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1945) 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to speak on this subject for a short 

while tonight as well. 

 

I want to refer to the motion that we are talking about, that Bill 

No. 87, An Act respecting amendments to Certain Farm 

Income Insurance Legislation be now read a second time and 

the proposed amendment by the Leader of the Opposition that 

says: 

 

 That all the words after the word "That" be deleted and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

 this Bill not be read a second time because the House leaders 

have not reached agreement on the principles involved and 

the process in which it has been brought forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and the proposed subamendment moved by the 

member from Arm River: 

 

 That the words "House leaders" be substituted for the words 

"the Minister of Agriculture and the opposition member 

responsible for Agriculture" and by deleting all the words 

after the words "principles involved" and the following 

substituted therefor: 

 

 because closure was used to unilaterally force introduction of 

this Bill in the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Before the member proceeds, the 

member may not be aware, maybe other members are not 

aware, that in the blues there is an error -- the word in the 

subamendment, because it changes the whole meaning:  "That 

the words "House leaders" be substituted 'with' the words . . ." 

 

Order.  I noticed there were some other members today didn't 

notice it either.  Order. 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Reading 

through the amendment and the subamendment, Mr. Speaker, 

it's very clear to me that the members opposite don't know what 

they're doing either.  I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I ask that the 

members get on with business and that we get to vote. 

 

I've been talking to farmers in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, 

and they clearly acknowledge that the federal Minister of 

Agriculture and the federal government are responsible and 

should be coming through with the third line of defence, and 

they're not after our provincial government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Mr. Speaker, yesterday we offered the 

members opposite two opportunities to speak on the GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) legislation, and they turned 

it down both times.  I would . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I do want to remind the member 

before he gets any further, he's not on the main motion.  He's 

on the subamendment.  And therefore the items in 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2375 

the subamendment are why the Minister of Agriculture and the 

opposition critic of Agriculture should be substituted for the 

House Leaders and the use of closure in this debate.  That is 

what the limitations of debate is in the subamendment. 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was trying to refer 

to the fact that closure . . . the motion about closure is what I 

was leading to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On that subject, the member opposite from Wilkie as well said 

about closure just a few minutes ago, that he had no difficulty 

living up to what he said.  And I refer back, Mr. Speaker, to 

Hansard, August 7, '89 where we were talking about closure 

with respect to the subamendment here. 

 

And he says that: 

 

 They keep telling us how bad it's going to be; we're going to 

lose the next election.  Fine, fine -- if we do, we will. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they did. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- And further, carrying on, it says: 

 

 And (also) I for one, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to support this 

(closure), because I believe it's right and it's fair and it's the 

thing to do, and I'll be supporting the motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who said that? 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- The member opposite from Wilkie said that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'll be very brief in closing.  And I just finish off, 

Mr. Speaker, by asking that we get on to business and argue 

that what we're dealing with here is not with the GRIP 

legislation; we're dealing with procedures.  And I urge all 

members to get on with business and get this legislation 

through. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

hesitated on purpose to get to my feet, Mr. Speaker, because I 

was hoping that more members from the government side 

would have the courage of the member from Turtleford and the 

member from Meadow Lake to get up to address this very, very 

serious topic that we have before us today. 

 

The members in this House, from time to time I think as 

debates have gone on, have been reminding each other of 

various things that we say.  And it's something like in the good 

book, I guess.  Here every word that we emit is recorded for 

posterity, and sometimes we are met with a situation, that -- 

golly, did I really say that? -- kind of thing. 

 

But in response to the member from Meadow Lake, Mr. 

Speaker, and I don't intend to take too much time in making my 

points, but in the next couple of hours I would like to bring 

forward some of the more salient issues that I think have to be 

dealt with in speaking to this subamendment. 

 

Now the member from Meadow Lake mentions the fact that 

yesterday they gave us the opportunity twice to get into the 

GRIP debate.  And I would agree with him that that was done 

at that time.  One must not forget that this is a House of debate.  

That is the essence of democracy and the essence of what this 

whole place is for.  And I think all of us have eloquently, from 

time to time, expressed our opinions on that. 

 

And in conclusion to that particular statement made by the 

member from Meadow Lake, I would also like to remind him 

that yesterday is what this legislature calls private members' 

day.  Private members' day, not government orders, not special 

orders by the government.  The government has four days of 

the week in which to do government business.  The fifth day 

has always been designated as private members' day, which 

essentially is the day for the opposition.  And I feel very 

comfortable talking about this topic, Mr. Speaker, simply 

because it was the member from Meadow Lake that made the 

comment.  And having made that comment, I have the right to 

respond to it for the member from . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order!  I think the member 

from Rosthern realizes that when the member from Meadow 

Lake started on that, I immediately called him out of order and 

that he was not on the subamendment.  And I had called the 

member out of order.  So that subject area is not within the 

purview of the subamendment. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The 

other member that had the courage to get up from the 

government side was the member from Turtleford.  And his 

greatest condemnation during his speech, short as it was, was 

the fact that the only reason, the only reason that we have the 

amendment and the subamendment before us today was to 

extend debate.  That was his criticism.  That was his 

chastisement of the opposition, that the only reason that we 

were coming up with this subamendment was to extend debate. 

 

Precisely, Mr. Speaker, I say, and I say to members opposite, 

precisely to extend debate for as long as necessary to try to 

convince you that what you're doing is not right.  Like I said 

before, that is the essence of debate -- so that we will have the 

opportunity to change your mind, if not the way a GRIP stands, 

then through the amendment that we have put forward and the 

subamendment which we are specifically addressing at this 

time. 

 

And for the member from Turtleford to suggest that the proper 

thing to do to get this legislature working is to boot us out, and 

that is what he said, boot the opposition out, in reference to the 

Star-Phoenix article, Mr. Speaker, is not what this 

subamendment is all about.  Because the subamendment is the 

debating that takes place here and us trying to put our best case 

forward as opposed to the stand that the government is taking.  

That's why we have the amendment and the subamendment 

before us. 



2376 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

Now, Mr. Speaker, so that the audience and the members 

opposite are . . . for those that perhaps that are looking in right 

now, the subamendment that we are dealing with in particular, 

that comes from the Hon. Minister of Agriculture's main 

motion that An Act respecting amendments to Certain Farm 

Income Insurance Legislation be now read a second time, we as 

the opposition are saying, no, it's not going to be read a second 

time and these are the reasons why. 

 

Now we're making the subamendment because we recognize 

now that our amendment which said that the House leaders, 

because they have not reached agreement on the principle, and 

the process in which it has been brought forward, we are now 

saying that on second thought . . .  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

go into that whole scenario of the House leaders and where we 

fit in and where we do not fit in.  And I take some issue with 

some of the comments made with my colleague . . . from my 

colleagues here on the role of the House leaders and so on, but 

I'll get into that momentarily. 

 

The proposed subamendment, "the proposed subamendment 

moved by Mr. Muirhead," and I'm quoting here, Mr. Speaker, 

from the blues: 

 

 That the words "House leaders" be substituted with the words 

"the Minister of Agriculture . . ." 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  Before the 

member . . . I don't want that to become a precedent.  Just 

because the names are in the blues, we still don't use those.  

You use the name of the constituency.  That's practice, has 

been practice for a long time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Of course, Mr. Speaker, and I have no 

problem with that.  I concur with your ruling.  I'm sorry. 

 

So the member from Arm River made this: 

 

 That the words "House Leaders" be substituted for the words 

"the Minister of Agriculture and the opposition member 

responsible for Agriculture" and by deleting all the words 

after the words "principles involved" and the following 

substituted therefor: 

 

 because closure was used to unilaterally force introduction of 

this Bill in the Assembly. 

 

Now there's a lot to that subamendment because it does 

basically two things.  It says, in retrospect, let's have another 

look at having the House leaders do the negotiating to get the 

system working because we feel that that has not been able to 

accomplish its objective, Mr. Speaker.  And I want to take 

some moments to show the Assembly what the House leaders 

actually did in trying to reach some kind of resolve of the issue 

that we find facing us this evening. 

 

And I want to take a few moments with that, then I want to go 

ahead and make the case why the Minister of Agriculture and 

our own person responsible for Agriculture should get together 

to resolve the issue.  And I think maybe the member from 

Thunder Creek took it 

perhaps a little bit . . . a step too far in suggesting that we use 

your hat, Mr. Speaker, pass it around and get these two folks on 

a train to B.C. (British Columbia) so they could hash out the . . 

. It's an interesting thought.  I don't know how practical, Mr. 

Speaker.  But we are trying and we are looking for innovative 

ways in which to accomplish our objective. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to get on with my other points that I'm going to be 

trying to make, is first of all the House leaders and the role that 

they have had.  We hear a lot of talk, Mr. Speaker, in the media 

and amongst ourselves about the negotiating process.  What 

was it really about?  Why did it not come to fruition? 

 

I have with me only a sample of negotiating procedures that 

Mr. House Leader for the government and myself did in terms 

of our written correspondence.  There was a lot here, Mr. 

Speaker.  I have correspondence dating from July 8, and then 

all the way to August 11.  I have left out some of the 

intervening material in between because of lack of relevancy 

but I want the viewers to get the gist of the kinds of things that 

we were trying to accomplish.  And certainly because in that 

intervening time some of the correspondence was dealing very 

heavily with other matters. 

 

The first letter that I have is a letter from myself that I wrote to 

the Government House Leader on July 8. 

 

(2000) 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I only have one letter of this nature but I 

have to set out the tenor of what we were working under and 

perhaps the duress that we were working under in trying, Mr. 

Speaker, to establish the situation where, as the subamendment 

mentions, closure has become necessary.  Closure has become 

necessary. 

 

Not only that, but as a subamendment also makes the point of 

unilateral rule changes, unilateral force by government 

members to force their way.  That's what this subamendment is 

talking about.  And I'm going to take some moments to, for the 

record, enter some of the correspondence.  And I say to the 

Government House Leader: 

 

 Further to our discussions last night, I would like to first 

outline to you my perception of the current process to now 

and then provide you with some options as agreed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we were looking at options at that time, how to 

get out of the process where we were zeroing in on a 

confrontational course where we would have to have closure 

being used.  Unilateral decisions made.  And I continue: 

 

 I cannot and do not hold the government responsible for the 

Speaker's unprecedented decision to order the Special Rules 

Committee to convene immediately and come to a hurried 

conclusion regarding bell-ringing rules. 

 

 However, I do submit that the failure of the committee to 

come to a consensus weighs heavily 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2377 

on the shoulders of government members. 

 

 Therefore, it is incumbent on us as House leaders to act to 

prevent the threatened precipitous action intervention by Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

 Any unilateral interference in favour of the government will 

only serve to bring the institution to the edge of chaos and 

further degrade our Assembly's public standing. 

 

That was a concern, Mr. Speaker, that I had at that time 

already.  And much of that, in subsequent events, have come to 

fruition. 

 

 As you know (I continue) from long experience, if there is 

not co-operation on all sides, after a time it no longer matters 

what the cause or who may be the blame-casters, it is the 

entire legislature that suffers. 

 

This is part of the letter that I wrote to the Government House 

Leader as long ago as July 8, where in anticipation of this 

scenario I was already making pleas that we come to some 

form of resolution. 

 

Now I continue on: 

 

 After receiving the Speaker's order I publicly stated that the 

opening position of the opposition would be to seek a 

six-month hoist (a six-month hoist). 

 

That simply means, Mr. Speaker, that we as a government then 

would say if an undesirable Bill comes forward that we cannot 

live with -- that the people cannot live with -- we will be asking 

the government to suspend or hoist or shelve that Bill for six 

months so that during that period of time, the government and 

the opposition can go out and find out really what the 

consensus of the people is on that particular piece of 

legislation, either through public hearings, preferably, or other 

means at our disposal. 

 

That is the proposition that I made, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if I can continue: 

 

 I publicly acknowledge that movement in these positions 

should be understood to be a given.  Yet the member from 

Prince Albert Northcote almost immediately introduced a 

motion to provide for a three-day hoist, a three-day hoist, not 

a six-month hoist.  There was no consideration by the 

government members of any other options.  We did try to 

explore the proposal for a public-hearing phase and we did 

discuss variations on the time of suspension.  But there was 

absolutely (absolutely) no response from government 

members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm still quoting from the letter that I sent to the 

government member trying to give a synopsis of the events that 

led to our conclusion, maybe, just maybe, government House 

leaders were not the proper people to deal from this because of 

the political perspective, as the member from Thunder Creek 

pointed out. 

At one point, the member from Prince Albert Northcote 

stated that the opposition had not initiated any moves for a 

compromise, thus clearly indicating that he was aware that 

his own three-day proposal was unreasonable.  I 

immediately put it to him that he should then indicate what 

he thought was a reasonable compromise -- 60 days, 45 

days, what? -- to which there was no response from any 

government member. 

 

 I have learned since you introduced the motion currently 

under debate that the member from Churchill Downs has 

indicated to certain members of the media that had the 

opposition simply proposed an amendment to increase the 

hoist from 3 to 60 days, that the government might well have 

agreed and that a resolution would have been had. 

 

Now I make that statement, Mr. Speaker, because that was 

what I was told in good faith by members of the media, that 

that is exactly what the member from Churchill Downs had 

said.  But subsequent to this in a future letter, we'll see how the 

government members have reacted to that.  I continue: 

 

 I suggest that the post-facto explanation is a bit artful and I 

do question the sincerity of those statements.  However, in 

accord with my promise to notify you of options before the 

House opens today and in a sincere attempt to stave off the 

precedent of unilateral rules of the House by the executive, I 

will therefore . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, on a point of order with 

respect to relevancy here.  I believe if the member wants to get 

off of this particular subamendment and debate something that 

happened in Rules Committee, we'd be quite willing to go 

ahead and vote this off at this time.  And otherwise, I would 

suggest that perhaps he might get his remarks more attuned to 

this very, very narrow motion . . . amendment . . . 

subamendment that his colleague asked us to debate.  If he 

wants to get on to something else, we're quite willing to vote 

this off immediately. 

 

The Speaker: -- Yes, what's your point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I don't have a point of order, but I would like 

to respond to the member's point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- If you have no point of order . . . 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I'm responding to his point of order.  I 

have the right to speak to a point of order, do I not? 

 

The Speaker: -- Not necessarily.  Speakers have from time to 

time said, no, he doesn't need any more.  I just want to make 

that clear.  That doesn't mean I'm not going to let you, but that's 

the Speaker's prerogative.  I just want to make that very clear.  

But I will let the member speak to it. 



2378 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I appreciate your indulgence, Mr. 

Speaker.  I would respond to the member.  If he has been 

listening carefully, I have been very, very precise about what 

I've been doing and why I am doing it. 

 

The subamendment says it shall not be the House leaders, it 

shall be the Minister of Agriculture and our member from the 

opposition dealing with agriculture.  Now how more precise 

can I be as to give explanation for people and to the Assembly 

why it should not be the House leaders? 

 

I have told you I am going to go through scenarios why the 

House leaders failed and I intend to do the same with why it 

should be those folks. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It is very difficult to separate those 

two.  I have been following the member very carefully, but I 

think the member is getting in too much detail.  I would 

suggest to the member that he would have a real good 

argument of relevancy if he was on the amendment. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's what I am on. 

 

The Speaker: --  No, we're on the subamendment.  We are on 

the subamendment.  Your words would be very relevant to the 

amendment, but not to the subamendment.  If the member goes 

into too much detail, he will be out of order on the 

subamendment. 

 

The subamendment simply says that the Minister of 

Agriculture and the opposition member should start 

negotiating.  That's what it says.  And the second part of it is 

that because closure was used unilaterally. 

 

Those are the two things:  arguing why it should be the 

Minister of Agriculture and the critic for Agriculture in 

opposition.  That's what the subamendment says.  And the 

second part of it is the closure.  So it's a very narrow 

subamendment. 

 

And I had ruled earlier today that to relate it briefly to the 

argument as to why it should not be the House leaders would 

be acceptable, but not in the detail I think that the member is 

going into at this time.  If he were speaking to the amendment, 

I think he would be in . . . certainly would be relevant and in 

order. 

 

However, I will allow the member to continue and I hope he 

takes into consideration what I have said. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you for that consideration. 

 

I have a number of letters here that I have sent to the 

Government House Leader and he has responded to me.  And 

that process is what I was trying to outline because I know that 

there's a lot of interest in this.  Why has this broken down?  The 

people are asking us; I'm sure the people are asking you, Mr. 

Speaker.  I don't want to involve you in the discussion here, but 

they're asking members of this legislature, why are we in the 

mess that we are in?  And what I'm trying to do here is lay it 

out. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate your ruling about not 

getting into detail.  But for a point of clarification, what if I just 

simply read the documents without  . . . I know also that you 

can't have an extended speech that quotes.  I was trying to 

avoid that by making comments as I went along.  But if it 

facilitates the matter, I'll quickly read it into the record that 

way. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I don't want to get into debate.  All I'm 

saying to the member is, in general terms, if he wishes to relate 

as to why the House leaders were not successful and therefore 

we need to now ask the Agriculture minister and the critic of 

Agriculture to take over negotiations, that is fine.  I've ruled 

that in order before.  And the second part of it is simply the 

closure.  And I ask the member to continue in that line please. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I've put away all the 

letters that I was going to do to set the scenario except those 

dated August 10 and August 11 and I'll read those into the 

record with your permission, sir, and I'll let the people make up 

their minds. 

 

On August 10, Mr. Speaker, on August 10 I write to the . . . 

No, I'm wrong.  On August 10, Government House Leader 

initiated on August 10 and he wrote me this letter.  And he 

said: 

 

 I write today to offer the following proposal for the 

transaction of legislative business for the balance of the 

week.  Government members have indicated their willingness 

to forego private members' business on Tuesday, provide 

members of your caucus with an additional 10 hours of 

debate on the second reading of The Farm Income Insurance 

Legislation Amendment Act. 

 

 In addition, the government is prepared to call this same Bill 

for further debate on Wednesday and Thursday, if it is felt 

that the opposition requires this additional debating time.  

This schedule would provide over 30 hours of debate for this 

particular stage of the Bill.  This is in addition to the two 

months of public debate since the government first gave 

notice of its intention to introduce the legislation on June 9. 

 

 Further, if second reading of The Farm Income Insurance 

Legislation Amendment Act is concluded as per the above 

schedule, the government is prepared to call the Estimates for 

the Department of Agriculture on Friday of this week. 

 

 If you are prepared to put forward an alternate schedule 

which would see the completion of second reading by 

Thursday or Friday of this week, I would be interested in 

discussing with you. 

 

 I look forward to your early response. 

 

And that's from the Government House Leader to myself. 

 

On the surface it appears as if it's a lot of generosity involved, 

Mr. Speaker; however, as my other colleagues have pointed out 

to the House, that when you start going 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2379 

back to 1989 on this very same thing, we are talking about 

120-some days of debate before closure was brought forward.  

Here we are on day 64, with a lot of other stuff going on before 

you people decided to go for closure -- half the time.  So let's 

put that on the table at the same time. 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. Speaker, in response to the Government House Leader, I 

did not respond to him directly because I felt that a way out of 

the impasse was not through, necessarily, the Government 

Leader, House Leader, and certainly not to the Minister of 

Agriculture, but rather a person that could resolve the impasse 

in this Legislative Assembly without the use of closure, 

without unilateral changes being made.  And so I wrote a letter 

that same day, after I got that, to the Hon. Attorney General.  

And I say to the Attorney General of Saskatchewan: 

 

 In response to your House Leader's letter of today's date, I 

would suggest a far more democratic, legal, and non-partisan 

approach be taken with respect to your government's attempt 

to implement the GRIP legislation.  Supporting our initial 

suspicions, we have obtained legal opinion that this 

legislation would not withstand a challenge under the Charter 

of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

 As such, we request that you immediately refer this Bill to 

the Court of Appeal under The Constitutional Questions Act, 

for a ruling regarding its constitutionality.  As you know, The 

Representations Act of '89 was referred to and reviewed 

quickly by the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court of 

Canada. 

 

 While the Bill is being examined, regular legislative business 

can continue.  I am sure you will agree that this is a 

responsible and fair approach to a Bill which deeply affects 

individual rights and the livelihood of thousands of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

 I await your earliest response. 

 

This was my letter, in response to the Government House 

Leader's letter, to the Attorney General of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  That, Mr. Speaker, to us, was a very reasonable 

way of getting away from closure, of getting away from the 

government making unilateral rule changes.  Well the same 

day, I did get a response from the Government House Leader.  

And in his response it says: 

 

 In response to your letter of this afternoon to the Attorney 

General, let me say first I was disappointed that you did not 

respond to the reasonable schedule for debate contained in 

my correspondence of earlier today.  The government has 

reviewed this matter with legal advisors, both inside and 

outside the Department of Justice, and we are confident that 

the proposed legislation would withstand any challenge under 

the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 Given this situation, I would respectfully request that you 

reconsider the rather generous proposal advanced earlier 

today wherein debate on the second reading of the legislation 

would be given priority on private members' day, as well as 

on Wednesday and Thursday.  This schedule will provide in 

excess of 30 hours of debate for members of your caucus in 

addition to the two months of public debate since notice of 

this legislation was first given. 

 

 I await your reply. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, a complete rejection of the offer 

that the opposition caucus made. 

 

And then I get into August 11, yesterday, Mr. Speaker, and a 

series of letters because I did not reply on the 10th to the 

Government House Leader, but I did reply on August 11.  And 

my letter to the Government House Leader simply was this: 

 

 Further to our discussion last night, I would like to detail our 

proposal to allow the passage of The Farm Income Insurance 

Legislation Amendment Act and an early end to the current 

session. 

 

 As per my recent letter to the Honourable . . . . Attorney 

General, we believe that your GRIP legislation would not 

survive an inevitable constitutional challenge.  It would seem 

prudent and impartial to have the Attorney General refer the 

Bill to the Court of Appeal under The Constitutional 

Questions Act for a ruling regarding its constitutionality.  

Again, I remind you that the former administration referred 

The Representations Act to the Court of Appeal and the 

Supreme Court of Canada for a review in 1989. 

 

 As was discussed, the Opposition Caucus would then be 

prepared to allow the passage of the Bill with an amendment 

to the "coming into force provision" which states that The 

Farm Income Insurance Legislation Amendment Act would 

not come into force until its constitutionality is confirmed. 

 

In other words, what I was saying, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Government House Leader is, you make that proviso, make 

that House amendment on that Bill that it will not come into 

force until the Supreme Court or the Appeal Court of 

Saskatchewan has confirmed its constitutionality -- you make 

that commitment -- and bang, Mr. Speaker, we would still try 

to get some amendments through during the normal course of 

debate, but it would be gone.  And we could then, literally, 

lickety-split get the business of the House moving. 

 

Now I continue on, Mr. Speaker, with a couple of short 

paragraphs, and I quote again: 

 

 If you believe the Premier (I'm quoting from a letter here) . . . 

observations that the rights of individuals must not be 

suppressed, then you must recognize this proposal as 

reasonable and democratic. 



2380 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

 It would seem that this proposal would be greeted as a major 

breakthrough in the current impasse and would be a 

significant step toward a speedy conclusion to this session. 

 

 I trust that you have taken this matter to your caucus 

colleagues and hope to hear from you at your earliest 

opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'll forego the one letter . . . this is the response 

from the Government House Leader -- this is the last one -- 

August 11, yesterday again, and he states that: 

 

 I have reviewed you correspondence of earlier this day and 

will again express my disappointment over your failure to 

consider the offer made both yesterday and today by the 

government.  The government has offered your caucus a very 

reasonable schedule for the consideration of this Bill and we 

sincerely expected a response that would have addressed this 

issue. 

 

 Unfortunately, you seem determined to continue the practice 

of the past few months.  I respectfully request that you 

reconsider our generous proposal which will provide ample 

time for opposition members to debate this legislation. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, in essence, is the latter part of the 

negotiations that we tried to bring forward.  Right from day 

one, from it's inception, the government was not prepared to 

move whatsoever on the procedure whereby we could handle 

this. 

 

It was either their way or the highway, and that was on the 

11th, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now you talk about closure and you talk about a 

subamendment and you talk about the unilateral changing of 

the rules of this House.  Well, that same night on the 11th -- 

yesterday, yesterday in the dark hours of the night, I might add, 

Mr. Speaker, sometime after 10 o'clock, sometime after 10 

o'clock at night, this notice of motion was laid on the Clerk's 

desk. 

 

This notice of motion -- and you talk about closure, and I want 

the folks out there to understand.  This was the motion laid out 

by the Government House Leader that says this: I give notice 

that I shall on Thursday next . . . And to explain what happens 

here is when you're going to make a motion like this, we as 

House leaders have to make sure that we do it 48 hours before 

it takes effect.  And so by doing it at 10:30 last night, of course 

yesterday counted as a day.  And normally perhaps we might 

not be aware of this until this morning, so we wouldn't have 

had proper time to react to it.  But having done it at 10:30 last 

night, it comes into effect tomorrow. 

 

This is what comes into effect, Mr. Speaker, this notice of 

motion "That, notwithstanding the Rules of the Assembly" . . .   

Notice that . . . notwithstanding the rules of the Assembly" . . . 

Very, very similar to some terminology that is used in the 

GRIP Bill itself.  Doesn't matter what the rules are. 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I am not calling the member to 

order, but I am not going to have a repeat of last night when . . . 

I'm simply saying I'm not going to have a repeat of last night 

when there was constant interference on that side of the House 

-- I'm not picking out anybody -- but on that side of the House 

when members are speaking.  And so I ask members to allow 

the member from Rosthern to have his say. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I can't 

understand why people would be interested in doing any other 

talking than listening to me because I think I'm doing a fairly 

good job of explaining the situation.  Thank you. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker, now that we have their attention.  

"That, notwithstanding the Rules of the Assembly" -- this is 

how this closure motion of time allocation works.  And they 

begin, Mr. Speaker, by saying notwithstanding the rules of this 

Assembly.  What does that mean?  It means that the 

Government House Leader is telling us, I don't care what the 

rules of this Assembly are.  We'll chuck them all out.  If any 

rule of this Assembly stands in my way, they don't count.  They 

don't count.  That's exactly what it means.  That's exactly what 

it means -- notwithstanding the rules of the Assembly. 

 

All right now what is he going to try to accomplish?  This 

notice of motion says "That, notwithstanding the Rules of the 

Assembly, and following the adoption of this motion" -- which 

could be in three months from now because we intend this to 

its bitter end: 

 

 and following the adoption of this motion, when the order is 

called for resuming the adjourned debate on the motion for 

second reading of Bill 87 (which for those listening, Bill 87 is 

the GRIP legislation) An Act respecting amendments to 

Certain Farm Income Insurance Legislation, not more than 

one sitting day shall be allocated to debate on such order. 

 

 not more than one day shall be allocated to debate on such 

order and that at fifteen minutes before the set time of 

adjournment, unless sooner concluded, (I guess you thought 

we might sit down and just let you roll over us -- but fifteen 

minutes before the time of adjournment) the Speaker shall 

(He has no choice.  The Speaker shall) interrupt the 

proceedings and put every question necessary to dispose of 

the order . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- That is the response of members opposite, I 

say to the public.  They don't care.  Closure, time allocation, 

whatever stands in our way . . . You heard the clap.  You heard 

the clap, notwithstanding the rules of the Assembly.  It doesn't 

matter what the rules of the Assembly are.  They don't count.  

We want our way.  Government House Leader, time allocation, 

subamendment, talks about closure, talks about unilateral 

action.  That's what I'm talking about. 

 

But that's not all.  That's not all that this motion says. 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2381 

There's a couple of pages in this motion.  In the dark of the 

night, this was laid on the desk of the Clerk. 

 

 That there shall be (it continues, that there shall be) two 

sitting days allocated to the consideration of the said Bill in 

the Committee of the Whole . . . 

 

Two days -- two days in the Committee of the Whole.  For 

those of you who don't understand what the Committee of the 

Whole is, that is the time that we finally have an opportunity to 

ask the Minister of Agriculture questions about the detail of 

that Bill.  And we will keep him there.  Normally we would 

have kept him there until we got the answers. 

 

But we know that the government doesn't want us to force the 

answer out of the Minister of Agriculture.  So what have they 

said?  The Government Leader has come to his rescue and said, 

it doesn't matter what the rules of this Assembly are, we are 

going to give this opposition two sitting days, two sitting days 

in the Committee of the Whole, so that we will have 

opportunity to put forth amendments. 

 

We don't like a lot about the Bill.  So we as the opposition are 

going to put forward amendments.  But we have to convince 

the government that these amendments are good.  And that 

takes debate.  That takes give and take, question and answer, 

before finally we hope to convince the government to make 

some changes to that Bill.  That's what the essence of this 

Committee of the Whole process is all about. 

 

But he said: 

 

 . . . there shall be two sitting days allocated to the 

consideration of the said Bill in the Committee of the Whole, 

and that at fifteen minutes before the set time of adjournment 

on the second . . . day, unless sooner concluded, the 

Chairman shall put every question . . . 

 

It's the Chairman this time because the Speaker's not involved 

in the Committee of the Whole.  So the Chairman, the Deputy 

Speaker probably, will now have to put every question 

necessary.  Listen to this: 

 

 . . . the Chairman shall put every question necessary to 

dispose of every section of the Bill not yet passed, (at the 

conclusion of that time) and shall report the Bill forthwith to 

the House, and the question for first and second reading of 

any amendments shall be put forthwith and decided with . . . 

(listen to this, it shall be decided) without amendments or 

debate . . . 

 

Without amendments or debate.  Nothing else, that's it.  It's 

done.  That dirty deed will be done.  And when, Mr. Speaker, 

will that dirty deed be accomplished?  Fifteen minutes before 

adjournment of the House, quarter to eleven at night, when 

most of the people of this province are at sleep sound in their 

beds.  That's when this deed shall be accomplished. 

 

(2030) 

And, Mr. Speaker, it concludes that there shall be two days?  

No, Mr. Speaker, not two days, because by now they are in a 

hurry. 

 

 That there shall be two hours allocated to consideration of the 

motion for third reading of the said Bill, (two hours) and at 

the expiration of two hours, unless sooner concluded, the 

Speaker shall interrupt the proceedings and put every 

question necessary to dispose of the order for third reading of 

the Bill; and, 

 

Still not all: 

 

 That consideration of the Bill, pursuant to this motion, be a 

Special Order of the Assembly to be called immediately after 

Orders of the Day. 

 

A special order, and the assistant House Leader of the 

government says, what does that mean?  I know how you folks 

are operating so maybe I should take the time, Mr. Speaker, to 

explain to the opposite Deputy House Leader what that means.  

That means, Mr. Deputy House Leader, that under special 

orders it takes precedence.  What you have done now is say, 

nothing else matters.  That comes forward and we go down that 

narrow road.  That's exactly what it means, Mr. Deputy House 

Leader.  For your edification I would explain that to you 

because you've got nothing else in mind, nothing else in mind 

except conclusion.  It doesn't matter which way of getting your 

way as quickly as possible and running roughshod over the 

process in meantime, running roughshod. 

 

Now this of course is becoming common practice, and my 

colleagues have referred to the fact that we have done that in 

1989, but how many times have you folks done that by now?  

Whenever this motley bunch of 10 over here stands in your 

way and puts up the good fight, the only thing you can do is 

steamroll.  The steamroller is put into motion and then you 

accomplish your deed.  You accomplish your deed. 

 

And you'll get your way.  You'll get your way because we 

know that ultimately we will cave in.  We won't cave in; you 

will just push us into the ground.  That's what will happen.  

And you'll get your way and it will become law. 

 

But folks, folks, let me tell you, you will pay, you will pay.  Let 

there be no doubt about it.  The people of Saskatchewan don't 

see this as a rural issue only.  The people of Saskatchewan 

don't see this as being issue of only GRIP and farmers.  The 

people of Saskatchewan see this as a condemnation of their 

rights throughout, because there is nothing to stop you.  There's 

nothing to stop you. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the problem with that motion and why I 

have spent some considerable time explaining the process.  

And I agree with the member from Thunder Creek and some of 

my colleagues who have said that maybe the House leaders 

weren't the best guys to handle this, because we approach it 

from the administrative point of view.  And you, Mr. Speaker, 

being a teacher as well as I being a teacher, we know too many 

things in the school system, and so on, always operate for the 

ease of administration.  And I can hear some of my principal 



2382 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

friends out there hollering at that one. 

 

So maybe the House leaders here are interested in the political 

aspect of the game and the administrative aspects of the House.  

Maybe they weren't the right ones, Mr. Speaker, but we tried.  I 

tried.  And I give the House Leader on the government side 

credit.  He was adamant in his beliefs and he was determined to 

see his way through.  And that's fair enough.  We tried but we 

were not successful. 

 

So I come now, Mr. Speaker, to another aspect of this 

subamendment which says that the Minister of Agriculture and 

the opposition member responsible for Agriculture be the 

principals that are going to be involved.  Now that seems 

logical to me.  That seems logical to me that those would be the 

folks that maybe should address this.  And I don't know too 

much about the Minister of Agriculture.  Of course I can read a 

résumé of his qualifications and education and so on, and his 

mental facilities -- I don't think they're in question at all -- and I 

give the member that.  I think he's quite capable that way. 

 

But the interpretation of the events is, I think, Mr. Minister of 

Agriculture, your interpretation of events.  And the direction in 

which you're going, I take great issue with that. 

 

Now having said that, Mr. Speaker, I also at the same time 

have to accept the fact that he holds the office of Minister of 

Agriculture.  And there's nothing that we can do about that 

from this side, except we're giving it a pretty darn good try, I 

think, to do something about it, but it's not within our 

parameters or within our mandate to make any changes there. 

 

But you are the member of this Legislative Assembly that has 

the trust of the Premier who has appointed you to be Minister 

of Agriculture.  And as such, you hold one of the most 

important and the most powerful portfolios on the Treasury 

Board and around the cabinet table. 

 

And you affect, sir, I would suggest, the lives of more families 

in Saskatchewan than almost any other one of the ministers in a 

direct fashion, in a direct fashion.  And not only in an 

economical fashion but certainly in the way of life and all these 

other kinds of things. 

 

So having said that, I'm not going to pursue that particular issue 

because you are the Minister of Agriculture and it's your 

responsibility and you are the one that should be involved.  

That's what we're saying.  All right. 

 

Now having said that, we can also take a look at our side and 

say which is the member from our side that should be involved 

in trying to come to some kind of a resolution here?  And of 

course we take a look at the member from Morse. 

 

Why would the member of Morse be considered from our side 

to be the proper individual to handle this situation?  Well if I 

could be forgiven to take a media guide booklet, because what 

it basically does is it gives a . . . no not an autopsy, what do you 

call that?  Biography.  Sorry, Mr. Speaker, I knew that didn't 

sound right. 

But it does give a biography of the individual.  And I'm just 

going to read this into the record, Mr. Speaker, because I know 

the member from Morse is too modest to come forward and say 

why he should be the individual from our side to take the 

negotiation stance with the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

This member from Morse was born in 1941 so he's got the 

advantage of middle age.  A lot of vast experience under his 

belt by now but still very, very alert.  He participates in family 

ranching operations in Swift Current area. 

 

Qualifications for dealing with agricultural issues?  He spent 

his life on the farm.  Spent his life in a ranching operation.  

He's a former councillor, Mr. Speaker, a former councillor, and 

I know I am one and there's about three or four others of us that 

have been councillors.  But more than just a councillor, Mr. 

Speaker, he was also the reeve of the RM (rural municipality) 

of Saskatchewan Landing. 

 

He was also a director of the Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities.  So he was a director of SARM and 

knows inside out the intricacies of that organization and the 

concerns that its members have.  So that's another reason, Mr. 

Speaker, why this member should be part of the negotiating 

process. 

 

And he's also a member of both the Saskatchewan federation of 

agriculture -- I suppose that's when that organization was still 

alive, because I went to its funeral as well back 1985, I believe 

it was -- and the rail line abandonment committee, Mr. 

Speaker, also  of the rail line abandonment committee.  First 

elected, Mr. Speaker, to the legislature in 1982, and of course 

this is where he has a tremendous advantage over the Minister 

of Agriculture himself because of the vast experience that he 

has under his belt. 

 

Now he was appointed to cabinet in 1989 as associate minister 

of Agriculture and Food, and he was also the minister 

responsible for the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, 

Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan, 

Saskatchewan Horse Racing Commission, and the Souris Basin 

Development Authority.  In other words, Mr. Speaker, 

involved intricately with a whole host of organizations in this 

province whose primary concern is the welfare of agriculture. 

 

In 1977 this member, Mr. Speaker, was awarded the Queen's 

Silver Jubilee medal for his contribution to local government, 

so that member, Mr. Speaker, is eminently well qualified to 

take that particular position. 

 

But I want to point out another thing to you, Mr. Speaker.  I 

want to point out to you that not only is the member of Morse 

eminently qualified for this particular position, but I'm not 

quite sure whether I would nominate him for that position.  

And I might beg to differ with some of my colleagues who 

have spoken, but that's what gives us the vitality within our 

caucus that we are free to speak our minds and give of our 

opinions.  And hope that the member of Morse does not hold 

this against me when I say that perhaps the member that is 

most eminently 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2383 

qualified . . . 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I draw your attention to the subamendment.  

The subamendment says that the Minister of Agriculture and 

the opposition member responsible for Agriculture.  Now I'm 

not quite sure in my own mind whether that is the former 

premier right now or whether it is . . . and the present member 

from Morse. 

 

But I'm going to take, Mr. Speaker, and just outline for you the 

reasons why I think it could be the member for Estevan that 

we're looking at on this side to do exactly what that 

subamendment is asking. 

 

Why?  Well, Mr. Speaker, the reason is very simple, and the 

reason is that this man was born in 1944.  I don't think he's too 

concerned about people knowing when he was born.  He was 

educated, Mr. Speaker, with a Bachelor of Science and 

Agriculture at the University of Saskatchewan; Master of 

Agricultural Economics and Business Administration in 

marketing at the University of Alberta. 

 

He received a doctorate in Agricultural Economics from Ohio 

State University, and until 1979, taught agricultural economics 

at the University of Saskatchewan.  He was elected as the 12th 

premier of Saskatchewan in 1982, and he has been the Leader 

of the Progressive Conservative Party since November, 1979. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in 1985 he took over the portfolio of 

minister of Agriculture in addition to responsibilities as 

premier.  He currently is honorary patron of many charitable 

and cultural groups and in '83 was awarded the Vanier Award 

as one of Canada's outstanding leaders. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this man that I'm talking about right now 

is most eminently qualified in terms of education, in terms of 

having the ability and capability of handling any job that comes 

his way.  But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, more so as the previous 

minister of Agriculture, we must take a look at the history of 

this man in terms of agriculture in this province. 

 

Now I know those folks out there who are listening, who are 

farmers themselves or once removed from the farm and still 

extremely interested in what happens on the farm scene, will 

understand what he has done for agriculture -- the programs, 

the going-to-the-wall for the farmers of this province, and the 

families, farm families of this province, for his ability to go out 

to Ottawa and come back home with billions and billions and 

billions of dollars time and time again.  As a matter of fact, I 

believe the total of the monies received from Ottawa directly 

because of his intervention is to the tune of $13 billion -- $13 

billion. 

 

Now we have the minister of Agriculture with the Premier 

going to Ottawa and goodness knows how many trips to get 

money from Ottawa.  They're always squawking on that side 

about Ottawa's failure to live up to their promises and so on, 

but yet they don't seem to be able to come home with a penny, 

to come home with bills -- to come home with bills.  And 

maybe I should ask the Minister of Agriculture, what is the size 

of the total bill that you have drummed up, for the taxpayers of 

this 

province to face and to pay, in your attempt to get money out, 

and not succeeding in doing that? 

 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is why I think that either one of the 

members that we have been talking about here would do a very 

good job in getting together, be it on that train to Vancouver or 

whatever, getting together with the Minister of Agriculture and 

settling this thing -- settling this thing not in an arbitrary way, 

not, as the subamendment suggests, through the use of closure 

or through the use of unilateral force as is being done right 

now.  There are other ways.  Granted, we as House leaders, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, have failed to do the job. 

 

What's imminent right now in this legislature is closure and 

unilateral decisions forcing it upon us.  That's what the 

government of the day . . . that's the course that they're on.  

And that's what this debate is about.  That's what this 

subamendment is about.  That's why I've spent the last 10 

minutes trying to dissuade government members against the 

course of action that they are embarked upon because, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I want to take a few moments to explain why, 

on issues of this significance to the people of Saskatchewan, 

consultation and listening to the people of Saskatchewan is 

more important than closure.  It's more important than closure 

because . . . 

 

And I've got a whole list of stuff that my colleagues haven't 

even come up against yet, but I only want to take a few 

moments of time just to remind the older members across the 

way, those that were elected in '86 or prior, of what some of 

their colleagues have said.  And I also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

want to remind the new members of what some of their 

colleagues have said, recognizing at the same time that 

conditions and times do change, that nothing is cast in stone, 

that nothing is, as Julius Caesar has said, as constant as the 

northern star.  Because we know what happened to him 10 

minutes after he said it, at least according to William 

Shakespeare. 

 

But I want to return to my attention for just a moment to some 

of the things that the member for Regina Elphinstone said back 

in 1989, the current House Leader for the government.  And he 

said a lot of things and I'm not going to quote them all, except 

something that he said on October 7, 1989.  When, on October 

7, 1989, Hansard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, records the House 

Leader of the government saying: 

 

 Well I say that closure is the most despicable rule that this 

government could invoke . . . 

 

And what am I holding in my hand here, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  

I'm holding in my hand a notice of motion saying that in two 

sitting days debate will end.  This is called closure.  This is 

called closure.  And whose name is on the bottom of this 

closure motion?  None other than the Government House 

Leader, the member from Elphinstone, who in 1989 said: 

 

 Well I say that closure is the most despicable rule that this 

government could invoke . . . 

 

 Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you that on this side of 



2384 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

the House, democratic traditions do matter, the traditions of 

this place do count.  Not once, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not once 

in all the years of CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) or New Democratic Party administration in this 

province, not once did we seek to stifle the free speech of this 

legislature; not once did we seek to limit debate in this 

House.  Not during the heated debates of the late 1940s, not 

during the medicare crisis, not during that time when the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan was being formed, not 

once did we seek to limit the rights of the opposition to speak 

in this legislature. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, so says the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow, August 7, 1989.  That's what he said.  That's what 

he said.  And I know that he's going to get on his feet after I sit 

down to explain his actions as opposed to his words. 

 

August 7, 1989, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

 I'll put my name on record against this limiting of free speech 

in the Saskatchewan legislature.  And when that day comes 

and I no longer have a right to sit in this legislature and to 

speak here, when that day comes, I will at least not go away 

with the shame of knowing that I was part of a group of men 

and women who sought to limit those rights in this House. 

 

The same member from Moose Jaw Wakamow said that 

August 7, 1989. 

 

 . . . when that day comes, I will at least not go away with the 

shame of knowing that I was part of a group of men and 

women who sought to limit those rights . . . 

 

August 7, 1989, I'm reading out of a transcript from Hansard.  

This is not the actual copy of Hansard. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, talking about closure, the force of closure 

as the subamendment is indicating, the former Speaker of the 

House, on August 4, 1989 as well, Mr. Brockelbank, who was 

not the Speaker at the time when he said this -- I should clarify 

that -- but he says: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, this government is above the law.  I've 

mentioned that the law of this Assembly is closure, rule 31.  

When the law is not what they want it to be, they change the 

law.  These laws, the rules of . . . (this) Assembly, are laws 

just as sure as any statutes of Saskatchewan.  They're the laws 

by which this highest court in the province is governed.  And 

when the majority take it upon themselves to change the law 

arbitrarily, that is not good for democracy. 

 

So said the former Speaker.  And now, Mr. Speaker, we see 

that closure, closure is being used here.  But the thing that I 

don't like about the closure is not so much the closure itself, but 

what the closure is being used for.  And the closure is being 

used for, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to strip the citizens of this 

province of their basic, fundamental rights. 

If you strip me of my rights through closure in speaking in 

here, I guess I'm a big enough guy to take that.  But why are 

you using closure?  You're using closure so that you can force 

the people of this province to lose their fundamental 

constitutional rights that everyone should have their day in 

court, that everybody should be equal before the law.  But you 

guys and gals over the way are saying, no, that's not the case.  

This government is above the law. 

 

That's what I find abhorrent, not so much the closure aspect.  

Because you got to do your thing; I can appreciate that.  But it 

boils down to the fundamental problem that we've been having 

in this legislature ever since you came down with that court 

case in Melville.  That's what the problem is.  You're putting 

yourselves above the law.  And you're depriving normal, 

everyday, hard-working citizens of this province.  Currently the 

ones in the greatest jeopardy are the farmers.  They are in 

imminent danger.  They're in the front lines right now, because 

this is aimed specifically at them right now and you're going to 

remove their constitutional rights. 

 

And you're going to say, yes, we made a mistake.  But we're 

going to cover it up, by golly, so that there's just absolutely no 

way you can get at us.  And that's what that Bill does.  That Bill 

is so abhorrent.  Because every nook and cranny where 

somebody could have come at you, has been taken care of.  

You must have had a flock of lawyers working on it, to make 

sure that you covered every possible angle.  Because you put 

yourself above the law, totally above the law, removed the 

rights of individuals in this province to challenge the 

government.  And you've removed that.  You've taken that 

away.  That's my biggest beef about this issue.  I can live with 

that closure.  I know we did it.  But you are using that method 

to strip the rights of the citizens of this province, and you're 

starting with farmers. 

 

And that's why folks in the cities are calling us up, and saying 

holy mackerel, this can't be going on.  Because if this is 

happening to the farmers, you're going to do that everywhere.  

And I'll give you an example of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

Closure used to be something that was totally frowned upon in 

Ottawa until they did it once.  And then they did it twice.  And 

now it's an almost weekly occurrence on one thing or another. 

 

I have to say one thing with you folks.  You sure pick up 

quickly on closure.  How many times have you done it now?  

Could somebody answer?  Is it three times?  Or is it four by 

now? 

 

You know we just got this other motion that I just read into the 

record.  Here is another time allocation.  And I'll tell you one 

thing.  And I tell that Government House Leader, if you think 

you're going to ram this through with more extended hours or if 

you think you're going to ram this thing through without 

closure on closure . . . This is time allocation, this puts 

everything into one nice neat little shell and says you got two 

days here, one day here, and two hours there, finished, done.  

Doesn't matter what you do during that time, it's finished. 

 

That's what this rule says.  But let me tell you folks, before 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2385 

that rule comes into effect -- and I suspect the Government 

House Leader is going to move this as a special order 

tomorrow morning at 9 o'clock -- that's a debatable motion.  

That's a debatable motion and we're going to debate it.  And we 

will be here till September debating that motion because it ain't 

going to pass.  And the only way that motion is going to pass -- 

this closure motion -- is to what . . . give me a guess, take a 

guess.  You're going to be putting closure on closure to get that 

through because we're not going to allow it to happen.  That's 

what's going to happen.  And I'm telling you that right now.  

We'll be in here till September debating that motion. 

 

If you think you're going to run this caucus of 10 into the 

ground with the determination that we've got, you've got 

another thought coming.  You've got another thought coming.  

We're going to stand up for the people if you're not going to. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I've tried to make my points as succinctly 

as possible.  I know there was a . . . you see that's the problem 

with debate.  The member from Swift Current says, they failed 

miserably.  Deaf ears, deaf ears.  So I made them succinctly.  

There were a lot of issues that I wanted to cover.  I've done 

that.  I've made my points.  I rest my case.  And I thank you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, for your indulgence.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and fellow 

members of the legislature.  It gives me a great pleasure to 

engage in this debate on the proposed subamendment moved 

by the member from Arm River which I strongly oppose. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's important for the public of 

Saskatchewan and the members opposite that they have a little 

bit of historical background as to why we've reached such a 

state of paralysis in the legislature here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think from the first day, Mr. Speaker, that the members 

opposite entered into this legislature and took their seats, Mr. 

Speaker, there has been one thing and one thing alone on their 

mind, and that has been to obstruct and try to stall the 

proceedings of this legislature and the work of the Government 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- And to prove that, Mr. Speaker, we just go back to 

last fall, December 16, the session last fall, Mr. Speaker.  That 

day, Mr. Speaker, the opposition walked out for four hours 

letting the bells ring, Mr. Speaker.  And that was a start, Mr. 

Speaker, that was an indication of what the opposition was 

going to be doing in their mandate, Mr. Speaker.  And now it's 

continued in this session, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The government has come into this session with an agenda.  

We brought in a budget, a throne speech, Mr. Speaker, and 

we've moved on.  We're bringing in legislation mandated by 

the people, Mr. Speaker.  But what have we seen by the 

opposition members?  Nothing 

again but obstruction.  That is, Mr. Speaker, that is 

unacceptable and we cannot continue that kind of activity. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Speaker, this whole GRIP issue . . . and the members 

opposite have used it as an issue to try to wreak revenge on the 

government, on the government, Mr. Speaker.  That's what they 

have done, Mr. Speaker.  It's all an issue of revenge and spite.  

It's not democracy, Mr. Speaker; far from it, far from it.  We 

know it's not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they have had 60-some days where they could 

have let this Bill be introduced into this House and debated.  

But what happened, Mr. Speaker?  No, they filibustered and 

they've tried to stall it and tried to avoid bringing it in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about democracy.  And 

the member from Rosthern talks about democracy.  Well there 

are some very important pillars that hold up the democratic 

institution.  One of the main pillars, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

majority . . . the government is elected by a majority.  And 

when they come in here, Mr. Speaker, they come in here to do 

their work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That's not to say that the minority is not to be listened to.  They 

are, Mr. Speaker.  And that's not to say that the opposition does 

not have an important role to play in this institution; the 

opposite, they have a very important role. 

 

But have we seen that from the members opposite?  Absolutely 

not.  We have seen them irresponsibly, irresponsibly hijacking 

this House for their own personal political agenda.  That's what 

it's been, Mr. Speaker.  And we will not tolerate that any 

further. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that it's important to realize that this 

government has some very important work to do.  We have a 

lot of legislation ahead of us that we must move on -- pressing 

issues, Mr. Speaker, important issues to the people of this 

province.  And the members opposite are holding that up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when they walked out of this legislature for 18 

days on this particular issue, Mr. Speaker, what did they do?  

Did they go out and try to galvanize public opinion on this 

issue?  No.  They were on the golf courses, Mr. Speaker, or 

taking holidays.  Can we tolerate that, Mr. Speaker?  No, we 

cannot. 

 

I just want to touch a bit on the member from Rosthern's 

comments.  And he was talking about the hon. member from 

Morse making some very salient points on democracy, on time 

allocation, and closure.  Mr. Speaker, I just want to go back to 

the hon. member from Morse's comments from August 7, 1989 

on the issue of closure, Mr. Speaker.  And I quote from August 

7, the hon. member from Morse: 

 

 We can no longer, Mr. Speaker, focus our thoughts on 

obstructing for obstruction's sake.  We can no longer obstruct 

just to present our own perspective.  We have to deal with 

governing this province, Mr. Speaker. 



2386 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

August 7, 1989, the member from Morse.  Now what's 

happened?  What kind of flip-flop, Mr. Speaker?  I tell you 

that is unacceptable and we will not tolerate that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that democracy has survived a 

long, long time.  And I'm telling you that it will survive in the 

future.  And this legislature will not be hijacked and it will not 

be terrorized by 10 members who have one thing on their mind, 

and that's to rebuild their political credibility and to destroy this 

institution, Mr. Speaker.  That's what it is.  That's what it is.  

Mr. Speaker, they hold so much contempt for this institution 

and they have forced us, Mr. Speaker, they have forced us, the 

government, to have to implement these measures because we 

have no alternative. 

 

Our House Leader, Mr. Speaker, has negotiated with the 

Opposition House Leader but to no avail.  You cannot bargain, 

you cannot compromise with terrorists, Mr. Speaker -- you 

can't.  And that's the point we've reached, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that the 

Government of Saskatchewan is going to move on with the 

work, the important work of the people of this province, and 

we will not let this kind of foolishness carry on any further. 

 

I want to tell you again, Mr. Speaker, that I will strongly be 

opposing this subamendment and this amendment.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I want to, Mr. Speaker, enter this debate on 

the matter before us today and I want to comment to the 

individuals opposite about my observation about the 

philosophy of this House.  And I want to point out the 

significant difference between the discussion at that point in 

time because it was a difference of philosophy. 

 

This, ladies and gentlemen . . . and I want to point it out to the 

members opposite.  It was a difference of philosophy of 

whether SaskEnergy should or should not be sold.  That was 

the basic discussion that was going on.  That, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and to members of this Assembly, was exactly what 

that was all about.  And obstruction for obstruction's sake on 

that basis was the reason why it was done. 

 

And I want to point out what the difference is in this legislation 

and what was done over there.  The truth, Mr. Member from 

Swift Current, is this, the truth, Mr. Minister of Energy and 

Mines, is this:  the truth is that you are taking, through your 

Minister of Agriculture, and voiding all of the incidents that 

occurred from 1991, on January 1, and up to this date.  And 

you are going to have that Minister of Agriculture rewrite all 

the details of what he thinks transpired in that period of time. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, is what the member 

from Kinistino was talking about. 

 

Can I just point out another thing?  I had a meeting with a 

gentleman from Kinistino today.  And, Mr. Minister, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I had a visit with this gentleman and he said 

his neighbour had a crop that was this high. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 

Minister of Finance says the heads were that big.  No, sir, they 

were standing straight up, and they reminded him of the 

Premier because the heads were empty. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, was what the communication was about. . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . No, sir, Mr. Member from Swift 

Current, I'm going to talk to you about philosophy.  I said it 

before.  This Bill excludes you from court, sir.  Your family 

won't be able to go to court. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  The 

subamendment before us is quite restrictive and narrow in 

scope, and it deals with substituting Minister of Agriculture 

and the Agriculture representative in place of the House leaders 

and also introduces the notion of closure.  I think that debate, 

then, should be on those points. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I just want 

to make one further point, and that is that the matter of closure, 

in dealing with this issue, is going to restrict men and women 

from the province of Saskatchewan to realize in court their 

significant constitutional right -- a right that has been 

established through the traditions, not only of the Parliament of 

Canada, not only through the traditions of the Parliament of 

Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but through the traditions of the 

parliament in the British Commonwealth and in Britain itself. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, closure upon closure upon closure is 

going to place the court below the viability of this House.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, closure and the Bill that is 

before us today is going to do that. 

 

Now you want to talk about principles?  Those are principles, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I will state this one extra point and 

then I will deal directly with the Bill. 

 

I called the president of SARM and I asked him what was 

going to happen if this was going to take place.  And he said, 

I'll tell you this.  I'll tell you this, that people went to war twice 

to defend the principles of freedom before the court and access 

to the court.  That, Mr. Speaker, was his words.  And if any of 

you have the courage to ask him some time, you ask him about 

that.  I challenge you to do that because that is exactly what he 

told me. 

 

Now I want to deal with the amendment, the subamendment in 

a various fashion, and I want to deal with it first of all in the 

aspect of the credibility of the member from Estevan in relating 

and becoming involved in a discussion with the Minister of 

Agriculture provincially.  And, because the discussion has 

involved the federal minister and could possible involve the 

federal minister, I believe it's necessary to involve him in the 

discussion. 

 

We have, Mr. Speaker, an individual who has distinguished 

himself as a person who has the capacity, number one, to 

negotiate, has the capacity because of his education to deal 

with the component of discussing the economics of agriculture 

in a way that surpasses any 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2387 

member of this Assembly.  And, Mr. Speaker, not only have I 

witnessed that as a part of what his education has provided, but 

I've witnessed that in his discussion in various areas.  And I'll 

point some of them out to you.  One of them is in his capacity 

to bring together the ministers of Agriculture from across 

Canada to have a single focus.  And I want to point out in one 

area that may surprise the Minister of Agriculture from 

Saskatchewan, and his capacity to deal with this. 

 

At no time in the discussion on transportation could Sask 

Wheat Pool ever get the method of payment to be established 

on the discussion in transportation, in the federal transportation 

committee.  Not once could they do that.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, and to the members of this Assembly, is a fact.  They 

had four or five different methods of allowing the method of 

payment to change.  And at no time were the ministers of 

Agriculture from across Canada allowed to deal with this in 

perspective.  And Sask Wheat Pool, although they were on the 

committee, could not provide to the people of the committee in 

transportation, at no time could they provide to them the 

significance of the method of payment to be established as it 

was in the Crow.  Mr. Speaker, my point is this.  The capacity 

of the member from Estevan to put that on the table is the 

reason why he should be included as a part of the discussion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the members opposite who 

have trouble hearing and listening, one of the things that you 

asked for continually over and over and over again was for the 

member from Estevan to fly with you to Ottawa to be a part of 

the group of people that was over there.  You have said that to 

this Assembly more than once.  As a matter of fact, you have 

said to this Assembly that we were never in favour of getting 

money from Ottawa -- two things that you have said. 

 

(2115) 

 

Now if you are so all-powered benevolent, why don't you take 

the suggestion in having the member from Estevan and you, 

sir, as the Minister of Agriculture, get together and do the right 

thing in relation to this Bill.  That, Mr. Minister, is exactly 

what we're talking about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why does he vote against it?  Does he vote 

against change?  No, he votes against the fact that you are 

unilaterally taking people's day in court away from them . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, so you think you're one 

better.  You think you're all better.  Now why don't you take 

the offer that we're making as members of the opposition and 

ask the Leader of the Opposition, the member from Estevan, to 

deal with the problem as it exists?  That, Mr. Minister, is what 

we're asking.  That is a legitimate proposal. 

 

I want to point out some other things.  I just read about Simon 

de Jong in a letter that was dropped off at our desk in the 

caucus office, and Simon de Jong was talking about how he 

was a part of the Finance Committee.  Why was he a part of the 

Finance Committee?  Mr. Minister and Mr. Deputy Speaker, he 

was a part of the Finance Committee -- why? -- because the 

Parliament of Canada allowed him to do that.  And you're 

going to say no to the former minister of Agriculture for the 

province of Saskatchewan 

and the premier and a person who has a great deal of respect in 

Manitoba and Saskatchewan and Alberta. 

 

As a matter of fact, as a matter of fact, members of this 

Assembly, when I was in Humboldt . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Mr. Speaker, if the member from Regina, the Minister of 

Finance, wants to talk about people going to jail, why doesn't 

he say that out of the House?  Why doesn't he say that out of 

the House?  Because he is typical of all of the things that they 

represent, and that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a fact.  Go pick up 

your PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyl) in downtown Regina 

and bury them in the proper place.  That's maybe what you 

should do. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the content and the reason of this motion 

is to establish a reasonable solution to a problem.  This 

government is hidebound and determined -- why, why, Mr. 

Minister? -- it's hidebound and determined not to change its 

course regardless of who they destroy in the way, regardless of 

what the principles that they're going to destroy.  They're going 

to do it anyway.  That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is why we're here 

debating. 

 

The principles of justice are being ignored.  At no time have we 

stood in the way of justice.  No time.  Mr. Speaker, the 

members opposite talk about Rafferty.  Not one single licence 

was disobeyed.  Not one single court order was disobeyed.  

That, Mr. Minister, and, Mr. Speaker, are a fact. 

 

Now we want to talk about getting involved with people so that 

they can do the honourable thing.  Why not take the people's, 

the farmers' . . . why not take the farmers' view of it?  If you 

don't want to take the member from Estevan's view of it or 

mine or the member from Thunder Creek or the member from 

Rosthern or from Arm River, why don't you do what the 

member from Melville said?  Why don't you do what the 

member from Melville said, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Meanwhile, one group that has not yet been heard from about 

the GRIP debate is NDP back-benchers from rural 

constituencies.  Why don't you take their advice?  Why don't 

you take their advice and make some changes to the GRIP 

program?  Why don't you?  They don't agree with you. 

 

As a matter of fact, people have told us about the member from 

Tisdale not agreeing with you.  The member from Shaunavon 

has been down there talking about that to the same people over 

there.  Why don't you do what they say?  Why don't you do 

what the people want?  That's all we're asking.  They want their 

day in court, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we're asking you to consider the Minister of Agriculture, 

the former minister of Agriculture, the two of them getting 

together and doing the thing right.  Allow the member from 

Estevan, who has a significant role in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, 

has a significant role in relation to that.  And that, Mr. Speaker, 

is exactly what we're talking about. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point something out.  The member 

from Estevan is the critic in Agriculture.  Now I want you to 

know that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 



2388 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

the member from Estevan is; and that, Mr. Speaker, is precisely 

the point that we're making.  The member from Estevan, who 

has a credible history in agriculture, he has established himself 

across Canada in significant ways.  We're asking you, sir, to 

become involved with him so that he can deal with it in a 

proper fashion. 

 

Actually, Mr. Speaker, why . . .  I'm going to point this out.  I 

had a hog board meeting in Swift Current one day earlier this 

summer and there were some people there from Humboldt, and 

I won't mention their names.  But they said to me, Mr. Speaker, 

this: I wish I had not voted for the guy that I did in Humboldt 

and had voted for the member from Estevan . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I know they were . . . (inaudible interjection) . 

. . Oh I doubt it.  I doubt that.  Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I just want to remind members . 

. . I was just in my office watching the debate, and the member 

that was on his feet at that particular time was not the member 

that was being heard over the TV.  They were other members, 

and particularly one particular member was heard constantly on 

the television. 

 

So I ask members, please, the members out there watching 

want to hear the member that is on his or her feet, and that's the 

person that should be heard, not all the other members that are 

interrupting.  So I ask the member from Morse to continue with 

his debate. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to point out 

why I believe that the member from Estevan should be 

involved in the debate.  And I want to point out to this 

Assembly that the reason that I want to point out the member 

from Estevan should be a part of that is that he has provided for 

himself a credible reputation across Canada to negotiate these 

kinds of opportunities. 

 

Now let's take some realism and put this into place.  For nine 

years the premier; for roughly six years the minister of 

Agriculture.  Ten years of the most difficult, Mr. Speaker, the 

most difficult times in agriculture's history in Canada, 

including the '30s.  In 1984 and '85 and in '88, every one of 

those years there was significantly less rain in the province of 

Saskatchewan than at any other period of time.  And this 

member from Estevan was the one that pulled the financing 

through from Ottawa. 

 

And I want to put this into perspective.  I want to put this into 

perspective because one of the gentlemen in the meeting in 

Humboldt said this -- and the Minister of Agriculture will 

know -- he said this, when the Minister of Agriculture was 

talking about the massive debt of the Saskatchewan budget.  

One individual, and I don't know what his name is, said this.  

He said, I want you to know, Mr. Minister -- speaking to the 

Minister of Agriculture now for Saskatchewan -- I want you to 

know that I took some of that money.  I took some of that 

money that was delivered by the member from Estevan.  I took 

some of that money.  And every one of the farmers in this 

Assembly today, every one of them was a part of that delivery 

system.  And the member from Estevan was the one that 

provided it year after year after year. 

 

Now let's talk about your record, Mr. Minister.  Why? 

Why did you ask the member from Estevan to participate with 

you in your trip to Ottawa?  Because you knew, sir, you knew, 

sir, that without him there you would get nowhere.  And that's 

precisely what has happened.  Mr. Speaker, what we are doing 

here now is asking you, sir, we're asking you to become 

involved with the member from Estevan to see whether you 

can work out a deal that would enhance the opportunity for the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan.  That is, Mr. Speaker, 

what we're doing. 

 

The education of the member from Estevan and his 

involvement in the discussion has been raised here before.  But 

I want to point out, and it's necessary to do that, that he has had 

significant education in Saskatchewan, in Alberta and in the 

United States in order to get a doctorate in agriculture 

economics.  And, Mr. Speaker, there is no one in this Assembly 

who matches that.  There is no one. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I believe that it is incumbent upon 

the Minister of Agriculture who recognized the need, who 

recognized the need of him going along to Ottawa, not once . . . 

And I have heard him say it over and over in this Assembly 

constantly saying, come along with us.  Do it together, Mr. 

Speaker; do it together. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, we're offering to do it together, but 

what offer have we had in return?  Not a thing, Mr. Speaker -- 

as a matter of fact the member from Kinistino says we are 

unilaterally stopping any progress in this House. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I say to the Minister of Agriculture, you 

asked for the member of Estevan to go along with you.  And 

now when we allow that opportunity to you to do that, what do 

you do?  Your members thumb their nose at us.  We're asking 

to participate.  What is this?  A new democratic process? 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly the reason why we put this 

subamendment onto here.  Because you, sir, have been asking 

for the member from Estevan to go along with you.  And now 

when the opportunity is presented, why don't you take it?  And 

that, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we're 

doing it. 

 

I want to point out some other things that are necessary to add 

to this debate.  And I want to point out to the members of this 

Assembly the other part of this motion that I think is 

significant.  The other part of the motion that is significant is 

the statements made by individuals. 

 

Now I had a statement read to me about obstruction for 

obstruction's sake, and I accept that.  But I want to point out, 

Mr. Speaker, that there is a significant difference between 

obstructing in this Assembly for obstruction's sake and 

obstructing individuals in their course of justice.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is precisely what I'm going to make a point of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice made these statements in a 

speech on August 7, 1989, and it's referring to the motion of 

closure: 

 

 . . . this motion has been referred to in this 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2389 

legislature by a number of speakers on this side of the House 

as an act of desperation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, closure is being introduced here as an act of 

desperation in my opinion, an act of desperation by a 

government who is on the wrong side of the issue.  They are on 

the wrong side of the issue and therefore they're just hidebound 

to force their way, overpower their way, and force closure on 

the discussion here today.  And, Mr. Speaker, they have done 

that over and over and over again. 

 

And the Minister of Justice says: 

 

 . . . I agree with that.  I think that it is correct.  It is an act of 

desperation simply because the government has found that it 

can't sell this idea, the people just aren't buying it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's exactly what's happening with GRIP.  

People aren't buying it.  Mr. Speaker, people aren't buying the 

idea that they can't go to court, that you're excluding them from 

court.  They aren't buying it.  And you're saying this is a 

desperate act by a desperate government, anxious to get out of 

here, to do whatever you're going to do. 

 

(2130) 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is precisely why this part is in here 

about closure.  That, Mr. Speaker, is precisely the point. 

 

The second point that the Minister of Justice made on August 

7, 1989 is this: 

 

 They're not winning the debate, and this is a desperation 

attempt to end the debate in the rather naive belief that you're 

going to . . . go ahead with the privatization . . . (as it was 

discussed at that time.) 

 

A matter of philosophy at that time and if you think this is a 

matter of philosophy this time, I'm proud to stand on 

obstruction.  Because you, sir, by closure are not allowing 

anyone to debate this. 

 

And the second point is that you are excluding people from 

their legal, constitutional right to participate in recourse before 

the court -- precisely the reason why we're objecting.  And that, 

Mr. Minister, is a fundamental right that individuals across this 

province, across Canada, have.  And that is being obstructed. 

 

It's an act of desperation, and I don't know why.  I've had 

observations made to me, well we've got three years to prove 

what kind of opposition we are, whether we have credibility or 

not.  That, Mr. Minister and Mr. Speaker, is not the point to 

have the closure brought in, unilaterally changing the lives of 

people without consultation, without involvement.  Closure in 

this Bill is . . . you're closing off debate on a fundamental right.  

And that is why, Mr. Speaker, we have serious, serious 

objections to this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's a debate that they're not winning.  Mr. 

Speaker, it's a debate they're not winning.  Now in order to 

understand 

rural farm people, you have to understand what they're all 

about.  They don't go around carrying signs.  They don't go 

around dumping wheat on the front lawn.  They don't go 

around doing those kinds of things because they're not that kind 

of people. 

 

They are honest, forthright individuals who, when you meet 

them, they will tell you, this is what's bothering me.  And then 

they conclude with that.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is why I see 

this kind of demonstration that we have here today, where a 

government who has a vast majority . . . And I respect that, but 

I don't respect the decision, Mr. Speaker, to deal with closure -- 

to deal with closure on a Bill that takes away the rights of 

individuals before the court, plain and simple. 

 

And I think the things that concern me again on this whole 

matter is the decision on closure, to unilaterally change the 

rules of this Assembly.  At no time, Mr. Speaker, have we 

excluded from debate any of the Bills that have been brought 

forward except this one.  Which ones have we not debated?  

Which ones have we not provided adequate discussion in a 

concrete and demonstrative way?  Mr. Speaker, we have done 

that with all of them.  And, Mr. Speaker, on this Bill they have 

used closure every step of the way.  Why, Mr. Speaker?  

Because when we said what it was going to do, it did what it 

did, and we were right all the time. 

 

You're taking away, by closure, the democratic right of this 

opposition to speak, to speak on an issue, Mr. Speaker, that my 

family fought for in the Second World War.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is what these people are doing.  They're taking away 

that right from access to information and access to 

demonstrating the kinds of things that are available.  Mr. 

Speaker, that is a fundamental proof of what we're doing. 

 

I want to point out to the members of this Assembly that I had 

uncles in the war, and my wife had uncles in the war, and, Mr. 

Speaker, I had cousins in the war, and that was the reason why 

they went.  They went to defend their right to speak in a free 

and democratic society without restriction, without closure, 

without the decision to deal with this in a way that is practical 

and pragmatic, and that is that the demonstration here of this 

massive majority . . . are doing by forcing their unilateral will 

on the people by closure.  Mr. Speaker, the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan will not forget this.  They will not. 

 

I want to point out some other things that have been said by 

individuals that I think are significant.  And that is that time 

allocation has been provided again where it limits debate to a 

certain amount of time.  Now, Mr. Speaker, on second reading 

like we're doing here today, after the motion goes forward and 

it is voted off, it will limit, in a way of closure, they'll limit the 

debate to one day.  One day, Mr. Speaker, for a decision that 

will affect 50,000 contracts, one day that we can debate this in 

a way that is realistic and pragmatic.  And, Mr. Speaker, I think 

that that's wrong.  I have always said it's wrong.  I have speech 

after speech of members opposite who have said it's wrong.  

And all that they can point back to me and say, obstruct for 

obstruction's sake. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is precisely why I don't believe this Bill 

should go forward.  Because the difference between at 



2390 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

that time was a philosophical reason different than mine.  And 

this one has to do with the ability of an individual to go to 

court. 

 

Take away your right as an individual before the law.  Take it 

away.  Don't let anybody have it.  Don't let those contracts on 

the 50,000 farmers . . . don't let them have that day in court.  

Don't. 

 

Your constituents are involved.  Your family is involved.  

Don't you ever think about that?  Don't you ever think about 

what the implications are for your own individual families?  

That's what we're talking about.  You are going to have closure 

on an individual right of individuals to sue the government. 

 

Well you think you're better than that.  Well I don't think you 

are.  And not only will I be proven right, Mr. Speaker, and 

members of Executive Council, but the people of Canada will 

show that you're wrong too.  Because the Supreme Court in my 

view will have no choice but to allow them to take you to 

court. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, who's going to pay 

then?  Who will pay?  Mr. Speaker, who will pay after closure 

is placed on the rights of individuals to speak?  Who will pay 

when the Supreme Court says you are not legally doing what 

you're doing?  Who will pay? 

 

Will it be a co-operation effort between farmers and the 

provincial government and the federal government?  I suspect 

not, Mr. Speaker.  On an illegal action taken by a government 

in an illegal way, it will only be your responsibility.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, are fairly significant. 

 

I want to point out a number of items that have been said by 

individuals across the way.  August 7, the member from 

Saskatoon South said this: 

 

 That is why, Mr. Speaker, I find this piece of legislation so 

abhorrent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, closure was the topic of discussion.  Closure was 

the topic of discussion on the basis that it probably was only 

done twice in that period of time.  And now we have had it . . . 

in the last three weeks we've had it four times. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly why at that time the member 

from Saskatoon South found it abhorrent and why we find it 

abhorrent today.  And in a far greater way, Mr. Speaker, 

because this deals with access to the court.  This closure 

motion will take away individuals' rights to appear before the 

court. 

 

The minister, the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, 

said this:  he said the court will decide.  The Minister of 

Agriculture twice yesterday said:  the court will decide. 

 

This is the court that you're involved with, right here.  This is 

the court that's deciding.  And this court is going to say, 

because of majority on that side of the House, that this court is 

going to show that the individuals opposite are the jury.  And 

that decision is going to be made by you and 

you're going to all vote for excluding people from the court -- 

except those people who have the nerve to stay out. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is precisely, is precisely what this 

discussion is all about.  That's why the member from Saskatoon 

South said, it's abhorrent.  And then again he said: 

 

 So I say again, you don't have the right, you just don't have 

the right as a government to tell me whether I can or cannot 

speak in this legislature.  The people will decide that. 

 

It's a matter of privilege to speak in this Assembly, ladies and 

gentlemen.  It's a matter of privilege.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

privilege is being denied. 

 

I'm going to point out one other thing that happened in '89, that 

the decision to do what we did on the basis of bell-ringing, the 

decision was made to the members of this Assembly to refer 

the matter to the Rules Committee.  And that, Mr. Speaker, and 

to the members of this Assembly, is why it was there in the 

first place.  And that is the reason why, Mr. Speaker, we are 

debating it here today; why we've debated it over the last few 

days. 

 

I want to talk a little bit about what the member from P.A. 

(Prince Albert) Carlton said: 

 

 What can we say about closure, Mr. Speaker, and closure, or 

in this case it's a matter of closure on closure. 

 

That means that you've got a time allocation Bill or motion 

before this Assembly and then you put a closure motion on the 

time allocation.  And that becomes a closure on the closure 

itself.  You limit debate on whether you can have debate.  

That's what this is. 

 

 (And) Sitting back and listening to a lot of the arguments that 

have been presented, and listening carefully and knowing 

very well that this is the first time that closure has ever been 

proposed in this legislature and ever used in this legislature, I 

can say that to me it smacks somewhat of totalitarianism. 

 

 Yes, it smacks of totalitarianism. 

 

He went on to say: "I feel that closure is somewhat of an 

affront to democracy."  Limiting debate -- and we had to listen 

to debates that had many, many times no relevance. 

 

Going on: 

 

 I think and I believe that it is the antithesis of democracy -- 

the exact opposite -- because what it does is it stifles debate 

as opposed as to what the democratic principle is of 

encouraging debate. 

 

Why is the debate stifled in here?  Somebody wants to go 

fishing, so that people's day in court can't be heard?  You got 

somewhere to go?  Well, go.  Let's talk about what the rights of 

individuals are on the basis of the freedom that they have to go 

to court. 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2391 

If democracy, Mr. Speaker, if democracy implies making 

decisions that reflect the public good and the public mood, 

then this motion of closure is definitely an affront to it. 

 

I would like to have you tell me how many farmers at Tisdale, 

where the crop is less than a foot high, want GRIP '91 versus 

GRIP '92. 

 

Mr. Speaker, observation has been made that there is no GRIP 

'91.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I think after the Supreme Court 

decides that your Bill is out of order, there will be a GRIP '91.  

Mr. Speaker, GRIP '91 will provide an opportunity for the 

farmers to get what they signed a contract about, and I believe 

that. 

 

(2145) 

 

The member from P.A. Carlton went on to say: 

 

 . . . because closure offends the democratic principle of free 

speech.  I find it very distasteful; I find it a bitter pill to 

swallow, because it doesn't solve an issue, it smothers it. 

 

No, Mr. Speaker, it smothers it.  And that, Mr. Speaker, puts a 

blanket of doom and gloom over the court system, initiated by 

the people opposite. That's what it does, and that, Mr. Speaker, 

is wrong. 

 

I want to go on to talk a little bit about the member from 

Humboldt.  Mr. Speaker, this is what he said: 

 

 . . . we are in this debate because this government, I believe, 

is drunk with power as well.  They are so consumed with 

themselves, so consumed with their friends, and so consumed 

by the power they wield, they just refuse to allow the 

democratic process to work. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, allowing the democratic process to work in 

this debate and in others is allowing the speech of individuals -- 

free speech, Mr. Speaker, free speech, the capacity to do it and 

the willingness to do it and the right to do it.  Mr. Speaker, it is 

just as fundamentally right to be able to speak in this Assembly 

as it is to speak in a court of law in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  That's a fundamental right of individuals. It's 

being curtailed here, and as evidenced in the documents that 

we've received, it will be curtailed in the court. 

 

The Bill says it over and over again.  You can't go to court; 

your rights are extinguished.  The incidents that happened will 

be just wiped away.  It never happened.  All of the people that 

did things in 1990 . . . January 1, 1991 in agriculture will be 

just swept right away.  Move it aside because the Minister of 

Agriculture is going to tell you what happened.  He's going to 

tell you what happened.  Closure, in this case, is going to wipe 

that opportunity to speak away, not only here, Mr. Speaker, but 

also in the court.  He goes on to say: 

 

 They simply just do not respond to democracy in a traditional 

way in this province because they are so drunk with power 

that they hold. 

Mr. Speaker, that's what the member from Humboldt said in 

1989. 

 

I want to continue; another observation he made, another 

observation he made is this: 

 

 It sets that arrogant attitude, and let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

I think the reason they're doing this is because every time 

they do it it becomes easier, it becomes more accepted by the 

people. 

 

Now this is talking about closure.  What about closure on a 

court case, closure on people's capacity to speak in this 

Assembly?  Next time it might be somebody else who gets 

caught in being excluded from a court.  Close that door.  That's 

closure.  Close the door.  Don't allow people the freedom, 

access to the court, to prove their point. 

 

And if you're so sure of yourself, we have made suggestions in 

this Assembly.  Why don't you allow a reference to the Court 

of Appeal?  Why don't you allow a reference from the Court of 

Appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada?  If you are so sure 

about what you're doing, allow that to happen.  Closure, Mr. 

Speaker, is closure in here, but the Bill is closure for the court 

in the province of Saskatchewan.  That's what it is.  I don't 

think it's going to stand up, nor do I think the people of the 

justice system will allow it to happen. 

 

It becomes more accepted by the people of this province.  Once 

it's done, then the people, they think, will say, well it's been 

done before, then they'll accept it a little easier next time and 

the next time and the next time.  Well, Mr. Speaker, it has been 

in the last few weeks the next time and the next time and the 

next time -- closure over and over again.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is a part of the reason why I rise in this debate today.  

It's why we brought this portion of the amendment into place so 

that people in the province could realize what was going on. 

 

I want to talk a little bit about what the member from Churchill 

Downs said in this debate in 1989. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, I rise to take part in what I think is an historical 

debate, the first time closure has ever been invoked in this 

province.  And I sincerely hope it'll be the last time closure is 

ever invoked in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Churchill Downs, the Associate 

Minister of Finance said, I hope this is the last time closure . . . 

This is 1989, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, and here he stands 

and he says, I'm going to vote for it.  Not once, twice, three 

times, four times, five times.  And then you go back to what the 

member from Humboldt said, it gets easier and easier and 

easier.  Who are you going to obstruct from the court next 

time?  It gets easier and easier and easier. 

 

In December you did one group, now you do another group, 

tomorrow you'll do another group.  Who's the next on the list 

when closure to the court is going to be used?  Closure to the 

court -- that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what we're talking about. 



2392 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, another comment made by the member from 

Churchill Downs is this: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, it is undoubtedly another factor -- I wished it 

were not so -- undoubtedly another factor is simply the desire 

of members opposite to enjoy their summer. 

 

We're talking about democracy, Mr. Speaker, the democratic 

right of individuals to appear before a court, and we talk about 

closure.  Closure in this Assembly is one thing, Mr. Speaker, 

but closure in a court of law is another.  Did you have anyone 

in Canada ever have a closure before the court?  Closure before 

the court is what we're talking about.  You're removing the 

rights of individuals to appear before a court.  It says that more 

than once.  Your rights are extinguished.  What does that 

mean?  Closure before the court, Mr. Speaker, closure. 

 

And then I want to point out, maybe the members opposite 

want to go camping or go out for the summer, go fishing.  Mr. 

Speaker, I want to point out to the members opposite that there 

have been considerable vacancies in the past few weeks.  Mr. 

Speaker, that's the kind of thing that has been happening over 

and over again.  Members opposite . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- I wonder if it's appropriate for the member 

opposite to be referring to the absence of members from the 

Chamber? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I must admit that I did not hear 

the member refer to anybody's absence but if he did I think the 

member . . . Order.  I think the member from Morse knows that 

that is improper if he did so, and I just draw that to his 

attention. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm quoting here 

from the member from Regina Churchill Downs, and he said: 

 

 It is undoubtedly another factor -- I wished it were not so -- 

undoubtedly another factor is simply the desire of members 

opposite to enjoy their summer." 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what I believe some of the members 

opposite have been doing.  The member from Regina Churchill 

Downs went on to say: 

 

 They don't want to be here, Mr. Speaker, because they don't 

want to face the music.  They don't want to admit and they 

don't want to be reminded that the public don't want this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people in this province need to have an 

opportunity to debate this issue.  Closure is a closure in this 

House, but a closure before the court is what your intention is.  

A closure before the court.  Closure here is one thing but 

closure before the court -- I find that disgusting, Mr. Speaker.  

The member from Churchill Downs went on to say: 

They don't want to admit and they don't want to be reminded 

that the public don't want this.  They are acting contrary to 

public opinion and they are being arrogant, insensitive, and 

undemocratic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the first time I have had the opportunity to 

say this.  This is the first opportunity that I've had to express 

the concern of my constituents.  And before I spoke this 

evening, I had a call back from an individual who counsels 

people in agriculture, and, Mr. Speaker, his observations to me 

were this. And he's a constituent of mine. His observations to 

me were this.  He said, block it as long as you can because 

these people are wrong. 

 

They're wrong and I want the people in my constituency to 

know that I stood up for them, that I stood up for them in every 

case that I possibly could.  And, Mr. Speaker, I will continue to 

do that because that's my right in this place.  But what have we 

got here?  Closure.  Closure in debate and closure in the court.  

Restricting rights in this Assembly and restricting rights in a 

court of law.  That, Mr. Speaker, is precisely what we are 

debating here today. 

 

The member from Regina Hillsdale, the Minister of Health, 

said this: 

 

 This debate, Mr. Speaker, is about a government with its own 

agenda, an agenda that is not in the best interest of the people 

and that is not good for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think, Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely accurate.  

Four years ago almost, three years ago almost to the day, 

people in this Assembly were in a reversed position.  The 

members opposite were over here, and we were over there.  

And that's what they said to us.  And what did we do, Mr. 

Speaker?  We referred the matter over to the Rules Committee. 

 

 This debate is about muzzling the opposition, Mr. Speaker -- 

muzzling the opposition, something that this government is 

not reluctant to do because we've seen repeated examples of 

how they've muzzled other people who have effectively 

spoken out against their policies, their cut-backs . . . their 

harsh and cruel tactics, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That's the kind of discussion that was being held when closure 

was taking place in the province of Saskatchewan three years 

ago. 

 

The member from Regina Hillsdale went on to say: 

 

 Another thing that I wish to talk about, Mr. Speaker, is the 

fact that this motion violates the very spirit of democracy.  It 

violates the right of freedom of discussion, free debate in the 

legislature on an issue of this importance. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, comes from the member from Regina 

Hillsdale, the Minister of Health. 

 

Talk about closure, Mr. Speaker, talking about closure, the will 

of the people to express their opinions -- closure is being 

administered in this House and in the Bill that 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2393 

 we're debating.  Closure will be administered in the court.  No 

question about it, no question about it denying the rights and 

access of individuals. 

 

The member for Regina Dewdney: 

 

 But I want to say, as other colleagues of mine have said, that 

even though the government may muzzle us in this 

legislature, we will not be muzzled in saying the things that 

need to be said, because if we can't say them in here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we will say them from one end of this 

province wherever we go, because those are the kinds of 

things that are important to the people of Saskatchewan.  

Democracy will be protected by this opposition to the largest 

extent that we can, at every opportunity that we can. 

 

I couldn't have said it better myself.  And you put road-blocks 

in the way, closure after closure after closure.  And what has it 

gotten you? 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we want to do by bringing this amendment 

forward is allow the member from Estevan and the member 

from Rosetown-Elrose to put it together and see whether they 

come to a conclusion, one that is going to protect the farmers, 

not the one that's going to cut them to pieces.  Allow that 

discussion to take place.  Allow that discussion to take place.  

Allow a time frame for it to happen.  That, Mr. Speaker, is why 

closure at this point in time is not the right thing to do. 

 

I want to point out a number of other things, Mr. Speaker, that I 

think are important in this discussion.  The statement was 

made, when people cannot be heard, freedom, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is destroyed.  When people cannot be heard, freedom, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is destroyed.  What are those people in 

the court today saying?  When the people cannot be heard, 

freedom, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is destroyed. 

 

What are they saying in the court?  Closure in the court -- this 

Bill is closure in the court.  We have closure in this Assembly 

for freedom of speech.  We have closure in the court for people 

to be excluded from the court.  Your rights are extinguished.  

That, Mr. Speaker, is what we're talking about -- closure in the 

court, refuse access to the court. 

 

(2200) 

 

The member from Moose Jaw Palliser had a few things to say 

about this issue too.  And I want to point out to the people here: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, this is a government afraid of words, afraid of 

words and afraid of ideas, afraid to let opposition MLAs, 

elected by their constituents to speak for them, do just that in 

these legislative chambers, the chambers of the people. 

 

This is the Chamber of the people, and you put closure on.  It's 

in the chamber of the court that you're putting closure on as 

well.  And I hear no's, no's, no's.  But what does it say?  It 

extinguishes your rights -- closure in the court, closure in this 

Assembly. 

When are you going to quit?  When are you going to quit?  

And who's next to get this closure placed on them?  Who's 

next?  Mr. Speaker, allow the people access in this Assembly.  

Allow people access in a court of law.  What are you afraid of?  

Closure in the court. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this member from Moose Jaw Palliser goes on to 

say: 

 

 This PC government with this motion has said formally and 

officially with their closure upon closure . . . they said, if you 

dare oppose us, if you dare to criticize us, if you dare to 

speak against us, we will eliminate your right to speak. 

 

Now where is it eliminated, Mr. Speaker?  It's being eliminated 

in this Assembly.  And on top of that, it's being eliminated in 

the court.  Mr. Speaker, that's where it's being eliminated.  

That's the fundamental reason why we're talking about it 

because closure is in the court.  Closure is a part of the 

discussion, Mr. Speaker.  Closure in the court.  That's the 

reason why we're talking about this. 

 

And the member from Moose Jaw Palliser goes on to say: And 

I say to this government, you don't need closure; what you need 

is a mandate. 

 

Have you got a mandate to exclude people from the court?  

Have you got a mandate to do that?  You've done it twice now 

-- twice, Mr. Speaker -- in less than a year.  Twice, Mr. 

Speaker, we have had closure in this Assembly and closure in 

the court.  Twice, twice you have extinguished the rights of 

individuals to appear in a court. 

 

How many times are you going to force people into that kind of 

position?  How many times?  A closure in the court.  

Extinguish the right.  No cause of action against -- there cannot 

be.  You can do anything you want.  And you have a closure in 

the court.  Which court is going to hear whether you are 

legitimate in what you're doing?  Which court is going to hear 

that?  And who is going to represent the people?  Are you? 

 

You were elected on October 21 to do that.  Did you have a 

mandate, did you have a mandate to exclude people from their 

day in the court?  I don't believe you did.  I don't believe you 

did. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Riversdale had a few things to 

say about closure, too, and I want to point them out. 

 

 . . . a government coming in and using the heavy hand of its 

majority and arbitrarily deciding in its opinion that the 

opposition's debate has been too long, in its opinion that our 

arguments have been irrelevant, in its opinion that we ought 

not to be talking about it. 

 

 They come here to define the rules of this legislature, to do 

this arbitrarily by simple majority, and to equate this kind of 

heavy-handed, undemocratic, unprecedented, unwarranted 

attack to the rules where all members agree . . . 

 

Member from Regina Riversdale, August 4, 1989, three 



2394 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

years ago had that to say about closure.  Mr. Speaker, the 

member for Riversdale, the attorney general at one time in this 

province, brought home to Canada the constitution and the Bill 

of Rights.  And now we have closure in this House and closure 

in the court -- closure in the court by a man who said that he 

was going to defend the rights of individuals because it was the 

right thing to do.  He has said in this province that the day in 

court will be heard.  The member from Rosetown-Elrose said 

twice yesterday, they will be heard.  But what have we heard?  

They keep just down the track, hard, throttle wide open, 

heading for who knows what, destroying the people's rights to 

appear before court.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is what the 

member from Riversdale is doing -- leading this group to that 

end. 

 

 But I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, what this does show. This 

motion today shows this black Friday for democracy, this 

unprecedented attack on freedom in the province of 

Saskatchewan, maybe an attack on 26 lonely members of the 

opposition. 

 

Twenty-six.  We have ten. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the necessity for us to speak about this in 

this case is even more right than the debate about this issue 

here.  The issue that was being debated was not as significant 

as the one we're debating today, not nearly. 

 

And I want to point that out to members in this Assembly 

because today we're witnessing a closure in this Assembly and 

a closure in court.  Closure -- allowing no one access, voiding 

information, extinguishing rights.  No right for cause of action 

against, for anything.  From 1991, on January 1 through to 

now, closure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

  . . . discredited and desperate, this government has no other 

choice.  It resorts to the actions of a bully.  It resorts to the 

actions of coming down and guillotining of the opposition 

right here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's the Leader of the NDP Party, the Premier of 

the province of Saskatchewan, his observations about closure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out another couple of things that 

need to be said.  I want to point out to this Assembly what the 

House Leader said for the Government of Saskatchewan, the 

member from Regina Elphinstone. 

 

 And then after the rule has been changed, they keep up the 

debate for a couple of weeks and find they're still loosing in 

the opinion polls and in the minds of people of the province.  

And so what do they do then?  Well then they say to the 

people of the province, we're not playing the game any more; 

we're not going to play any more.  We got the most players; 

we chose the game that we're going to play, we pick the 

referee; we change the rules to our best advantage.  And we 

still can't win, so we're going to quit playing. 

 

And if I take a scenario of what happened in a debate about 

closure, here and in 1989, I would say that the member from 

Elphinstone is right on.  You take the right to speak away. You 

don't want to play the game; you change the rules of the game, 

change your referee; you do 

all kinds of different rules.  So you get your own way.  Fine. I 

can handle that.  But what I can't handle, Mr. Speaker, is 

closure in a court.  What I can't handle, Mr. Speaker, is closure 

in a place where people have the right -- on a constitutional 

right basis -- to be represented. 

 

And they have the right to be there.  They have the right, Mr. 

Speaker, to be there.  And this Assembly is putting closure on 

that.  And I don't think that that's right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other things that could be said.  The 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow felt very strongly about 

this issue.  I respect him as an individual because he's a 

principled man, and yet when we come into this place and he 

changes sides, his principles vanish.  Where are the principles?  

Where are the principles that should be stood on, on the basis 

of this issue and on the basis of other issues, Mr. Speaker?  The 

issues are these. 

 

And as he said in one of his remarks, Mr. Speaker, if a foreign 

power sought to limit the freedom of speech in Canada, we 

would fight them.  We would fight them anywhere, Mr. 

Speaker.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is what we're doing here 

today, talking about closure; talking about the involvement of 

the Minister of Agriculture and the member from Estevan in 

solving and resolving this problem.  We have laid out, Mr. 

Speaker, over and over and over again, solutions to the 

impasse.  But, Mr. Speaker, all we see is a hard, bent-over 

determination that goes harder and harder as each day passes.  

And, Mr. Speaker, that's what we have. 

 

The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow says: if a foreign 

power sought to limit debate in this legislature, we would 

oppose that with all of the strength we could muster.  Mr. 

Speaker, it's not happening from without; it's happening from 

within. 

 

We have a government who seeks to limit the free speech of 

members in this legislature.  That's no less reason, Mr. Speaker, 

for opposing this with all our strength. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what we're doing.  Over and 

over again we have laid out to this Assembly why we believe 

that this government is in error.  We have laid it out in different 

ways, and we're going to continue to lay that out before this 

Assembly in various approaches.  We're going to lay it out in a 

systematic way so that the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan know that we are defending their rights. 

 

Closure is a significant action in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker.  

Closure, restricting freedom of speech, is significant in this 

Assembly, but it's even more significant when rights are 

extinguished in a Bill before this Assembly so that those 

actions can never be taken to court.  The actions of the 

government can never be take to court. 

 

And I want to put this in contrast.  What would have happened, 

Mr. Speaker, if the farmers would have said, we want to 

change it?  What would the government have done?  If the 

farmers would have said we would change it, we want it 

changed, what would the government have done?  Would they 

have taken the farmers to court for not paying their bills?  You 

bet. 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2395 

But where's the closure today, Mr. Speaker?  Closure is here, 

yes, but closure is in a court of law.  Closure is the 

extinguishment of rights in a civil action against the province 

of Saskatchewan.  That's what the discussion is about.  And 

that's what the discussion has always been: closure before a 

court of law.  That is the reason, Mr. Speaker, we're opposing 

the government's actions on this Bill, and that's why I will be 

voting for this amendment and the subamendment.  Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 10:14 p.m. until 10:24 p.m. 

 

Subamendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Martens  

-- 9 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Sonntag 

Wiens Roy 

Tchorzewski Scott 

Kowalsky Kujawa 

Carson Crofford 

Penner Stanger 

Koenker Knezacek 

Lorje Keeping 

Pringle Renaud 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson Jess 

-- 22 

The division bells rang from 10:26 p.m. until 10:37 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Martens  

--9 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Sonntag 

Wiens Flavel 

Tchorzewski Roy 

Lingenfelter Scott 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Carson Stanger 

Penner Knezacek 

Koenker Keeping 

Lorje Renaud 

Pringle Langford 

Calvert Jess 

Johnson  

-- 23 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to again rise in the 

Assembly to speak on the main motion and speak to this 

motion before the Assembly regarding changes to the GRIP 

Bill and the farm insurance in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I find it almost amazing that as I listened to the results of 

the vote, that if the opposition would have had even double the 

members, we would have been very close to upsetting the 

government at this time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But regardless, Mr. Speaker, that indicates the . . . one wonders 

if the support is beginning to dwindle on that side of the House 

to . . . support for the Agriculture minister in the front benches 

regarding GRIP, regarding the unilateral changes that have 

taken place in this Bill that have destroyed or are taking away 

the ability of individuals to proceed in the courts.  As clause 

10.1(2) says: 

 

 Every cause of action against the Crown or a Crown agent 

arising from, resulting from, or incidental to anything 

mentioned in clauses . . . is extinguished. 

 

And then it also indicates in 10(3) that: 

 

 In any action or proceeding against the Crown or a Crown 

agent, a court shall not consider any principle of law or in 

equity that would require adequate, reasonable or any notice 

with respect to any amendments or changes to a revenue 

insurance contract to be provided by the corporation to any 

party to the contract. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find that and my colleagues find that to be a 

clause that we have grave difficulty with and we find it 

abhorrent that a government would even take that action in 

light of the fact that the government of the day are led by a 

Premier who was very sincere when he was part of the 

repatriation of the constitution, and spoke out very strongly, 

and fought for, the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other day in this Assembly we asked the 

Justice minister if he would consider circumventing the normal 

process of the courts and allowing the GRIP Bill to proceed 

directly to the Court of Appeal because of the fact that we are 

informed and feel that we have substantial evidence that would 

indicate that this Bill may supersede or . . . not supersede, but 

may go against the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, and 

certainly would affect the court case that is before the courts at 

the present time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe, in asking the Minister of Justice to go to 

the Appeal court, it would certainly speed up the process.  And 

the government would then find out if indeed they have the 

legality or are in a legal position to bring forward the 

legislation in the position and in the manner they have. 

 

And we again refer back to the debate in 1989 regarding the 

Boundaries Commission and the boundaries Act that was 

brought in at that time, and the opposition that was 



2396 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

raised regarding to the boundary changes, and the fact that a 

group took that to the court, went to the courts on the boundary 

changes, Mr. Speaker.  And in order to speed up the process, 

the Justice minister of the day asked for the Court of Appeal to 

rule, and the Court of Appeal ruled.  And then the process went 

directly to the Supreme Court of Canada for a quick ruling, 

because we all realized the necessity of the day was the 

impending election, and the fact that it would be very 

inappropriate for an election to be conducted on boundary 

changes which, if upheld . . . and if they weren't upheld in the 

court, then you'd have had to go on new boundary changes, and 

it would have been very expensive to the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the reason I raise that . . . And I want to take 

a couple of examples, recent examples where the Supreme 

Court ruled on section 7 of the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms.  And in one case it was a ruling in a case of 

Pearlman versus the Manitoba Law Society and the judicial 

committee.  And the ruling was the indication . . . The Supreme 

Court came down and said: 

 

 The principles of fundamental justice to which this section 

refers include but are not in limited to the rules of natural 

justice and the duty to act fairly.  They therefore include the 

requirement of a procedurally fair hearing be a fair and 

impartial decision maker. 

 

And I would indicate I don't believe that this Assembly is an 

impartial decision-maker to be implementing that kind of 

legislative changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to also refer to another decision from 

the Supreme Court regarding a challenge to the charter.  This 

one comes from the Quebec Association of Protestant School 

Boards against the Attorney General of Quebec in 1982.  It 

says: 

 

 The Government of Canada has an interest sufficient to 

permit it to intervene in an action for a declaration that a 

provincial statute is contrary to the charter, and therefore of 

no force or effect. 

 

 Provincial legislative authority is now limited by the rights 

conferred by the charter, and the question of conflict between 

the charter and a provincial law is not a matter solely of 

provincial interest. 

 

(2245) 

 

That would indicate to me, Mr. Speaker, it would also indicate 

to my colleagues that this government stands potentially to be . 

. . their GRIP legislation stands in a good position of 

potentially being struck down by the charter.  Because I believe 

if the section 7 applies in those two cases that I've raised in this 

Assembly just now, Mr. Speaker, that they certainly could be 

raised with regards to the GRIP question and the legality of the 

government today and unilaterally changing legislation.  

They're bringing forward legislation that would change 

contracts, and in changing contracts work against or go against 

the basic freedoms and rights of individuals that our forefathers 

have fought for over the years. 

And as my colleague from Morse indicated, some of his family 

were involved in the last great war, a war where people decided 

to stand up against oppression, the oppressive measures of a 

leader from Germany who felt it was his mandate to bring a 

clean and clear race to the world and decided that the only way 

to do that was to use oppressive means.  Mr. Speaker, I believe 

we here in Canada and all the members who fought over the 

past number of years, not only in World War I and World War 

II . . . and even today we see the conflict that is taking place in 

Czechoslovakia, and sometimes, Mr. Speaker, many of us are 

very shocked at the way individuals would treat other human 

beings just to simply assert their rights. 

 

And I believe we must continue to speak for the rights of 

individuals.  Even individuals in this country, Mr. Speaker, 

who are guilty or have committed an offence are innocent until 

proven guilty.  But the law protects them and gives them that 

fair day in court, that fair time for an impartial hearing before 

an impartial decision maker, and allows the process to decide 

whether an individual is indeed guilty or not. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I believe as we continue the debate on the 

GRIP Bill, we will continue to bring this out that the feeling is 

there.  And we've certainly been hearing from a number of 

legal minds who indicate, and individuals who are very 

familiar with constitutional law, that this certainly is another 

one of those cases which this Assembly must be aware of and 

be very careful with. 

 

And I would recommend that the government, on any 

legislation they bring forward, take the time to test their 

legislation, take the time when they're drafting their legislation 

to see to it that that legislation is indeed in line with the Charter 

of Rights and Freedoms.  And I say that as the chairman of the 

Regulations Committee, Mr. Speaker, as the legal counsel to 

our committee has indicated that one of the areas that we are 

going to have to be very careful in and be very mindful of 

when we're reviewing Bills is the fact that addressing the fact 

of whether these Bills that we're reviewing, the Bills that have 

been passed in this Assembly, that we review before they're put 

in the gazette, Mr. Speaker, are indeed constitutional. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, as we look at the debate that has taken 

over for the past number of days, we see a number of principles 

that have been, Mr. Speaker, raised, a number of principles that 

have been raised that would indicate that certainly the GRIP 

Bill before us is something that I think, if the truth were 

known, many people and many individuals and possibly many 

on the government side of the House would wish they had 

never even entered into today. 

 

There's no doubt in my mind that there are many people who 

would believe that if they had had the ability to do it all over 

again, they would certainly take another route. 

 

Another question we raise and another reason we suggest the 

fact that this Bill before us may have a constitutional impact . . 

. Just take a look at page 1 of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, page 1 and 

almost half of page 2 -- Bill No. 87, an Act respecting 

amendments to Certain Farm Income Insurance Legislation.  

And the Bill goes through a process 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2397 

of whereas's: 

 

 WHEREAS the Legislative Assembly recognizes that farm 

income insurance programs should encourage good farming 

practices, provide reasonable protection to producers and be 

efficiently administered in the interests of Saskatchewan 

taxpayers and (Mr. Speaker); 

 

 WHEREAS the gross revenue insurance program was 

introduced in 1991 in advance of provincial legislation and a 

formal federal-provincial agreement; and 

 

 WHEREAS changes were made by the Government of 

Saskatchewan (Government of Saskatchewan and this 

program is a federal-provincial program but it says) to gross 

revenue insurance program contracts after March 15, 1991 

and the time for producers to make decisions was extended to 

May 15, 1991; 

 

 WHEREAS the terms of revenue insurance contracts 

applicable for the 1991-92 crop year were never fully set out 

in an Act or regulations; 

 

 WHEREAS there are deficiencies in the original design and 

administration of the gross revenue insurance program; 

 

 WHEREAS, in accordance with the requirement in The 

Agricultural Safety Net Act to review and make 

recommendations with respect to the gross revenue insurance 

program, an independent advisory committee recommended 

changes to the program; 

 

 WHEREAS required parties to the federal-provincial 

agreement agreed, on March 12, 1992, to effect changes to 

the gross revenue insurance program and the Government of 

Saskatchewan immediately informed producers by making an 

announcement on March 13, 1992. 

 

This announcement which the Crop Insurance deemed to have 

been made in accordance with the contract, although the 

contract read that changes should be made in the mail by letter 

to producers so they could have it in front of them and 

everybody would be informed at the same time. 

 

 WHEREAS the Government of Saskatchewan promptly 

undertook extensive measures to inform producers of the 

gross revenue insurance program applicable for the 1992-93 

crop year; 

 

 WHEREAS in accordance with precedent set in 1991, the 

Government of Saskatchewan in 1992 extended the time for 

producers to make decisions under gross revenue insurance 

program contracts; 

 

 WHEREAS the Legislative Assembly recognizes that 

amendments to farm income insurance legislation are 

required to address the deficiencies mentioned above and to 

implement changes to the gross revenue insurance program; 

 THEREFORE HER MAJESTY, by and with the advice and 

consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts 

as follows: 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is an abundant number of whereas's that we 

have never seen before in legislation, and it would appear to us, 

Mr. Speaker, that the only reason for this long preamble to the 

Bill was an attempt by the government to try and explain the 

reasons for their tampering with and changing contracts and 

taking away the rights of individuals in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's no doubt -- and we've indicated this before 

-- that the whole debate over GRIP will not end here.  It will 

not end when this debate in this Assembly eventually ends after 

the final process takes place on time allocation and the Bill 

may or may not become law.  As, Mr. Speaker, we are aware, 

there is one more process once it goes through this Assembly 

that the debate must follow through, and it must receive Royal 

Assent. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the GRIP legislation before 

us and we look at the 1991 GRIP program -- and certainly 

more and more producers are becoming more . . . very acutely 

aware of the differences between the '91 and the '92 programs 

-- Mr. Speaker, we find that there are many more people 

beginning to realize the impact that this '92 program is going to 

have on their individual farms. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, yes, we've all indicated that there are people 

and individuals in the agricultural field who have looked at the 

'92 program and will say and indicate that, well '92 isn't all that 

bad for me this year.  But if you really follow and draw a map 

as to the areas where producers are somewhat in favour . . . 

more acceptable of the 1992 program, you will find it is areas 

where producers have had sufficient rainfall and are looking at 

substantial yields in their crop.  And they look at the '92 

program and say, you know that one isn't all that bad a program 

because even though I've got crop in the bins, even though my 

bins are full and running over, because it's an area pay-out on 

the revenue portion, I still have the potential of putting 15, 20, 

maybe $30 an acre in my pocket depending what the price of 

grain does and depending what the production factor coming 

into play does.  Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure that's what the intent 

of insurance programs were. 

 

Now 1991 with all its faults, Mr. Speaker, 1991 put the 

insurance directly into the hands of those individuals who, 

through no fault of their own . . . such as we see in a number of 

areas in this province today, Mr. Speaker, because of drought.  

And who knows?  The potential for severe frost damage to a 

major portion of the crop still exists, Mr. Speaker.  And 

because of these factors, Mr. Speaker, people who do not have 

the crop in the bin are going to be left with very little.  They'll 

have a little bit from their crop insurance, crop protection, and 

then whatever acreage payment that works out for their area . . . 

the same payment that the producer, their neighbour maybe 

down the road has when his bins are full and running over. 

 

And I don't believe, Mr. Speaker, that that is the type of 

insurance program that the provincial government of 



2398 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

yesterday and the federal government agreed to and tried to 

work out.  And maybe, and I'm not absolutely sure, but I don't 

think it's the type of insurance program that even many 

members on the government side of the House thought they 

were bringing into the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think we all realistically want to look at ways and means of 

giving the rural community and agriculture in particular an 

ability to carry an insurance program that doesn't give them a 

pile of money or that they can just make money on, but can 

protect them through the bad years so that when they have the 

good years, the good years come along, Mr. Speaker, they can 

put aside.  And they can continue to build and enhance their 

operations.  But through insurance, by carrying insurance 

they're able to protect themselves from the dips in the cycle that 

we continually see take place in agriculture. 

 

And we're all aware, Mr. Speaker, of the very disastrous effect 

and severe effect that a crop loss or price reductions or income 

in farm . . . farm income has in the field of agriculture -- not 

only in agriculture, but in all of Saskatchewan, not only on the 

farms but in our small communities. 

 

Take a look at Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker.  Just take a 

look at the number of businesses that have folded up through 

the past year, year and a half, past two years, Mr. Speaker.   

Many of those businesses have folded up because of the lack of 

income and money in the hands of the agriculture producers 

across this province; money which, Mr. Speaker, flows into 

every sector of our economy; money which flows from the 

farmers' hands to the business persons' hands to the wage 

earners' hands and so on.  It just continually revolves, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I think over the years we've all known that any time there's 

a dollar in a farmer's pocket, he probably generates 4 or $5 in 

economic activity and spin-off in this province, whereas . . . I'm 

not certain, maybe the labour or the business community 

generates the same type of activity. 

 

And if you were to talk to a business person around our 

province, if you were to talk to any of the professionals in our 

province, and I look at my constituency and many members 

can look at their constituencies, Mr. Speaker, they will find, 

you will find, that many of the nurses in our hospitals and 

many of the workers in our care homes and even many of the 

teachers in our schools, Mr. Speaker, have in a lot of cases 

come from farm backgrounds and continue to live in farm . . . 

or on farm backgrounds and their occupation is just a way of 

enhancing the farming operation by working together as a 

couple and a family.  But there are many producers out there, 

Mr. Speaker, who would dearly love to be able to do it on their 

own. 

 

And I also believe, Mr. Speaker, that there are people across 

this nation, people across this province, there are the wage 

earners out there, the high income wage earners, there are the 

low income, the minimum wage earners, many people who are 

becoming tired, Mr. Speaker, with the number of government 

subsidies and programs that are thrown at the farm community; 

and many farmers out there who are not impressed with third 

line of defence. 

 

As the Minister of Agriculture and the government would 

argue today it's about time the federal government came up 

with another third line of defence, a commitment to agriculture.  

And, Mr. Speaker, we can talk about a third line of defence but 

a third line of defence doesn't give any farmer the . . . And 

farmers are business people.  It doesn't give them the ability 

whatsoever to legitimately sit down and make that 

business-type decision that they need to manage their farms, 

Mr. Speaker, and to plan for tomorrow. 

 

Who's to say that the federal government, if they were to come 

up with the 500 million that the provincial government is 

asking for, when will that money finally find its way into the 

pockets of producers across this province?  When more 

foreclosures have taken place, Mr. Speaker?  That doesn't help 

the person whose bills are due today.  That doesn't help the 

person whose bills are due and the interest rate is accruing and 

climbing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also find that a third line of defence doesn't 

address the real problem out there of stabilizing the farm 

economy.  And as well, Mr. Speaker, one has to ask, if the 

Government of Saskatchewan is in such dire fiscal restraint and 

having such dire fiscal problems, Mr. Speaker, what about the 

Government of Canada?  Are we just asking the Government 

of Canada now to pour in more money when they don't have . . 

. Basically they're looking at collecting money from not only 

taxpayers across the country but taxpayers living in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 11 o'clock, this House 

stands adjourned until tomorrow morning at 9 a.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11 p.m. 

 

 


