




















































Hansard: August 27, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3159 

 August 27, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

read the following petition: 

 

 To the Honourable Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

Legislature Assembled: 

 

 The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 that back pain and other highly prevalent 

neuro-muscular-skeletal disorders are extremely costly to the 

Canadian economy; 

 

 that scientific evidence clearly illustrates that chiropractic 

treatment is the most cost-effective and efficient therapy for 

such disorders; 

 

 that in the face of an ever-increasing pressure to adopt 

expensive new forms of high technology treatment, 

chiropractic care has proven to be a low cost, low technology, 

conservative, and safe form of treatment, consistent with the 

true "wellness" model of health care; 

 

 that the government publicly asserts it remains committed to 

the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

comprehensiveness, accessibility, portability, and public 

administration; 

 

 that the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to chiropractic patients; 

 

 and that the government's proposed restrictions on this 

therapy will clearly cost more both in dollars and in patient 

disability; 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from all over north and 

north-central Saskatchewan and I would like to present the 

following petitions. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have the same 

petition as my colleague had, which is to do with the 

chiropractic concerns.  We have between 2 and 300 signatures 

today on several pages.  And they are coming out of the 

north-east corner of the province mostly, and a 

few other small towns, but it looks like about 15 or 20 different 

communities.  And I'll table those today on their behalf, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd just like to read the 

prayer into the record: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have a number of pages here signed by 

individuals from right across the province actually -- from 

Estevan, Oxbow, and North Portal in the South, to Regina and 

Saskatoon, Meadow Lake, North Battleford, Landis, Kerrobert, 

Unity, and so on. 

 

I so present these petitions. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have about 10 

pages of petitions.  I'll not read the prayer as it has been done.  

This covers a wide range too, Mr. Speaker, all the way from 

Canora right through to Macklin, Unity, North Battleford, 

Kildeer.  And it's to do with the same petition, Mr. Speaker, the 

chiropractic care people. 

 

And at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to lay these on the 

Table. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 15, 16 

pages of signatures here on chiropractic care and they come 

from Cadillac, Cabri, Admiral, Frontier, Shaunavon, Gull Lake, 

Val Marie, Bracken, Webb, Vanguard, Simmie, Ponteix, Rush 

Lake, Climax, Swift Current, Eastend, Shellbrook, Hudson 

Bay, Guernsey, Warman, Humboldt, Muenster, and St. Brieux. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have petitions with 

respect to chiropractic care in the province as well.  These ones 

are from primarily the southern part of the province, Regina 

and south, all the way over to the Shaunavon, Gull Lake area.  

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to present those now. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I have several pages, probably 

several hundred names on a petition that I will submit with 

respect to chiropractic care.  I'll just read the last sentence: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by 



3160 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

charging them fees not assessed for any other medical 

treatment. 

 

These petitioners are from North Battleford, Meadow Lake, 

Hafford, Turtleford, Edam, Marshall, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, 

Spruce Home, Emma Lake, more from Shellbrook and Prince 

Albert, Albertville, Weldon, Birch Hills, Shellbrook, quite a 

few from Hagen, Middle Lake, Spalding, Archerwill, Hudson 

Bay, Saskatchewan; Nipawin, Kelvington, Quill Lakes, 

Englefeld, Warman, Kinistino, Melfort, Guernsey, 

Pleasantdale, as well as several from Regina and Pilot Butte, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have 

petitions today to present, nearly a dozen pages here, I believe, 

of people that are upset with the treatment of chiropractors in 

our province.  And I just read the prayer part to you, sir: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have people from the communities of 

Battleford, North Battleford, Kindersley, Regina.  I'm sure 

there are some from Churchill Downs on this page.  Edenwold, 

Kronau, Kronau, Regina, Weyburn, Griffin, Hafford, Prince 

Albert, Holdfast, Lumsden, Southey, Belle Plaine, Southey, 

Regina, Bulyea, Earl Grey, Bethune, Moose Jaw, Silton, Disley 

-- people from all over the province, Mr. Speaker.  I do present. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 

lay on the Table for the perusal of the people of Saskatchewan 

petitions dealing with chiropractic services.  I won't bother 

reading the preamble or the prayer.  But be it known that these 

individuals expressing their concern come from such places as 

Hague, Saskatoon, Warman, Kindersley, Osler, Aberdeen, 

Meadow Lake, Battleford, Unity, Spiritwood, more from 

Mayfair and many, many more from Saskatoon and 

surrounding areas like Langham and Weyburn -- even one from 

Weyburn on this one.  So I would want to put these on record 

as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I too would like to lay some 

petitions on the Table, the same as my colleague from 

Rosthern, about chiropractic care.  And I won't read any of it . . 

. take the time, Mr. Speaker.  I'll just cover a few of the outlines 

where they come from. 

 

These are mostly from Saskatoon, Perdue, Dundurn area -- 

that's my constituency, Mr. Speaker, quite a few from Dundurn.  

And then this page is also looks like Saskatoon, Warman, 

Martensville, more from Dundurn.  And the last page looks like 

about the same, Mr. Speaker, from Saskatoon, Martensville, 

Dundurn area.  Thank you.  I lay these on the Table. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

Deputy Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions 

have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7), they are hereby 

read and received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly will be pleased to stop the 

funding of abortions in Saskatchewan. 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Non-controversial Bills 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as 

chairman of the Standing Committee on Non-controversial 

Bills, I present the first report of the said committee which is as 

follows: 

 

Bill No. 76 -- An Act to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- As chairman of the Non-controversial Bills 

Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 76, An Act to amend The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act, as being 

non-controversial. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be 

waived in second reading and Committee of the Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill 

now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As chairman of the 

Standing Committee on Non-controversial Bills, I present the 

first report of the said committee as follows: 

 

Bill No. 77 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Employees' 

Superannuation Act 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- As chairman of the Non-controversial Bills 

Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 77, An Act to amend The 

Municipal Employees' Superannuation Act, as being 

non-controversial. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the second 

reading and consideration in committee be waived on this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3161 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As chairman of the 

Standing Committee on Non-controversial Bills, I present the 

first report of the said committee as follows: 

 

Bill No. 80 -- An Act to amend The Interprovincial 

Subpeona Act 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- As chairman of the Non-controversial Bills 

Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 80, An Act to amend The 

Interprovincial Subpeona Act, as being non-controversial. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the second 

reading and consideration in Committee of the Whole of the 

said Bill be waived. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

take this opportunity to introduce Mr. Fred Herron, the 

executive director of the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation 

who is sitting in your gallery.  And I'm sure that most of the 

members here are aware of who Mr. Herron is and would join 

with me in welcoming him here to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I too would like to join 

in welcoming Mr. Herron to the Assembly today and add our 

welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Future of Rural Hospitals 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I direct my first question to the Minister of Health.  

Mr. Speaker, in anticipation of the Health minister's plan to 

radically change the lives of residents in rural Saskatchewan 

through hospital closures and conversions, a small group of 

people around Rosetown-Outlook area have been meeting to 

design a plan that complies with the Minister of Health's 

orders. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have received a copy of this plan, as have 

many others.  And it confirms, Mr. Speaker, it confirms our 

fears that there will be massive rural hospital conversions and 

closures.  The plan calls for the closure of the hospital 

functions of health care facilities in Dinsmore, Lucky Lake, 

Kyle, Milden, and Elrose.  No more hospital care for these 

communities.  The plan also calls for the termination of any 

hospital care for Beechy -- 

something the Liberal leader predicted and supported during 

the last election.  Madam Minister, can you confirm this 

information? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- No, I can't. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again to the 

Minister of Health.  The Minister of Health has met with this 

group and has supported and encouraged this plan from square 

one.  Madam Minister, this was done in anticipation of your 

so-called wellness plan.  The plan which was designed under 

your guidelines means the only hospital left in this fairly large 

area are going to be in Rosetown and in Outlook.  You have 

committed in this House that no changes will be made without 

direct public input from those that are going to be affected, 

Madam Minister.  That means that you and this board must 

hold meetings in towns like Beechy and Kyle and Dinsmore.  

Madam Minister, for when have you scheduled those meetings, 

and will you honour their input? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, is 

we did have a meeting in Dinsmore at which many of these 

issues were discussed and the people at that meeting were not 

raising the unreasonable scare tactics that the opposition is.  

They were participating in a co-operative discussion about 

what the health care reform meant to them, and what the plans 

may be for that particular area. 

 

There was no predetermination in that meeting as to what the 

particular situation would be in that area.  There was no 

discussion of some of the things the member opposite has 

raised in terms of what it would look like in the end.  They 

were talking about the health care reform.  They were talking 

about how they could get together and co-operate, and how 

they might come together on a district basis -- rural 

communities and urban communities talking about how they 

can improve the health care system in their area, unlike the 

members opposite who are trying to destroy any advancement 

whatsoever in the health care area through scare tactics, 

through scare tactics and fearmongering and pitting people 

against each other.  This group of people were trying to 

co-operate and work it out for themselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the same 

minister, Mr. Speaker, and I want the public to notice how she 

skilfully and deftly avoided answering my question.  Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister of Health at every turn is trying to wash 

her hands of responsibility.  Even health care professionals, 

Madam Minister, are saying that you're passing the buck -- 

that's what they're saying.  This is your doing, Madam 

Minister.  You are throwing people into the lion's den and then 

claiming it's up to the lion to say what is going to happen next. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, you say the public in these small 

communities will have meaningful input.  You're on record 

continually as saying that.  Well I wonder, Madam Minister, 

because in the Rosetown Eagle you are quoted as saying that 

you want the group to proceed with these 



3162 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

plans immediately.  That's what you're quoted as saying -- to 

proceed with this immediately.  In fact you want this whole 

thing up and running by next April, and that you will have 

funding necessary.  That's what you're saying, Madam 

Minister. 

 

How does this fact jibe with your promise for public input? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The fact of the matter is, what the 

member opposite doesn't know is that the mid-west planning 

group has been having these discussions for at least two years 

-- yes, and even earlier than that, even earlier than that -- but 

very intensely for the last two years.  Many people in that 

group feel that they are ready to get organized on a district 

basis.  And if they are prepared to, the government will do 

what it can to accommodate them and assist them. 

 

The government wishes to act as a facilitator with communities 

that are ready to move in this direction, and who obviously are 

far more advanced than the members opposite in their thinking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- That does not preclude community input 

and involvement.  In fact what was taking place at Dinsmore 

was precisely that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, hospital care is going to be 

take out of Dinsmore, Lucky Lake, Kyle, Milden, and Elrose.  

We want you to commit now for public hearings, that you will 

be at the meetings in those communities directly, just as your 

member from Shaunavon promised that you would be at 

Eastend in the middle of this month.  I have not heard that you 

have been there yet, Madam Minister.  The keys to the 

steamroller effect that the Premier has talked about has been 

passed to you, Madam Minister. 

 

Closing the hospital function in these communities has 

monumental consequences, I say to you, Madam Minister.  

Without the hospital, the community cannot attract doctors.  

That's a simple fact, Madam Minister, and yet you claim 

otherwise in your wellness plan.  Perhaps you can explain, 

Madam Minister, to the province, to all the people of the 

province, how doctors will come flocking to rural 

Saskatchewan under your new plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The members opposite, their purpose in 

life seems to be obstructionist and to try to destroy any hope 

for our rural communities to improve their health care system.  

That's their purpose in life, is to destroy the possibility of 

preserving medicare in this province.  That's what the members 

opposite are doing with these outrageous scare tactics and 

fearmongering.  That's what they're doing. 

 

The fact of the matter is -- and for the members' 

edification because they were in government for 10 years and 

obviously never figured this out in spite of the fact they were 

faced with numerous studies on it -- the fact of the matter is, is 

if you develop group medical practices within a district that the 

chances of getting more doctors in rural Saskatchewan 

increases substantially.  Now I don't expect the member 

opposite to understand that today.  He didn't understand it for 

the last 10 years.  But this government is committed to creating 

larger population bases in rural Saskatchewan that can attract 

more medical professionals.  There have been studies that have 

indicated that group medical practices are more viable and will 

bring more doctors to our small rural communities.  Our hope 

is that we can achieve this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.   Madam Minister, 

fear is not what I'm talking about; fact is what I'm talking 

about.  And the facts for these rural communities are now 

evident.  That's all I'm saying. 

 

These are not fearmongering tactics on our part.  The plan has 

been disclosed for this area and there are the communities.  It's 

as simple as that, Madam Minister.  You should talk to a few 

doctors, Madam Minister, on this issue in rural Saskatchewan.  

I have. 

 

In fact a Dr. Hindmarsh, Dr. Hindmarsh in Meadow Lake, a 

well known and respected physician, tells me that they're 

already experiencing difficulty attracting home-grown doctors 

to their community.  And Dr. Hindmarsh gives the reason as 

the uncertainty and the ambiguity of the future of health care 

facilities that's causing the problem. 

 

Those aren't my words; those are a doctor's words.  Uncertainty 

and bungling in health care, that is what you are creating, 

Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, could you tell us what you will do to attract 

doctors to a community like Kyle or Dinsmore, should they 

lose their current doctor to hospital closures?  What will you 

do, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The issue of doctors in rural 

Saskatchewan has been . . . and the difficulty in getting doctors 

in rural Saskatchewan is long standing, very long standing.  

The fact of the matter is, is there have been problems right 

across this province throughout the entire 10 years that you 

were in government, in getting doctors.  And you did nothing 

about it -- nothing. 

 

Not only did you not sufficiently encourage the College of 

Medicine to have a larger rural medical component, you did 

nothing about locum tenens.  This government did it last 

November; you did nothing.  You did nothing about 

encouraging group medical practices.  You did nothing about 

creating a larger critical mass on which doctors could be hired.  

You did absolutely nothing.  And the problem became critical 

when you were in government.  And this government's going to 

try and solve it. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3163 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister lives in the 

past.  Madam Minister lives in the past.  You say we did 

nothing.  Well, Madam Minister, it's precisely what you are 

doing in health in rural Saskatchewan that has brought you 

down to a 19 per cent popularity rating, Madam Minister.  Do 

you realize that?  From 55 down to 19.  These are part of the 

reasons. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, those were Dr. Hindmarsh's words, the 

member who has just resigned from your Health Research 

Board that you so fondly were reporting to the other day.  The 

ambiguity of your program is the cause for lots of concern in 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Madam Minister, the direct threat to the survival of rural 

communities is at stake here and I wish you would take your 

job seriously and remove some of that partisan rhetoric in your 

answers. 

 

Madam Minister, sugar-coating that you apply cannot hide the 

fact that the removal of hospital care and physician care would 

be a serious blow to the communities that your NDP (New 

Democratic Party) are telling that you're trying to help.  

Without hospital care, without physician care, people are going 

to have to travel away from their communities.  Where, Madam 

Minister, I ask you, are these people going to go? 

 

Dr. Hindmarsh tells us that these people are going to go to the 

larger hospitals in Saskatoon.  Is that part of your closure . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  I had made up my 

mind before I came in that I was not going to interfere with 

question period today at all.  But I have kept track of the 

number of interruptions and I'm sure you don't want to know 

how many there are. 

 

I ask the minister to please respond to the question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite did 

nothing with respect to trying to attract health care 

professionals to Saskatchewan and to our community.  They 

did nothing.  They poured some $489 million into capital 

construction which has increased in operating budgets by $80 

million in the province in the last 10 years.  And they are only 

using something like one-third of the potential beds in that kind 

of situation, and they did nothing about getting front-line 

workers and doctors to our rural communities. 

 

This is a problem that has been escalating very quickly over the 

last 10 years.  The hope is, is that by organizing communities 

on a district basis where they share responsibility for getting 

doctors to rural communities, the hope is, is that through the 

development of group medical practices on a district basis and 

a smaller community basis, that when a small town loses its 

doctors, the larger community will have a responsibility for 

getting doctors to that smaller community. 

 

That's the recommendation.  Those are the plans.  And I must 

say, Mr. Speaker, at least this government is doing something 

about it when the former government did absolutely nothing. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Another question to 

the Madam Minister.  What I would say to you, Madam 

Minister: if you and your colleagues and the Minister of 

Finance and the Premier had done nothing, that would be 

positive for rural Saskatchewan, let me assure you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Now, Madam Minister, I asked you the 

question, and according to Dr. Hindmarsh, is telling me the 

communities like Meadow Lake are going to be sending their 

patients to Saskatoon, that is already overstressed.  Those are 

not my words.  That comes from the medical community, 

Madam Minister.  You chose to ignore answering that question 

as well.  And you got into your political rhetoric. 

 

Madam Minister, I would just want to tell you in case you don't 

know, that the city hospitals are already filled to capacity -- 

filled to capacity because of your cut-backs to those facilities.  

Nurses and doctors are being run off their feet, Madam 

Minister.  Today in the newspaper we see headlines that say: 

stay in Royal University Hospital overcrowded and frustrating, 

says a youth; a young gentleman with pneumonia put into a 

ward at 103-degree temperature with young kids, with young 

children. 

 

Tell, tell us what effect closing down rural hospitals in rural 

communities, the effect that it will have on the major hospitals 

in Saskatoon and Regina, that are already stretched to their 

limit.  Tell us that, Madam Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite knows that with 

respect to the Royal University Hospital, the pediatric wing 

closure has been taking place over several years under your 

administration.  For summer, there have been summer wings 

that have been shut down, and this has been an ongoing thing 

in Saskatoon.  And the fact of the matter is, is that is apparently 

going to be opened up in the fall.  These are decisions that are 

made by those hospital boards.  The member opposite fully 

knows that. 

 

As to the Meadow Lake hospital, Mr. Speaker, the Meadow 

Lake hospital is not a hospital that's going to be closed.  It's a 

hospital that's used to its full capacity.  And as to what Dr. 

Hindmarsh says, I can't comment on that.  He hasn't expressed 

his concerns to us. But the member opposite . . . And I don't 

believe what the member opposite says in many of these 

instances, because his rhetoric is as it is quoted in the Swift 

Current Sun.  It says here: most of what we hear from the 

opposition lately is closer to ravings than rhetoric.  And that is 

an apt description of what the member opposite is engaged in 

today -- ravings.  It's ravings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- These are not my words, Madam Minister.  

But Meadow Lake had eight doctors.  It has six today.  In a 

month it'll have five.  And at that point, medical services will 

cease.  Those are not my words, Madam Minister.  Those are 

not my words. 



3164 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

And you say it's always the case in University Hospital.  Here 

are quotes: but he conceded it was undertaken to save the 

hospital money.  A further quote, he went a bit further: the 

closures this year have gone further because of budget 

considerations, Madam Minister.  Your cuts -- your cuts -- 

that's what's doing that, Madam Minister. 

 

When Wilkie, when Dinsmore, when Beechy closes their 

hospitals, the acute facilities, Madam Minister, whose decision 

will that be? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, what we're asking 

communities to do is to get together on a district basis and to 

do needs assessment of their health care needs in the district.  

We are hoping that they will be able to come together.  They'll 

be able to have consultation and discussions.  They will be able 

to do needs assessment and make some determination on a 

district basis as to what their health care needs are. 

 

Communities may explore options.  They may explore options 

as to whether or not they want to convert some beds into 

long-term care.  They may explore options as to whether they 

want to reduce their acute care component and put in a 

community health centre.  They will want to look at what their 

needs assessment are and explore all potential options and have 

these consultations. 

 

And I must say, Mr. Speaker, that as I go through the province, 

communities and stakeholders with whom I'm speaking behave 

far more maturely, far more intelligently, and far more 

competently than the members opposite with their ravings and 

their scare tactics and their fearmongering. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you for adding the applauding time to 

the length of question period, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Madam Minister, you didn't answer my question.  Who is 

going to make the decision to close the hospital?  You didn't 

answer that.  In your roundabout, rhetorical way you refused to 

answer. 

 

I'm going to tell you who's going to make that decision, Madam 

Minister.  It's the board.  Right?  The board is going to do your 

dirty work for you.  They are going to make the decision.  And 

what are they going to base that decision on, Madam Minister?  

Funding.  You hold the purse-strings.  They are going to be 

forced to make decisions dependent upon your refusal to 

adequately fund those districts.  Is that not true, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite 

had developed a plan for health care and a strategy -- a 

long-term plan and a long-term strategy for health care 10 

years ago -- we wouldn't have the problems we have today in 

getting health care professionals out to our rural communities. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is this government has put forward a 

plan that hopes to bring more health 

professionals to many of our communities, that will ask 

communities to come together and determine what their health 

care needs are, that will ask communities to come forward with 

a plan for their area which they will consult with with the 

Department of Health. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is the members opposite sat on their 

hands for 10 years and they did nothing.  They did nothing.  

They had no plan for health care, no long-term strategy at all.  

And as an end they continued to chalk up the debt in this 

province to some $15 billion . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I want the public to note that 

every time I come to the nitty-gritty part of her wellness plan, 

she refuses to answer the questions.  She refuses to answer the 

question, who's going to order the closing of the hospitals?  She 

refuses to answer the question, how can they do anything else 

except remain within the limits, within the parameters of your 

budget guidelines? 

 

Because, Madam Minister, now I'm coming to the critical point 

and I tell you this, Madam Minister, that we are going to get a 

multi-tiered health care system in Saskatchewan because I 

asked you this question, I asked you this question: who is going 

to pay for services in Kyle or in Dinsmore when those services 

are no longer available?  How will these residents be able to be 

assured of services within their own area?  How will they do 

that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, is 

there will be services in Kyle and Dinsmore.  The members 

opposite are attempting to engage in scare tactics.  There will 

be services.  And if Dinsmore wishes to participate in the 

mid-west planning group and become part of the mid-west 

district, then Dinsmore will have a voice on that board and will 

have input to the decisions that the board is making.  The board 

will make decisions for the district and will have an obligation 

and a duty to ensure that there are health care services in every 

single part of that district. 

 

And the fact of the matter is, is by pooling their resources, by 

pooling their co-operation these communities, these 

communities within a district are going to be able to deliver a 

more co-ordinated and integrated approach to health care, a 

much more co-ordinated approach.  And they will be able to do 

programming that the members opposite were never able to 

deliver to their communities when they were in power. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I ask you, please don't evade this critical, 

important question.  Answer it directly.  Bernie Kirwan's, 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), 

rural communities want to know this answer.  Madam Minister, 

your scheme, instigated by the colleague sitting beside you, the 

Minister of Finance and the Premier of the province . . . have 

told you to save 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3165 

money.  This scheme is about off-loading, down-loading.  

Madam Minister, I'm saying to you that if these people want 

services, if they want enhanced services within their own area . 

. . 

 

Tell me, Madam Minister.  You've gone on record, and the 

Minister of Social Services told me the other day that these 

boards would not have taxing powers.  All right, I'm glad to 

hear that.  I think everybody's glad to hear that.  Will you also 

confirm, Madam Minister, that municipalities also will not 

have taxing powers.  Will you make that commitment that 

you're not down-loading and forcing municipalities to pick up 

the tab that you are refusing to pay.  Are the worst fears of 

Bernie Kirwan's not being realized, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

quite right.  These interim boards will not have taxing power.  

The member opposite also knows that we have set up or are in 

the process of setting up a committee consisting of the 

Department of Health, the Department of Finance, a 

representative from SARM, one from SUMA (Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association), SASCH (Saskatchewan 

Association of Special Care Homes), SHA (Saskatchewan 

Health-Care Association), and other health care organizations 

that will look at the issue of hospital levies and make some 

recommendations to government as to what will occur with 

respect to the hospital levy and municipal taxation. 

 

The member opposite knows that, and he knows that full well.  

But he's quite right; these interim boards will have no taxing 

authority. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Licensing of Private Vocational Schools in Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my 

pleasure to introduce a green paper on the licensing of private 

vocational schools in Saskatchewan.  Specifically, this 

document addresses the purpose of the licensing procedure and 

how the government proposes to improve it.  I want to 

emphasize that the green paper process will include providing 

opportunities for those who want to make their views known to 

do so. 

 

The Department of Education is responsible to license private 

vocational schools in Saskatchewan.  Licence requirements are 

spelled out in The Private Vocational Schools Regulation Act 

and regulations.  The purpose of the Act is to ensure that 

Saskatchewan students wanting vocational training can be 

confident they are getting quality training. 

 

Students have a right to expect that their training will be up to 

date and that it will help prepare them for the world of work.  

They have every right to expect this whether they receive their 

training at a public training facility or a private one.  The initial 

legislation was introduced with 

this goal in mind.  Minimum standards were established before 

the schools could be licensed by the province. 

 

However the existing legislation is now over 12 years old.  

Times change.  Our legislative tools for regulating private 

vocational schools may no longer be in step with the times.  

Specifically, we were concerned that the current Act does not 

provide students with enough protection from a consumer's 

standpoint.  We also felt the legislation could be improved in 

terms of ability to quickly resolve disputes. 

 

Lastly, we wanted the Act to be more responsive to questions 

of program quality in private vocational schools. 

 

The green paper I'm tabling today outlines how we propose to 

address these questions.  It will also serve as the basis for 

consultation on how we might improve the Act.  The green 

paper represents the beginning of the process of improving the 

legislation.  It not only defines what we feel needs to be done, 

but seeks the opinions of those most concerned as well. 

 

I am confident the final product will be much improved as a 

result.  An independent three-person panel will be established 

to conduct public hearings on proposed changes to the Act.  

Hearings will be held in Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert 

early in the fall of this year.  These meetings will be completely 

open.  We expect to hear from the public at large, along with 

those most directly affected by the proposed changes -- school 

owners and operators, instructors, and students. 

 

People will have the option of making their views known in 

whatever way they are most comfortable -- in person, in 

writing, or even by mail.  At the conclusion of the 

public-meeting phase, the panel is to present its 

recommendations. 

 

I want to re-emphasize that this green paper is intended 

primarily as a focal point for discussion.  Nothing has been 

finalized nor will it be until we've had a chance to study the 

panel's recommendations. 

 

I should also point out that the review process and eventual 

changes to the private vocational schools' legislation are taking 

place as part of a much broader exercise.  I'm referring here to 

the various reviews under way or planned for all aspects of our 

post-secondary education system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes the important 

contribution private vocational schools make to training in 

Saskatchewan.  Through this green paper we hope to find a 

way of building on their strengths so that this tradition can 

continue.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

thank the minister for sending over a copy of her address so 

that I could have a look at it. 



3166 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

We look forward to the participation of the public in this 

process.  We're very pleased to see that the minister has been 

taking our advice that we were giving to the Minister of 

Agriculture, to go out and consult. 

 

We believe that there needs to be a set of guidelines set out for 

the licensing of private vocational schools.  It's important, 

Madam Minister, that these schools be dealt with in a proper 

manner and that they in turn deal with their student clients also 

in a proper manner.  We have seen a number of these 

institutions over the last while fail, as businesses do, Mr. 

Speaker.  But when such failures occur, it's important that the 

education of the students not be unduly disrupted or that they 

do not lose their tuition fees. 

 

Madam Minister, we like the idea of a panel to go around and 

hear the representations from the public, but we do have some 

concerns.  We will be watching to see that it's not the NDP 

contribution list that is consulted in setting up this committee, 

as we have seen happening in many, many of the other boards 

that are currently being put into place by your government. 

 

We're pleased that public meetings will be held, that they will 

be open to everyone and not unduly formal.  We believe it's 

important that people have the opportunity to express 

themselves and that everyone be heard, not just those who can 

present the best written brief. 

 

Madam Minister, private vocational schools provide an 

important service in society and should be encouraged.  We on 

this side of the House are prepared to work to see that those 

schools provide the best service possible to their students. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Standing Committee on the Environment 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 

day and with leave I move, seconded by the member from the 

Melfort: 

 

 That a standing committee on the environment be appointed 

and empowered to examine and inquire into all such 

matters and things as may be referred to it by this 

Assembly, and to report from time to time their 

observations thereon; with the power to send for persons, 

papers, and records, and to examine witnesses under oath; 

and that rule 89(1) of the Rules and Procedures of the 

legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan be amended by 

adding the said committee to the list of standing 

committees of the Assembly: and the membership thereof 

shall consist of the following names: Calvert, Murray, 

Anguish, Lautermilch, D'Autremont, Trew, Scott, Crofford, 

Haverstock, and Boyd (and I'm not sure here whether it's 

names or constituencies I need in this motion, and I'll 

correct that if need be) and continue for the duration of this 

legislature but shall be effected from time to time by 

resolution of the Assembly, pursuant to rule 92(1). 

 

I so move. 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, following along the 

same issue and by leave, I move, seconded by the member 

from Melfort: 

 

 That the Standing Committee on the Environment be 

authorized to review and report on legislation relating to the 

environmental issues as may be referred to it by this 

Assembly and that the committee shall have the authority to 

meet during the session when the Assembly is not meeting 

or between sessions to undertake public consultation, to 

meet outside the seat of government to hear testimony and 

to acquire research assistance as deemed appropriate by the 

committee. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might beg leave of the 

Assembly to introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to 

you, and through you to all members of the Assembly, a 

gentleman seated in the west gallery who's a very distinguished 

representative of our country for the Department of External 

Affairs.  And I'm referring to Donald Bobiash who's a good 

friend of mine.  And his family happens to come from the 

community of Zelma which is I'm sure familiar . . . I'm sure all 

members are familiar with Zelma.  And I can say that because 

my great-grandfather also homesteaded at Zelma. 

 

Don Beaubiash is from a farm there, attended the University of 

Saskatchewan, was a Rhodes Scholar for Saskatchewan, and is 

also a former employee of the Government of Saskatchewan, 

now working for the Department of External Affairs in 

Pakistan.  And I'd like all members to join with me in 

welcoming Don to Saskatchewan and to the legislature today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Rural Development 

Vote 43 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to please introduce his 

officials. 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3167 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have 

with me today Bill Reader, the deputy minister; Walter 

Antonio and Lloyd Talbot and Larry Chaykowski and John 

Babcock. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Good afternoon, 

Mr. Minister.  I'd like to say hello to your officials.  We've been 

here a few times already at this subject; we're almost becoming 

old friends. 

 

I have a few questions that I'd like to just delve right into, Mr. 

Minister.  I believe we had asked you some questions with 

regards to the question package that you had sent over, and that 

you might be supplying some follow-ups to us.  If you have 

them, we'd appreciate having it now.  If not, what I want today 

in order to -- for some expediency of time -- is to ascertain 

from you a commitment that you would give us the information 

on any of the questions that we happen to find that we don't 

have in our possession as we complete going through all of this 

pile of records and questions. 

 

I have to admit I haven't quite finished it yet and I do have a lot 

of questions in here, but if you'd give me that commitment, 

then we could carry on to the rest of my questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, certainly we will try to 

endeavour to the best of our ability to answer any questions 

that we haven't fully answered. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, 

would you also commit today, that you will not be eliminating 

the Department of Rural Development or amalgamating it with 

any other department within the foreseeable future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, that is not my role 

in life to determine.  I think they'll be determined by cabinet 

and by Executive Council and by the Premier.  We are looking 

at government reorganization and certainly there may be pieces 

and bits of government moved around.  And the foreseeable 

future is a long time and I'm not prepared to make that 

commitment. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, I will be very happy to pass that 

information on to the SARM and to those people that will be 

affected.  And I'm quite sure that they'll be very disappointed in 

you as their minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you commit today that your government will 

not amalgamate any two or more municipalities unless they 

jointly request such an amalgamation in writing, and then only 

after a majority vote by the affected rate payers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I've said many 

times in here that we do not have a grand scheme to 

amalgamate RMs (rural municipality).  They will be allowed to 

make those choices.  And we will be working with RMs to look 

at all ways that they can work together to reduce their costs, 

whether that be amalgamation or sharing equipment or 

whatever.  And again it will be up to the RMs to make those 

sorts of decisions. 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, will 

you commit today that your department will not cut the 

Department of Rural Development by 30 per cent in funding in 

the next budgetary process, and that you will resign your 

portfolio if you do not stay within the 3.4 per cent cuts to the 

RMs that you have set forth in this year's budget as a projection 

for next year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the 3.3 per cent 

budget cuts referred to third-party grants given to RMs.  That 

was, as I've stated earlier, a target date.  I think it's never been 

done in the past where third parties were given an estimate or a 

guess at what their next year's funding would be.  It will allow 

the RMs to plan ahead somewhat and we will again try to 

finalize those numbers and pass it on to the RMs at the earliest 

possible date. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, in view of your tragic errors in 

the past year of performance or past eight months of 

performance, will you commit today to replace and reimburse 

RMs for the errors that your department have made in this 

year's calculations by cutting 18.3 per cent out of the grants to 

municipalities instead of the 7.4 per cent that you have written 

in the budget for this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we did not make 

any errors in our calculations.  We specified to the RMs that 

their grants this year would be 7.4 per cent less than they were 

last year and they will come in right on target. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- That is the most extreme exaggeration that 

I've ever heard in my life, Mr. Minister.  But I'll leave the 

municipalities and the people of this province to judge you for 

that answer.  They also have calculators. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would like to draw your attention to a memo 

from your deputy minister to the deputy minister of Finance 

that was provided to us by staff in your department.  I'll send 

you a copy across as soon as we can find someone that can do 

that.  I want to continue to read this while a page comes across. 

 

First your deputy identifies a 150,000 annual saving that could 

be had if a contract was completed with WESTBRIDGE 

Computers, but indicated he needed the assistance of Finance 

and SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation).  

Was this contract executed and have the savings been realized? 

 

I may as well give you the three questions I have here and then 

I'll send that material over. 

 

Will you also note in the memo that your deputy said the 

attached forecast was based on the PSC (Public Service 

Commission) not concluding a collective agreement that fiscal 

year.  Just refresh my memory and confirm that you saved 

$82,000 by ensuring that no wage increases were negotiated in 

the fiscal year 1991-92. 

 

(1500) 

 

And question number three.  Now if you turn the page you will 

find and see a breakdown of the department's budget forecast 

for the end of 1991-92 fiscal year.  First, is this 



3168 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

how the 1991-92 budget actually turned out and do you have 

with you the final version of this document?  I want a copy of 

the final version to compare with this one.  If a page will come 

over I'll send that over and I'll read the memo. 

 

Okay, the memo goes as such: 

 

 Remaining 1991-92 Funding: I am submitting Saskatchewan 

Rural Development's strategy for reducing program 

services expenditures to the target level of $23,719,200. 

 

 Although the department is committed to meeting its target, 

many of the expenditure reductions will result in a decline 

in services to our rural clientele.  Restraint in staffing, 

travel, telephone and marketing costs will translate into 

30% fewer client contacts through Rural Service Centres.  

Internal operations have been reduced to an even greater 

extent.  Deferred maintenance in community pastures and 

at ferry crossings will result in longer term costs. 

 

 I wish to draw your attention to two measures which are in 

part dependent on the action of central agencies.  The 

department is currently negotiating a 3 year contract with 

Westbridge which will reduce our mainframe costs by 

$85,000 in 1991-92 with potential annual savings of 

$150,000.  We require the assistance of Finance and 

S.P.M.C. to execute the contract. 

 

 The department has also adjusted its salary forecast by 

$82,000 on the assumption that the Public 

Service/Government Employees Collective Agreement will 

not be settled in this fiscal year. 

 

 The targeted expenditure level is reflected in the attached 

December special warrant request and our fourth-quarter 

funding requirements. 

 

Now it is signed by one of your department people.  And I 

won't read the name because I don't believe that we want to 

embarrass any individuals. 

 

Will you please answer those three questions, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, could I get the 

member to table that document so that I can answer the 

questions that he's reading from? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I'll send the memo over.  I've already tabled 

the other two documents that have the figures on them.  If you 

want to just take them right on over to him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the computer 

system was installed and we are on target with that.  As the 

member opposite knows, there was no increase in union rates 

as of yet.  The contract is not yet signed.  We normally budget 

in the department to absorb any unexpected increases in union 

rates.  And I think if there was another question there, I've 

missed it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay, you identified $150,000 annual 

saving.  And I believe you say that because the computer deal 

went through you've made that saving.  I think you've made a 

commitment as well that the $82,000 was also made as a 

saving.  The third question was that if you would turn the page 

you would see a breakdown of the department's budget forecast 

for the end of 1991-92.  Now that's on those first two pages I 

sent you over.  First is this, how the '91-92 budget actually 

turned out, and do you have with you the final version of this 

document?  I want a copy of the final version to compare to 

this one. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We do not have the final 

document, but we will get it for you.  We don't have it with us; 

we will get it for you.  We were very, very, very close to being 

right on target. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I will accept that 

commitment.  I have another question that I will carry on to 

then.  I have a couple of quick questions regarding order in 

council 92-934 whereby you transferred certain lands to the 

Meewasin Authority for the sum of $100. 

 

I'm not speaking in opposition to the transfer, but I think it is 

important that people know the real cost of the various 

transactions that governments make.  Number one, Mr. 

Minister, was there an appraisal of the land?  And if so, was the 

fair market value of the land transferred to Meewasin? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, that land was land 

that the Meewasin Valley Authority needed for the 

Wanuskewin Park in Saskatoon.  It was 1.7 acres I believe, and 

I don't think that we probably did a formal appraisal on it 

which would have cost us probably more than the land was 

worth.  And certainly considering the cause, I think the value 

was in line. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- You've already answered the question that I 

would have asked, which is why not?  I will carry on though. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, the Minister of Finance has made a big 

to-do about writing off capital losses or reductions in market 

value of assets held by the government.  Where is the market 

value of this land transfer reflected in your department's 

budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, this would not in 

any case . . . the value of land would not be reflected in the 

operating budget.  I think the value of the land, the 1.7 acres is 

hardly a significant amount of our assets in any case 

considering the value of $100 of the land. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, I suggest that the transfer of 

this land represents a grant to the Meewasin Authority which is 

fair enough, but a grant that far exceeds $100 in value.  I 

believe that it is absolutely the right of the taxpayer to know 

the value of the grant to the Authority represented by this 

transfer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we do not, as we 

say, we did not have an appraisal on it.  This land I believe is 

not high value land.  It's probably waste land and $100 may 

have well been more than it was worth.  So I don't know that 

there was any significant transfer involved there. 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3169 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, I would find it really hard to 

believe that any one point whatever acres near any major city 

would be worth less than a hundred dollars.  I mean, let's face 

it.  This is pretty close to a big major metropolitan centre in 

Saskatchewan.  I want to ask you if there have been other 

similar transfers for less than market value.  And if so, would 

you like to list . . . or I would like you to list those for me 

including the real market value and the recipient of the 

government grant of land. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We can make that commitment.  I 

think . . . and most of the transfers of land that take place at less 

than . . . or less than or at some deemed price would be within 

the departments of government.  If we transfer an acre of land 

to Highways or a few acres to Parks and whatever, that sort of 

transfer takes place.  And it's often not valued; we don't do an 

appraisal on it.  So I can get a list of those sorts of things if 

you'd like. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I most certainly 

would like.  And I'm going to suggest to you that I think there's 

considerable valuable amount of property that might be 

involved.  And I think the taxpayers would like to know about 

this. 

 

We'd also like to know, are you willing to request that the 

Provincial Auditor undertake an audit of all the land transfers 

and sales under your jurisdiction to determine exactly what the 

value has been transferred and to make a report on what 

accounting and reporting treatment such transfers would 

receive?  Will you trust the Provincial Auditor to do the job for 

us, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the auditor does 

that every year. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Could you see to it 

that we have the results of that determination.  I'll take that as a 

positive response. 

 

I want to move on to the next set of questions, Mr. Minister.  

I'm now going to send across to you a computer print-out.  It is 

in the original document that shows all the revenues of the 

department as at October 21, 1991.  To start with I would like 

you to confirm that this is a legitimate document in that it is a 

computer print-out that was generated by your staff. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, these appear to be 

working documents of our department from what we can tell.  

We don't have our computers hand-printed so we can tell 

whether they come out of our computer.  But it seems to be 

information . . . this particular information I think is a list of a 

breakdown of our salary costs month by month, branch by 

branch. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  There are still a 

number of people who know your intention is not only to do 

away with their jobs, but to do away with your own entire 

department of Rural Development.  Now this document is 

accurate and I challenge you to show that it is not accurate if 

you happen to think it might not be.  But I want you to provide 

for me the same print-out showing all 

department revenues as of March 31, 1992, and again the year 

to date for June 31, 1992.  Can you provide that for me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- This document you gave me has 

absolutely nothing to do with revenues.  But we can provide 

our revenue forecast at the beginning of the year and as of the 

first quarter. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I will expect to get 

that information from you and we will be pursuing that because 

it is important to our point.  I will take your word on that and 

pass on to the set of questions, Mr. Minister. 

 

I am now going to send you a copy of the detailed budget for 

the department prepared for you to show you the precise status 

of the finances of the department effective October 21, 1991.  I 

wonder if I'm doing the same one that I just did here.  Yes I am.  

Sorry about that.  There's no use repeating the same question.  I 

happen to have two copies.  I was intending on sending you the 

top copy with those other lists and I didn't do that.  My 

apologies, Mr. Minister.  So we will expect to get those 

answers from you. 

 

We have spent quite a bit of time going through your Estimates 

and portfolio.  While I would want to say just at this time, we 

haven't gone through the Estimates on a point-by-point, 

item-by-item basis, I believe that with the information that you 

have provided us, that we can get a pretty accurate assessment 

of how your department is operating and what direction it is 

going in. 

 

I will once again state for the benefit of the people in rural 

municipalities throughout Saskatchewan that as the critic for 

this department, it is my firm belief that this department is 

under very serious, very, very serious possibility of being 

eliminated totally, or at the very least, amalgamated with other 

departments.  I believe that the information that you will 

provide us will prove that point, and I believe that if that 

doesn't happen at that stage it will be proven out in time. 

 

(1515) 

 

I therefore caution the minister that if this is his intent and if he 

does this move, he would be doing so against the wishes of the 

SARM, which is the parent body of all of the rural 

municipalities in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think you know the structure full well, Mr. Minister, and I 

think that you know full well that there have been resolutions 

passed by the SARM, which is the representative body that has 

conventions every year with representatives that can come 

from every municipality in the province, the voting delegates, 

and they have voted unanimously to keep their own 

department. 

 

In the past few weeks, I want to point out to you and I have a 

lot of them in this set of files here, I have letters from many 

municipalities that have decided that they too believe that there 

is a threat to this very department.  Without exception, every 

one of these letters from the individual municipalities that have 

written to me have pointed out their very strong opposition to 

any move to either down-size the department or to eliminate or 

to 



3170 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

amalgamate it with any other department. 

 

It is very critical also to people with interests such as the 

critical wildlife habitat Bill that we have just changed the name 

of, but I'll refer to it in its old context in order for you to 

remember the fact that there has now been a commitment made 

in that very Act that the Department of Rural Development will 

continue to operate and handle the affairs of that particular land 

structure that is set up underneath that particular Bill.  Those 

people are very concerned also that this department now 

remain in place because they expect this to be the department 

that will handle their affairs. 

 

And so I caution you, minister, if you have designs on 

eliminating the department, take a look, consult with the 

people, talk to the municipalities, be very sure of your ground, 

because these people are deadly serious.  They'll boot you out 

of here three years from now if you take away their 

department.  They simply don't want it, and I don't think I can 

put it to you any stronger than that. 

 

And with that I'm going to allow you to complete the Estimates 

for today in Rural Development.  And I assure you that in the 

next session when you come back with a new budget for next 

year, or if it's a minibudget this fall, whichever, at our first 

opportunity we will be challenging you on the basis of all the 

information that we will have had a time to study through by 

then as well as all of the new figures that you will be bringing 

in.  And we won't be letting you off nearly as lightly as we are 

today. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 14 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just a question that 

occurred to me as a result of question period today.  And I 

wanted to know if the minister had any thoughts with respect to 

rural municipalities having to increase their taxes to help fund 

health care.  And obviously they're worried about it, as it was 

here in question period. 

 

Rural municipalities have had to raise taxes for education, and 

that's not real popular, and it's difficult to do, as you know.  Is 

there anything that you could say to RM councillors and rural 

municipal government that would make them more 

comfortable with the fact that they're not going to have to raise 

taxes to keep their health care under the new wellness model.  

And I can be a little bit more specific. 

 

If in fact there are decisions made where communities are 

going to lose their hospital or close a hospital or convert a 

hospital, and they're not going to have that acute care, but if 

they want it, then they could raise their local money so that 

they could keep it. 
 

The two-tiered health system is something that worries people.  

In other words, those communities and rural municipalities that 

have the money maybe could have health care.  Those that 

don't, don't.  So there's going to be some really difficult 

decisions made about raising taxes locally if there's off-loading 

down at the local level . . . 

 (inaudible interjection) . . . If we want to maintain our 

integrated facility or maintain the health care stuff, we're going 

to have to raise taxes. 

 

Is there anything that you could say that you have talked about 

with your Health colleague and with your Finance colleague 

that would enlighten the RM about this and RM councils? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well certainly the RM councils are 

concerned, and the SARM is concerned about anything that 

forces them to raise taxes.  They have to collect taxes, and 

they're collecting them from farmers who are not in a good 

position to be paying increases in taxes.  And health care costs 

are certainly one of the things that they're concerned about. 

 

The mill rates right now . . . and the average mill rate across the 

province is for a municipality, for themselves, 46.6; for 

schools, 70.2; and for hospital, 4.  So it's a very small portion 

right now. 

 

I guess the only thing that I've discussed with the Minister of 

Health and the Minister of Finance and my other colleagues is 

that one of the advantages of the wellness model that will 

hopefully provide more services to rural communities and 

better service, but it will also do it in a very cost efficient way.  

And some of the things that we are contemplating doing, we 

anticipate some substantial savings in health care costs. 

 

And from that point of view, I guess that should provide some 

comforts to the RMs.  Because if we continue on the way we 

are with our health care system not running efficiently, 

somebody has to pay for that and it will have to come out of 

the taxpayers' pockets somewhere, whether it's the RMs or the 

taxpayers in general. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if you think this is going to 

save a lot of money -- and I just want to clear this up -- if you 

think this is going to save money because you are -- I'll try to 

use the right words -- consolidating health care services by 

closing some in various communities and you're making them 

go to some place else . . . Say they're closing all around 

Rosetown, as we heard today.  Closing in Dinsmore, closing in 

Beechy, closing in Kyle, and closing in other communities, 

Lucky Lake, whatever, and they're moving to Beechy. 

 

Now you're suggesting that you're going to save money 

because you're closing these other health care facilities.  Now 

what I'm trying to find out is what if Beechy, for example, and 

in that rural municipality in that area, they want to maintain the 

health care facility.  So they say, well we've got enough money.  

We'll raise taxes to kick in some money to maintain it.  And 

that option is there for them.  Then they could get into a 

situation where they are raising local taxes to pay for health 

care facilities that is not being paid for under the new wellness 

model by the general provisions of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Will that happen, and can that happen, in your view?  And have 

you heard of . . . have you had discussions with your colleagues 

about that happening?  Because obviously, Mr. Minister, you 

know what that means. 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3171 

Then some communities that have some money or have some 

oil wells or have some gas or have some other capacity, are 

going to be able to afford health care, but those that do not, or 

have had drought or don't have the diversification, don't have 

access to the revenue and to the capital. 

 

Therefore some municipalities, therefore some people will 

have one level of health care that they can afford locally and 

others will have to travel a hundred miles or others because 

they can't afford it.  Now you're going to get this see-sawing 

and it's far from universal health care across the province of 

Saskatchewan.  But it would be even far from universal health 

care within a rural area. 

 

And that's what they're concerned about because when you get 

communities choosing which one's going to stay open and 

what's going to close, they're going to have that option before 

them. 

 

Have you discussed with the RM and have you discussed with 

your Finance minister and have you discussed with your Health 

minister, the option of local communities, local municipalities, 

raising their mill rates to pay more for health care to keep a 

facility there or to enhance a facility? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, to begin with, the 

Minister of Health has been communicating directly with 

SARM as have I been on many issues, and taxation being one 

of them. 

 

The member from Estevan attempts to put words in my mouth 

here.  The wellness model is not talking about closing 

hospitals.  He continually talks about closures.  What we're 

talking about with wellness model, and I think if you had 

listened in question period you would have heard that, is we're 

talking about people getting together to provide services that 

they need in their community. 

 

And that is the thrust of the wellness model, is to get together 

to provide health based more on different principles of wellness 

rather than strictly on an illness, and work, co-operating 

together, to provide the services that they can't now get in the 

communities. 

 

And one of the things that we anticipate is that it will likely be 

a cheaper way to deliver health care.  That's an added benefit.  

And I think the possibility of local taxation increasing is much 

greater under the present system because if we don't make 

some health care reforms we are on to higher and higher-cost 

health care, and that I think ultimately, given the state of the 

provincial economy and the provincial . . . 

 

(1530) 

 

Just in conclusion, I think -- as I was saying before the power 

so rudely went out on us -- I think the old system that we have, 

the system that's fossilized over a period of years, if we don't 

make some reforms to our health care system, then I think we 

will have some huge costs and there very well might be some 

taxes ended up on rural municipalities to cover.  I think 

certainly that there is no plan at the present to finance more of 

the hospital health 

care costs through rural RMs. 

 

Mr. Martens: --Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'm just going to 

deal with this in a fashion that relates to rural municipalities.  

There was a health region -- it was called health region no. 1 -- 

in the south-west part of the province and was there from 

somewhere in the 1947-48 to about 1978 or '79.  And in that 

period of time the municipalities put together a block of money 

that was allowed to be used as a back-stop for the medical care 

insurance in that period of time.  And they put together in a 

bond $200,000.  Now that's a significant amount of money in 

that period of time.  The municipalities did that and provided a 

service. 

 

Subsequent to that, they had a specific mill rate that was 

requisitioned every year.  Some years it would be, I remember, 

$7; I remember $28.  The majority of that, however, Mr. 

Minister, went to deal with the dental services provided to 

children under 18 years of age.  That service was provided that 

way. 

 

The doctors on the other hand had a fee structure that was at 80 

per cent of the level of provincial funding and that money then 

-- on the 20 per cent -- went to service all of the requirements 

by the health region to pay off all the bills plus provide dental 

services, plus other things that the health care region would 

provide. 

 

Now in about 1977 that was all done away with by your former 

government.  It was all squashed.  It was taken away.  And 

with that, with that -- if you go to the Department of Health 

you'll find this to be accurate -- with that, went about $480,000 

that went back to the Department of Health. 

 

All of that money was put together by the municipalities, the 

taxes paid by people in my municipality and other 

municipalities.  I think there was about 35 municipalities in 

total.  All those municipalities contributed.  When the health 

care change came about in the middle or late '70s, then that 

money was just sucked up by the Health department. 

 

And what we're vitally concerned about, Mr. Minister, is that 

that same function will happen again, only in somewhat of a 

reverse. 

 

Now you're going to get these big health care boards setting up 

and saying, okay now here's the program; we're going to give 

you 75 per cent of the funding required to keep Vanguard 

hospital open, Cabri hospital open, Ponteix hospital open, 

Kincaid, Mankota, Eastend, and Climax.  All those hospitals 

are going to be funded at 75 per cent. 

 

Who's going to pick up the rest?  That's the question that we 

have fundamentally at the bottom of this.  Who is required to 

pick up the rest?  These municipalities are being asked by 

health care boards, hospital boards, some ambulance boards . . . 

and they're requisitioned for a certain amount of money.  Some 

it's five mills.  Some it's six mills.  Some it's eight mills.  And 

that, Mr. Minister, what we are having a problem. 

 

Health care should not be funded by property tax.  That's 



3172 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

where we have a belief that is absolutely, I believe, in every 

person's best interest.  You just tell me what you think of that, 

and then I'll come up with some more scenarios about how the 

difficulty will increase as we go along in the system. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the members 

opposite can come up with the different scenarios all afternoon.  

And as the Minister of Rural Development, I'm naturally very 

concerned about the development of the health care and the 

health care reform and the wellness model as it applies to rural 

Saskatchewan.  But if you are into asking specific questions of 

health care regions and boards, it'd probably be better 

addressed to the Minister of Health tomorrow . . . (inaudible) . . 

. address concerns about increase in taxes.  I guess that is 

hardly related to wellness. 

 

I think if there was to be off-loading of taxes to the SARM or 

to rural municipalities, it could occur under the present system 

or under a reformed system.  I guess what I'm saying is that we 

think that we can provide a better system with health care 

reform, and that really is unrelated to the issue of off-loading to 

RMs. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, this goes even beyond 

that.  And I'll point this out.  Your staff will know that the RM 

of Riverside has about three times the assessment of Miry 

Creek or Saskatchewan Landing or Hazlet which are 

surrounding them.  And the reason is, Mr. Minister, they have 

the oil in their municipality.  And all of that oil just seems to 

come out of that one municipality.  And they will have the 

freedom then on the basis of a mill rate attached to a requisition 

asked for by the hospital board that will be giving them an 

opportunity to say, we can have a health care facility. 

 

And then you go to Rush Lake municipality or to Morse or to 

Riverhurst where there's absolutely no industrial development, 

and they will not be able to have one.  So what you have is the 

city of Swift Current is going to have one, Cabri will have one 

because that's in that municipality, and nobody else will have 

one there.  Gull Lake might not even have one because they 

don't have enough oil to generate the income for that. 

 

And that's the kind of thing that we're talking about.  Who in 

the south-west is going to have one?  Shaunavon is the only 

municipality . . . Bone Creek is probably the only municipality 

with oil in its area.  You go to Eastend, they're not going to 

have one.  You go to Ponteix, Mankota, Kincaid, Vanguard, 

and Lafleche -- they don't have any of that opportunity to 

develop that kind of an infrastructure for a health care facility 

because they haven't got the tax base. 

 

You have to understand that rural municipal people, Bernard 

Kirwan included . . . and I heard him twice at SARM district 

meetings and your staff will have heard him too, say we have 

to be very careful about off-loading on the municipal tax base 

on property taxes because we have a serious problem coming 

from this government.  The second thing he said is we have to 

be worried about health care.  That's what he said at every one 

of the ones that I was at. 

And that, Mr. Minister, is what we're pointing to in this 

instance.  And it's necessary for you to be involved in the 

discussion because you're going to have a different level of 

care.  And they're going to have to drive . . . it's a hundred 

miles from the border to Swift Current. 

 

And how many people in an accidental basis are going to have 

health care?  Not many of them.  And I have lived, Mr. 

Minister, in periods of time when that telephone wasn't 

available to have health care, when the facilities weren't 

available for health care because you couldn't get that accident 

victim to the location where it was required for service.  And 

what we have today is modern technology, and we're going to 

take all of that away. 

 

And then it's going to come on the tax base, on the property tax 

base, and that's what we're worried about.  That is the 

contention that we've made here right from the beginning of 

this discussion.  And I think you need to be worried about it 

because Mr. Kirwan doesn't want to have it come on the 

property tax base either.  In fact he wants to get rid of the 

school board on the property tax basis too.  He doesn't want all 

that other stuff. 

 

And then you add on recreation and all these other things.  

And, Mr. Minister, we want to preserve the health care that 

we've got.  By putting it on the property tax isn't going to 

preserve it; it's going to ditch it.  And that's what we're worried 

about. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess it's the 

opposition's job to point out concerns.  But I think the member 

is speculating and pointing out the worst-possible-case scenario 

of what might happen.  There is no plan to move, off-load 

health care costs to rural tax bases.  And certainly that presents 

. . . there would be problems if that were to occur. 

 

And you know, that's something that certainly we've said we 

were setting . . . I think the Minister of Health will tell you if 

you ask her that we're studying the possibility of different 

funding methods and we're talking to people. 

 

But to say that because the wellness model, we're reforming the 

health care system, somehow that means that it's all going to 

get dumped on local RMs and we won't be able to afford their 

hospitals, I think that is a connection that is not at all valid.  I 

think again, if we can deliver better services for the same 

money or the same services for less money, that in the long run 

will mean it's a much, much larger possibility that it will be 

able to be funded provincially. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, what we're asking you to tell us 

and to tell rural people is that your new wellness model won't 

result in higher taxes at the municipal level between RMs and 

between areas so that they are forced to compete for health care 

by raising their taxes because . . . Obviously if they're going to 

lose their hospital or they're going to close this health facility or 

some of it because you planned, as you say, to save all this 

money by consolidating in a few places and that's the only way 

you can do it, then they are going to be tempted to raise taxes 

to save their town health or to save their community. 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3173 

What we want to know from you is that you're not going let 

that happen, so communities will not have to bear that 

responsibility to stay alive and maintain the health care services 

by raising their municipal tax rate.  And it could go up.  I'm 

sure you know -- if you have any sense, and your officials 

would know it -- it could go up 50 mills to 100 mills to save 

their health care system. 

 

Now that is not universal health care, and you know that.  That 

is not universal health care across Saskatchewan, because 

you're going to have communities competing with one another 

and people competing with one another.  Those that are lucky 

enough to have the resources to raise the taxes will, and those 

that can't won't.  Because what you've just said, you just said, 

well we're going to save money on the wellness model.  That's 

what you've said.  You're going to be more efficient.  You're 

going to save money.  Well you know what that means.  That 

means you're going to have to close the facilities in Beechy and 

Dinsmore and Kyle and other places, so that in fact they go to 

Rosetown. 

 

Now what's to prevent Kyle from going out and say, well I 

guess we have to jack up our mill rate to save the health care 

system in Kyle -- or people in the RMs surrounding Beechy?  

And they want to know that.  Because then you say, well I 

guess you'll have to do that if you want to save it.  This is the 

new wellness model.  You've said, I can't stop you; it's in your 

hands.  Right?  That's what you're going to say. 

 

And if that's what you're going to say, Mr. Minister, you are 

going to have one holy problem on your hands because you 

don't have universal health care at all.  And you'll have 

community competing with community, which will be pretty 

ugly. 

 

Now you're the minister responsible for the rural municipal 

government.  The head of the SARM and reeves and councils 

are saying as far as they can see there's no other way around it.  

If they want to stick up for their health care facility they're 

going to have to raise the mill rate or else it's gone.  And you 

can say well, it's a lot more efficient.  They have to drive to 

Rosetown or they have to drive to Saskatoon.  But some of 

them will fight back and say I want to stick up for rural 

Saskatchewan or rural communities. 

 

And incidentally, I mean I'm sure that you can believe I don't . . 

. and a lot of people on this side of the House fundamentally 

disagree with what you're doing.  Because you have the 

technology now to run huge operations all over Saskatchewan; 

you don't have to have them all in Regina or Saskatoon and you 

know that.  You can run Crop Insurance out of Melville; you 

can run multibillion-dollar hospitals out of any place. 

 

But in any event, what we want from you is any words of 

assurance with some degree of specificity or some degree of 

authenticity that RMs won't be faced with this in your new 

wellness model.  You're the minister responsible for RM 

government, municipal government.  Can you give them the 

assurance that this will not be the case so you'll have this 

patchwork of health care because of patchwork of tax 

increases.  Can you do that? 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the member from 

Estevan has a holy problem as well.  He just doesn't understand 

the wellness model.  And you know, the idea that the wellness 

model is we're going to shut down all the little hospitals and 

make all the people go to the big hospitals to save money is not 

the wellness model.  If you read the paper you would know 

that. 

 

The wellness model is people getting together, communities 

getting together and deciding whether they want to keep their 

old folks in their homes longer and do that, because that's what 

the community wants, and convert a level 2 care to a level 4 

care -- whatever way they can work together to provide all the 

services that they need. 

 

And we think that we can provide better services that way and 

maybe save some money at the same time.  And I think again, 

if you want to promote problems for rural RMs, we'll keep on 

with the health care system, bury your head in the sand and say 

we're going to continue with the health care system the way it 

is.  And as the costs escalate and the province can no longer 

afford it, there will probably be off-loading. 

 

I think the wellness model will give some local control, some 

input, will provide better services for less money.  And it 

doesn't mean closures.  I have explained it.  Read the paper and 

you would understand it.  I think that is the . . . if you can't 

understand it and you want a real detailed explanation of it, ask 

the Health minister tomorrow and she will explain it to you one 

more time. 

 

This is not a closure hospital plan to save money.  This is a 

wellness model; this is health care reform; this has been 

respected right across the country as the new direction of health 

care in the '90s.  It's the new medicare.  I think you guys are in 

the same position as the opponents to medicare in the '60s, 

pounding on the doors saying we're going to lose our doctors.  

It's going to be the end of the world. 

 

Don't run around doom-saying, get on side and have a look -- at 

least have a look -- at what the wellness model means so you 

know where we're going with it. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I know that we have built 

hospitals, built integrated facilities.  We've put them together.  

What we're concerned about is your whole approach which will 

cause communities and force them to raise taxes.  And they are 

going to be off-loading under your model no matter any way 

you want to design it, that's the case. 

 

You have said you're going to limit or stop funding level 1 and 

2 care.  Right?  Now that's serious enough.  You're going to 

stop level 1 and 2 funding.  So people are worried about what 

is going to happen to the senior citizens with 1 and 2 funding in 

the rural communities, whether it's Beechy or Craik, or 

Davidson or Herbert or wherever it is. 

 

Now you said that you're going to close or convert rural health 

care . . . acute-care health care facilities.  Now what does that 

mean? -- 1 and 2 isn't funded, they're going to have to close 

some of their hospitals, and you're 



3174 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

saying this is the new wellness model because they can all take 

the old folks to Rosetown, or they can take them to Swift 

Current; now they can close the hospitals. 

 

You see what's going to happen?  They're not going to like that.  

Even if you say, well it's your decision.  What they're going to 

say is, well maybe we can come up with enough money to save 

ours.  Which will mean . . . Can't you acknowledge, what 

you're setting them up for is for local people being forced to 

raise more taxes to save their seniors, their health care, their 

integrated facilities, and even their acute care. 

 

There's nothing that you can show me about the wellness 

model that will relieve you as the minister of Municipal Affairs 

from facing higher taxes.  And that will be unfair because some 

municipalities will be able to afford it and some can't.  That's 

why people say, well why would an NDP government -- of all 

people, that believe in universal health care -- force this 

hodgepodge of various levels of service across Saskatchewan 

for Saskatchewan people?  It's unfair. 

 

And you should give us . . . or give them . . . say well, if that 

happens I will compensate; I will make sure that we have 

universal access.  And even though your municipality doesn't 

have oil or doesn't have paper, doesn't have diversification or 

potash, we will make sure that your people have access to 

health care that is equitable across the province.  And you have 

given us no assurance of that.  You've dodged and ducked in 

here. 

 

Can't you tell us that the people of Saskatchewan at the 

municipal level will have access to equitable health care 

without going into their pockets and raising taxes higher than 

their neighbours down the road?  Can't you tell us that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly I can tell you that.  That's 

what the wellness model's all about: to get equitable health 

service into rural areas and that people can afford.  That is what 

the wellness model is all about.  By doing these health care 

reforms, we will have good health care, equitable health care 

available to everyone. 

 

Right now we have areas where the rural health care is in some 

cases less than the urban health care.  And I think that's part of 

the wellness model is to provide better health care.  But I think, 

if the member wants to take up the wellness model, I can give 

you the assurance that there is no plans to increase . . . to 

off-load rural health care taxation onto rural governments. 

 

I can give you assurance that as the Minister of Rural 

Development I do my best to keep in contact with SARM, and 

I do my best to defend and look out for the rural areas and the . 

. . all the rural people and the rural municipalities.  But I also 

want to look after the rural people's health care.  It's also my 

responsibility to be sure that we get . . . my duty to work for 

good health care in rural areas.  And I can give the assurances 

that I will work for all of those things. 

 

If you have specific questions about the health care, I suggest 

you address them tomorrow in Estimates to the Minister of 

Health. 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, well we're maybe making a little 

progress.  I just want your assurance that . . . well no, I want to 

know that you understand the implications of what Health is 

doing to your portfolio. 

 

Now you say you can stand there and say, I'll give you my 

assurance that we'll provide equitable treatment and so forth.  

The treatment is what we're concerned about.  What if a 

municipality decides the only way they can save their health 

care system is to raise the mill rate by 50, 75 mills? 

 

Then what happens?  It's up a hundred times; what happens?  

Are you going to say, well I guess that's part of the wellness 

model?  Would you say, I can't stop them from doing that?  I 

guess if they thought they were going to lose their hospital in 

Beechy or whatever, I guess they can do that.  They can raise 

their own money to save that health care system.  Is that okay if 

they did that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Again, Mr. Chairman, the member 

is wildly speculating. 

 

I think the municipalities certainly have a certain amount of 

autonomy.  The wellness model, as you say, that's my 

responsibility to see that health care is out there.  I think the 

wellness model is going to be great for rural Saskatchewan.  I 

think it's going to provide better health care out there.  And I 

think we will have universal access.  I think we're the party that 

brought in medicare and I think this is a second stage of it. 

 

And for the member to speculate about wild increases in taxes 

to RMs is ridiculous. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, look.  Maybe you can't 

answer the question and maybe you shouldn't, given the 

political implications.  But it's not hypothetical to think that 

communities really want their health care system and the only 

way that they can save it under your system is to raise taxes 

locally.  That's not hypothetical, because they're talking about 

it. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Ridiculous. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- And the minister says it's ridiculous.  There's no 

other way that you're going to provide universal access to all 

these people, take some of them away, without them thinking 

about, I could save it; if I could raise my taxes enough, I could 

contribute. 

 

Now if they do that -- and they're going to do it sure as I'm 

standing here -- what will you do?  And you say, oh that's fine.  

I guess it's your choice.  You have a certain degree of 

independence which you've just finished saying.  It's part of the 

wellness model. 

 

Is that what you're going to say?  Is that it?  So we can go by . . 

. or anybody watching here, the president of SARM now 

knows.  Well my goodness, if an RM wants to raise their 

money to save their health care system, they're going to be 

quietly encouraged to go do that. 

 

That's what you're leaving them with.  And there's nothing that 

you have in mind to prevent that. We just 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3175 

want to acknowledge that.  You're going to consolidate.  And 

you're going to have this new wellness stuff, and it's going to 

move them here, and then they're going to have that choice. 

 

What happens, Mr. Minister, if a RM or a couple of RMs 

decide to raise the mill rate, say 75 mills, 100 per cent increase, 

to save their health care system?  What will you do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, that is the reason 

that we are not imposing the reforms on people.  The Minister 

of Health has been criss-crossing the province, meeting with 

people, talking with people, getting communities together to 

decide what they want.  And communities are not going to 

decide that they want to double their taxes if they can get the 

services in the cheapest way they can. 

 

That, I think, will be one of the things that communities will 

decide.  They will decide how they can deliver services 

cheaper.  And we believe it will be cheaper.  And therefore 

there is no plan to off-load taxes. 

 

So I don't know why you would stand up and ask a 

hypothetical question about what might happen if taxes 

increase. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- That's what we thought.  And that is one awful 

admission.  There's the wellness model like we all wanted to 

see it.  That the local people will have the independence and 

the autonomy to make up their own minds to raise their own 

taxes which, number one, will be unfair because it won't be 

universal.  And those that can afford it will raise it.  And as my 

colleague from Morse just said, and then the city people won't 

have to raise their tax levels to pay for rural health care, and 

you'll have such a fight on your hands between communities, 

between rural and urban people because of inequitable access 

to health care. 

 

Well you just go try.  You just see the kind of situation that 

you're forcing people into.  Well you've got the greatest 

technology; you could have tremendous reform.  You can have 

access to satellites, communication technology, transportation, 

and you're consolidating it in a few centres and then forcing 

people -- forcing them -- to fight their neighbours to save their 

health care system. 

 

(1600) 

 

You say well, it's their system; it's their autonomy.  Well that's 

the answer that we expected.  That's the answer.  And you're 

the minister.  You're going to preside over this where 

municipalities can fight with each other.  It'll be fighting like 

sharks in a feeding frenzy for Heaven's sake, for their health 

care and for their very viability. 

 

I know the jobs and the quality of life that goes with the health 

care facility in rural Saskatchewan.  You go look at the ones 

that we built in Kyle or you look at them in other places and it's 

really important to the community.  They're going to fight for 

their life for those facilities.  And they're going to have to raise 

taxes.  And then you're going to have a patchwork like a quilt.  

This area is high taxes; this one couldn't afford it; this has 

health care. 

And then you're going to have the bigger communities saying 

and the cities, Moose Jaw or Saskatoon or Regina can say, well 

we don't have to raise taxes so much.  Those rural people are 

fighting over what's left, pick the bones out there.  You're 

going to have an awful system.  And you've admitted it here. 

 

That's the wellness model.  It'll give more people access to 

more services at lower cost.  We'll see, we'll see.  You're going 

to run into people who are very, very determined to save their 

communities.  And health care, as you know - 

_ you must know, living in Saskatchewan -- health care to local 

people is really important.  And you're going to force them to 

fight with each other to save what's left. 

 

And they're going to do it with municipal tax rates; therefore 

you're going to be responsible for one of the most unequitable 

systems that you can find any place -- and from a party that 

believes the opposite, that everybody should have equitable 

access.  And you're going to force them or you're going to say, 

well it's your choice.  You raised the taxes.  Well and they're 

going to do it.  But you're not going to fool them. 

 

So the answer you gave here today, well it's their choice, is 

what I expected.  And it's very disappointing, Mr. Minister, if 

that's all you've got for them in your new wellness model, as 

the minister responsible for Municipal Affairs, Rural Affairs, 

that that's it.  That's it.  You have nothing else. 

 

Can't you say that if you have forced to raise your taxes to meet 

some of these health care obligations, we'll be there to help 

you.  Have you got any hope for them at all other than this 

dog-bone fight? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Again, there is no likelihood of 

anybody raising their taxes.  I think the member opposite 

should realize that we're out there asking people to work 

together.  It's the party opposite who was always out there 

trying to start fights.  And again they're out there trying to 

cause divisions which they hope will be politically helpful to 

them. 

 

We again are out there asking people, work together.  All join 

together and let's provide a good health care system for rural 

Saskatchewan.  Let's enhance our health care system.  Let's 

adopt the wellness model.  But the members opposite are out 

there saying, well let's get these communities fighting and we'll 

get some political gain out of it.  That is the difference, I think. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, the truth of the matter is this:  in 

the community that I live and the area of the people that I serve 

will have all of their health care services funded to Swift 

Current.  Okay?  Swift Current gets a new hospital, say, for 

developing the health care there.  Who's going to get the 

funding to keep Vanguard open?  And who's going to get the 

funding to keep Ponteix open?  And who's going to get the 

funding to keep . . . who's going to provide the funding to keep 

those hospitals open?  Kincaid and Gull Lake, who's going to 

pay for that? 

 

And that's, Mr. Minister, is exactly what's happening.  The city 

of Swift Current will not have to increase its taxes 



3176 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

because it comes under universal health care.  It's got a 

hospital, and they will build another one.  But those rural 

communities all the way around will not have . . . And you 

know what those people think?  They don't like that. 

 

And I'm going to read this into the record, because you got this 

letter too and you can go check to see who the lady is, but this 

lady wrote a letter as a result of, Mr. Minister, not me 

communicating with her not me scaring her, but there was a 

50th wedding anniversary in this small community of 

Vanguard and the Minister of Health was there and the 

Minister of Economic Development was there and there was a 

gentleman there who used to represent the constituency that I 

live in.  And he'd made some glowing statements how 

everything was going to shut down in Vanguard. 

 

And the whole thing blew up.  I have had letter after letter 

asking me to make that information available in this Assembly.  

I'm going to read you what this lady says, because it's very 

important: 

 

 Dear Mr. Premier: 

 

 You cannot seriously be considering allowing the Health 

minister to go ahead with her plans for rural health care in 

Saskatchewan.  This gallant dumping of responsibility will 

have such severe ramifications it is impossible even to 

imagine the chaos that will result. 

 

 1. As each hospital, nursing home, etc., jockey for funding in 

the districts, communities will be pitted against each other, 

and even within communities, there will be strife.  The 

effects of that will last for generations to come. 

 

 2. There will be no quality people on these boards.  No 

intelligent person would even consider accepting any 

responsibility for the mess you will be creating. 

 

And I didn't solicit this letter, Mr. Minister, nor did I create the 

atmosphere out there.  But she wanted me to read this: 

 

 3. The cost to health care will be far greater than it is now, 

with the bulk of the money having been spent on these boards 

and administrations with little left for actual health care, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

 4. The deficit must be addressed and some changes will be 

necessary. 

 

They're not afraid of changes, but be careful what you do.  This 

fiasco will create an increase rather than a decrease in that 

deficit, Mr. Minister.  Firstly, the plan itself will cost a very, 

very large sum of money to implement before you admit it is 

totally unworkable. 

 

Secondly, as people lose their jobs, not just health care 

workers, but nearly every industry in the province, they will 

hopefully move out of the province to find work.  If not, they 

will create a further drain in our welfare system.  In either case, 

there will an acute drain on the tax base, Mr. Minister.  This 

alone will have a negative effect on the deficit. 

5. The quality of health care will suffer.  The best people in 

the field will leave the province rather than try to work under 

the stressful conditions the government is creating. 

 

We had an example of that from Meadow Lake this morning . . 

. or this afternoon.  No. 6, talking about health care taxation, 

Mr. Member from Swift Current. 

 

 People (patients) will not know where to turn for their health 

care needs.  The very thought of trying to get help in an 

emergency situation in rural Saskatchewan makes my blood 

run cold.  By the time the buck stops passing you will 

probably be dead. 

 

 Mr. Premier, I realize that this whole thing is political and the 

government is trying to get out of a very tricky responsibility.  

However, I would have expected you to learn from GRIP.  

Slow down. Take time to work out a concrete plan that can 

work.  No one expects you to solve the deficit overnight. 

 

 We do expect to take responsibility -- responsible steps 

towards a solution.  Rushing into it will only make the 

situation increase instead of better.  The solution will take 

time and hard work on the part of each of us, but we must 

begin with common sense. 

 

And as I see this whole area of taxation bed itself down in what 

you say is equal opportunity, equal access for everybody, is a 

bunch of garbage. 

 

I've seen it work before health care came in and I don't now 

want to have that.  I have never been in a community that ever 

had no health care.  And I don't want to go back to those kinds 

of conditions.  And that, Mr. Minister, is what we're talking 

about -- inconsistency in taxation throughout the south-west in 

all of Saskatchewan in order to provide the health care in a 

level format for the people that they serve in that community. 

 

And that is what this letter to you asks you to address.  And 

that, Mr. Minister, is a fact.  If you'll go back and look, you'll 

find it.  And it wasn't brought here to my attention because of 

myself.  It was brought to the attention of this committee by the 

very fact that taxation is not going to be equal. 

 

It will be less in Swift Current because the province will say, 

we'll fund it for everybody; put it in Swift Current.  But who 

wants to keep sending their people from Vanguard, Ponteix, 

and Kincaid to Swift Current?  Those people don't want that.  

They never have. 

 

You know when I have received an equal amount of response 

and letters as I have received from Vanguard, is when a school 

was closed in my constituency.  That's equivalent to what I 

received in letters from the  Vanguard community, because 

they were told that they should shut their hospital down.  And 

that is a fact, Mr. Minister. 

 

And so what happens?  The community will pick up the 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3177 

tax tab.  We've heard it from the Minister of Social Services.  

We heard it from the Minister of Health today: no it won't 

happen.  But realism has to set in at some point in time, Mr. 

Minister, and that's the point we want to make. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I hope realism does settle in 

soon.  I think the Minister of Health is doing a very credible 

job of selling the wellness model and explaining it to people.  I 

think if the members opposite would have taken the time to 

understand the wellness model . . . and that particular person 

may have not been contacted directly by you, but I think when 

members opposite stand up in the House and make statements 

about something they don't understand or refuse to understand, 

it creates a problem for us in explaining to people what the 

system is. 

 

I think if you insist on sticking your head in the sand and 

refusing to do health care reforms, you will be the ones who 

will be sitting in an even smaller group over there after the next 

election. 
 

Item 14 agreed to. 
 

Items 15 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 
 

Vote 43 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Rural Development 

Vote 144 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 

Vote 144 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 43 
 

Items 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 

Vote 43 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Agricultural Division 

Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 51 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 51 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Rural Development 

Capital Expenditure -- Vote 67 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 67 agreed to. 

 

(1615) 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 43 

 

Items 1 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 43 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Rural Development 

Vote 66 

 

Items 10 and 11 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Expenditure 

Agricultural Division 

Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 51 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 51 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Loans, Advances and 

Investments 

Agricultural Division 

Rural Development 

Vote 61 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 

Vote 61 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 

Item 1 
 

Mr. Britton: -- There's a few questions we'd like to ask, Mr. 

Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I'd like to ask you, could you tell me 

why you didn't send back the written answers to the global 

questions that were sent over to you? 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I believe those should be over there 

now, I think.  If they're not, I wasn't aware that we hadn't got 

them.  If they're not, they should be there very shortly.  We'll 

get them. 
 

Mr. Britton: -- Well thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

that'll help us a lot because I was wondering why we didn't get 

those.  And that'll certainly help us to get through this a little 

more quickly. 
 

Okay, you are on item 1, Mr. Chairman?  Could you tell us, 

Mr. Minister, what exactly that is, that operating grant? 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- This is page . . . pardon me, John.  

I'm still lost on where you're at here.  Page 82? -- at the top, 

number 1 there? Those are the numbers that are paid out from 

the Consolidated Fund to the Water Corp for operating money. 



3178 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just before the 

officials leave, I would like to take this opportunity to thank 

them for all of their help with all of the questions that we've 

asked of them.  I want to assure them that we will have a lot 

more questions for them next year, so they may as well sharpen 

up their pencils and get to work.  And we'll try to keep them 

busy for the next year.  But we do thank you and we appreciate 

it.  And rural Saskatchewan appreciates your department and 

the work you're doing as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just 

want to thank the opposition and my officials -- who have left 

already -- but thank the opposition for the questions and the 

suggestions in the Estimates. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I 

would thank the opposition for their co-operation.  It was 

apparently the expectation that Sask Water be done a little 

later.  We'll certainly have the officials here later.  In the mean 

time we will proceed with, Mr. Chairman, will proceed with 

Energy and Mines, who are all here and ready and willing and 

able to answer the opposition members' questions.  Sask Water 

will be dealt with on the conclusion of this. 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 

 

The Chair -- I would ask the minister to please introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The officials 

that are here today are: on my left is Ray Clayton, the acting 

deputy minister; to his left is Dan McFadyen, the assistant 

deputy minister, resource policy and economics; to my right is 

Bruce Wilson, the executive director of petroleum and natural 

gas; immediately behind me is Lynn Jacobson, the director of 

personnel administration; and beside her is Les Beck, executive 

director of geology and mines. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I'm 

going to turn the questions over to the member from Arm River 

who's under a bit of a time restraint, and then will come back 

later. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

when we were discussing your Estimates some time ago, we 

were talking about this quarrying problem for the Bakken 

family and you gave me a document on it last night.  When we 

talked about it before . . . when we closed off, I went through 

by memory of the chronological order right through the seven 

or eight years and you said you also had that from the 

department.  Is there a way that I can get a copy of that so we 

know we're all singing from the same song sheet? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, if the hon. member would 

be . . . We can get you this information but we 

haven't got it right here with us.  Can we get it over to you at 

some other time? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, that would be fine because it would 

help.  I think this is not going to get resolved just today here.  I 

just want to go through it as quickly as possible some of my 

concerns here.  This document you graciously gave me last 

night, Mr. Minister, just a few of the paragraphs: 

 

 Most of the problems as related to the question of a surface 

access which is the responsibility of the agency responsible 

for administering Crown-owned service.  (And then) The 

caveat placed on this parcel of land by the Minister of 

Agriculture was clearly effective when the land was sold to 

Conrad Bakken.  On signing the caveat Mr. Bakken clearly 

acknowledged that all sand, gravel, and rock from this parcel 

of land was the property of the Crown. 

 

Well they understand that and I understand that and we accept 

that and they accept those.  And then we have a change, I 

understand.  There's a change here in the second-last paragraph. 

 

 The change in administration of sand and gravel rights also 

requires amendments to The Provincial Lands Act.  Once 

these amendments are proclaimed, the sand and gravel 

associated with Mr. Bakken's surface title will be 

administered by the Rural Development Department. A 

proclamation date is currently being targeted for early in the 

new year. 

 

Is everything all done?  Is this all in place?  It just needs to be 

proclaimed.  Is that all, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, yes that's been taken care 

of.  When The Crown Minerals Act was passed, these were 

consequential amendments to the other Act; and when The 

Crown Minerals Act is proclaimed, it will all be taken care of. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now the last paragraph of your document is 

kind of a shock to me and it's going to be a real shocker to the 

Bakken's, I'm sure: 

 

 Under this new statutory agreement, the caveat on this parcel 

of land will require review as this will be the only parcel of 

land in Saskatchewan where sand and gravel will be treated 

like a Crown mineral.  The outcome of this review and the 

question of access to the sand, gravel, and rock in this parcel 

of land should be pursued with Rural Development. 

 

Anyway, that's at a later time.  Can you tell me why that is, that 

this quarter section will be the only one on this situation in all 

Saskatchewan?  I just don't understand that, Mr. Minister, and 

I'm sure the Bakkens won't. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the member asks a very 

valid question.  That is the only one in the province.  And when 

that was placed on there . . . the caveat was placed on there, it 

referred to that quarter of land only. 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3179 

But in the change of the legislation as we have now brought it 

in and it's been passed in this legislature, this caveat will be 

reviewed.  And when it's reviewed, Rural Development will 

obviously want to take a look at this.  And if it's reviewed and 

if the caveat comes off, then the minerals will go back to their 

natural state and not in the state that they are now. 

 

So that's why we brought in this legislation.  Without that 

legislation it would have stayed that way.  And we brought in 

the legislation so that this would be possible to do this. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Now just so I 

have this straight.  That means anybody owning land or 

anybody leasing Crown land that under the new . . . that the 

right of coring would be the . . . whoever has the surface rights 

would always have that right to coring.  Is that what you're 

saying in this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, this is a bit of a 

complicated thing, but I think I can explain it to the hon. 

member.  As long as that caveat is on there, the sand and gravel 

does not become part of a surface.  Once the caveat is removed, 

then the sand and gravel becomes part of the surface, as it is in 

the case of freehold, part of the surface as it is in the case of 

freehold minerals. 

 

So the point here is that the caveat has to come off before it 

becomes part of the surface.  And this is something that Rural 

Development will take a look at as soon as the Act is 

proclaimed. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay, I'm getting to understand that.  But 

my question wasn't pertaining particularly to the Bakkens.  I 

meant my question . . . Mr. Minister, are you saying that this 

new regulation change here would mean that anyone else out 

there that's renting . . . has their own land, own it or renting 

lands branch land that any quarrying on there would be a first 

chance for the person releasing that land?  That's what I meant. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer is that that will 

be part of the surface once the Act is proclaimed. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay, that's good.  I thank you for that 

because that's been long overdue.  That's been talked about for 

a long time.  But the part of the Bakkens' problem here then 

goes strictly back to the old lands branch.  Is that what'd you 

say?  There is no problem here once this happens.  Because the 

Bakkens' will be quite happy whenever that happens this winter 

or January 1 if they just have to deal with Rural Development 

over that caveat.  That's all you're saying?  Is that what you're 

saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- That is right, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Because I think that's where the problem has 

been.  I don't know whether you're familiar with some of these 

here . . . the correspondence.  And just give me a moment.  You 

see, I don't know whether the Department of Energy even has 

the complete file or not.  But here's where the . . . I don't think 

there'll be a problem with that caveat because Mr. Conrad 

Bakken was sent this letter on March 19, 1986.  And I think it's 

very important that your people understand this so I think we 

can get off 

this very quickly.  This is written to Mr. Bakken regarding the 

east half of 13-23-1. 

 

 The Department of Agriculture, Department of Energy and 

Mines, the Department of Justice and the Department of 

Parks and Renewable Resources have reviewed in detail the 

possibility of selling the above land.  As a result, I am 

corresponding with you to determine whether you wish to 

purchase the surface rights (to purchase the surface rights). 

 

 The province must retain complete control of the sand and 

gravel, as our legislation does not allow the province to sell 

sand and gravel except by a quarrying lease.  Any agreement 

to sell the surface to you would accordingly be on the 

condition that the province continue to have ownership, 

control, and access to the sand and gravel, much the same as 

now.  The province would register a caveat against the land 

to protect its interest in the sand and gravel. 

 

So then at that time, Mr. Minister, there was a problem with the 

Squaw Creek Aggregate breaking the rules and regulations 

with lands branch.  And also I have letters here to no end where 

there was a full right of any minister . . . I'm not blaming this 

administration.  Ministers did have the right to have broken that 

agreement with Squaw Creek Aggregate, but it was never the 

minister's really fault. It was always this here continuous battle 

back and forth.  Lands branch says, go to Energy and Mines; 

Energy and Mines would say, go to lands branch. 

 

But here's what's in the next paragraph: Squaw Creek 

Aggregate Ltd.'s quarrying lease would have to be protected 

until it expires in April 1988.  And that's signed by Jack Drew, 

the deputy minister of Agriculture. 

 

And it was definitely the understanding, with no problem 

whatsoever, when the Bakkens come in and they were in the 

Walter Scott Building and they drew up this bill of sale, that 

after 1988 that caveat would only be there . . . It would always 

be there to protect the mineral rights, but it would be wide open 

for them to get a lease from Energy and Mines because Squaw 

Creek Aggregate, there was no way they were going to obtain a 

lease.  That's always been the problem. 

 

But if I have this kind of clear in my mind -- and I think I have, 

seeing that this has happened -- I think it will be no problem 

because Bakkens now owning the land, I'm sure there'd be no 

problem.  Because I know where the note is, I know where the 

letter is -- I haven't got it with me -- that's pertaining to that and 

the bill of sale when that caveat comes off.  Because when Neal 

Hardy was the minister of lands branch he said, if you can 

clean up your problems in Energy and Mines between the 

Bakkens and Squaw Creek Aggregate, that's not a problem;  I'll 

soon lift the caveat. 

 

So if that's what you're telling me, that all the Bakkens don't 

have to deal any more with Energy and Mines; it's strictly that 

caveat. Is that what you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- That's right, Mr. Chairman. 



3180 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay, I'm going to leave it there.  I had a 

whole bunch of more letters and what not to go through, and I 

can see that it's not necessary.  And I thank you very much, 

because you've clarified it in my mind.  And I think when I go 

back to tell the . . . show that letter that your EA (executive 

assistant) wrote to me, Mr. Degenstein, and he wrote that part 

in there. 

 

The only thing I want to say in closing, Mr. Minister, that when 

I talked to you about this case a couple times and I said to you 

very nicely that maybe that shouldn't have to be your problem 

now, that if I can explain this whole problem to your assistant 

or somebody, maybe we could save a lot of time.  And I talked 

to Mr. Degenstein and he said to me that I'll get the file over.  

You and I will sit down and discuss it all, because I asked him 

to be sure not to listen to the one story.  There's more stories 

than just the one coming from the department.  There's the 

lands branch story.  There's a lot to talk about.  So he said we 

wouldn't bring Mr. Bakken in to just to meet with them, until 

him and I get through all the discussions on it, and then we'll 

have Mr. Bakken in. 

 

And I was a little disappointed when I got a letter from him 

saying that there's no need for us to meet at this time.  And I've 

seen that, Mr. Minister, with something that usually doesn't 

happen between . . . sent it to the minister last night here when 

an EA (executive assistant) didn't get back to us. 

 

It's something that's always been in my 15 years here. It's a 

courtesy that we've always had, that ministers and MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) and MLAs with their 

back-benchers give to one another, that we give ourself all the 

time.  And I feel disappointed that I didn't get a chance to sit 

down with your EA and cover this into a greater . . . more 

content to this.  And perhaps we wouldn't had to even brought 

this to the floor of the House, because I think he could've 

explained it to me. 

 

And I just want to in closing, say thank you very much, and 

thank your officials for bringing this information to me.  

Because I think this solves the problem.  And I'd like to thank 

you.  And that's all the questions I have to ask. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just have a 

couple of questions, Mr. Minister, and they deal with the 

south-east area of the province.  As you know, the Shell oil 

company have a pilot project going in the Midale oil field with 

CO D22 injection.  I understand that the Shand 1 power plant 

will be commissioned this weekend officially.  And I'm 

wondering if the ability of that plant to have CO D22 gases 

stripped from the stack has been enhanced in any way, if there's 

ongoing conversations with Shell and others that would allow 

that to happen if the right economic situation works out. 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, there's nothing on the 

Shand 2 plant now that can strip the CO D22, but not on that 

particular one, Shand 1.  But Shell and SaskPower are 

engaging and have been engaging in discussions as to the 

possibility of building a unit on there which could strip the 

CO D22.  And I guess -- and I'm not familiar with the 

SaskPower conversations -- but I guess it would hinge a lot of 

the fact as to whether it would be economical to do so at this 

point. 

 

And all I can tell the member now is that Shell and SaskPower 

are actively discussing the situation right now. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, the Shell project, as I 

understand, has gone through another phase and it's currently 

on stream to the full extent of the pilot.  Can you just tell the 

Assembly -- and I understand that this is privileged information 

naturally to Shell oil company -- but can you give us a feel for 

how it's progressing?  Is it looking positive so far, or are they 

running into some technical problems?  Is there anything that 

you can do to sort of enlighten the situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, that's a very good 

question.  And I don't have a very long answer for this because 

again we're not privy to a lot of the information.  But early in 

'92 Shell started this CO D22 project, the injection of CO D22 

into the wells. 

 

And at this point, the information we have is that there is no 

CO D22 breaking through to other producing wells.  So it's 

working at this stage, and they haven't had any real difficulties 

with it at this point. 

 

So that's about all we know at this stage.  I was there a month 

and a half ago or so, two months ago, when they had their 

official opening.  And the officials that were there were 

optimistic that it was going to work, because they hadn't had 

any problems up to that point.  And at this point we haven't had 

any information that they've had problems since then. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Is the government contributing monetarily to 

that project at all in any way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, no, we're not. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So to the best of your knowledge, there's been 

no agreement on a CO D22 supply negotiated between Shell 

and SaskPower or any other entity of government so far? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- No, Mr. Chairman, no.  I don't know that 

there's any more than just discussions held.  There's been no 

agreement, I can assure the member of that.  But the 

discussions are ongoing and they may come to fruition and 

come to an agreement. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Has there been any other movement in 

negotiations -- and I understand that the Leader of the 

Opposition and you talked a great deal about the AECL 

(Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) MOU (memorandum of 

understanding), or that portion of it.  Part of that agreement 

dealt with the whole coal area and the ongoing attempts to 

reach a federal-provincial agreement on some coal research.  

And certainly Saskatchewan was in the running for perhaps a 

pilot project which would deal with coal gasification and the 

availability to strip certain gases and that type of thing out of 

the coal as it's used in electrical generation. 

 

Is there anything further in those negotiations?  Are we any 



August 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3181 

closer to a . . . I believe it's IGCC (Integrated Gasification 

Combined Cycle) technology? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- In response to that question, there is the 

Action Committee on Low-Sulphur Coal that was established 

quite some time ago.  And they've had meetings but there's 

been absolutely no resolution at this point.  Things have been 

rather slow in that area because the . . . having a little difficulty 

in getting the other provinces that are party to this low-sulphur 

coal committee to meet, and there's the B.C. (British 

Columbia), Alberta, and the Ontario governments.  We've had 

some difficulty getting together with them.  So there's been no 

action on that to date. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So I gather from this then that you're telling is 

that the reneging by the Saskatchewan government on the 

MOU that was signed last fall has got nothing to do with this 

slow down that has occurred in the coal area, that this is a 

direct result of other provinces not willing to participate.  Is 

that what you're telling me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the cancellation of the 

AECL SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) deal MOU has 

nothing to do with this.  Other provinces have simply indicated 

that at this time they are not willing to proceed on a joint 

project.  And they've also got fiscal problems and I guess that 

sort of limits their activity in this area as well. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I would just encourage you, Mr. 

Minister, given . . . And I'm sure you've been briefed on all of, 

sort of the attributes that Saskatchewan has with low sulphur 

coal, with power plants close to producing oil fields, with our 

leadership in certain areas of using coal, burning coal to 

develop electricity, that we're a natural. 

 

And I know the pressures that the federal government is under. 

But there's a tremendous amount of possibilities there, Mr. 

Minister, that I think we could take part in, and I would hope 

that our reluctance in other areas isn't infringing on our ability 

to maybe grab a 2 or $300 million project. 

 

Here I would think that the federal green plan requirements are 

not going to go away.  I'm quite amazed that those other three 

provinces have sort of let that slide because some of them have 

a great deal of difficulty meeting those requirements as we do.  

And we're now into '92 going on '93 with certain deadlines 

imposed by the green plan, and I would just encourage you to 

push that initiative as hard as you can.  Because when you add 

it up, I believe Saskatchewan has more variable possibilities 

than any other jurisdiction in Canada to prove it out.  That's all 

I've got to say on it. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- I have one question before we go on any 

further.  Just before we get started, I notice there is a difference 

of 40 positions in person-years.  Could you tell me where those 

positions went?  And were they a total reduction, or just what 

happened to those 40 person-years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, those positions that . . . I 

think I understand what the member's asking.  And if 

they're not getting the answer that you're looking for, maybe 

you'll ask the question again.  But those positions are in the 

revolving fund. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 23 agreed to. 

 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Energy and Mines 

 

Nil vote. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 23 

 

Items 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 

Vote 23 agreed to. 
 

(1700) 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Energy and Mines 

Vote 66 
 

Items 8 and 9 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund 

Budgetary Expenditure 

Resources Division 

Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 1 
 

Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 

Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Loans, Advances and 

Investments 

Energy Security Division 

Energy and Mines 

Vote 63 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 

Vote 63 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Loans, Advances and 

Investments 

Energy Security Division 

Energy and Mines 

Vote 63 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 

Vote 63 agreed to. 



3182 Saskatchewan Hansard August 27, 1992 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to 

thank the minister and his officials for putting together the 

Estimates that were quite easy to follow, and we thank you 

very much for your time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would also 

like to thank the officials for assisting us in answering these 

questions.  Also like to thank the opposition for the questions 

and for their co-operation. 

 

The Chair: -- On behalf of the members of the Assembly I 

thank the minister, the opposition members, and the officials 

for your participation this afternoon. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


