




















































Hansard: August 25, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3027 

 August 25, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 64 -- An Act respecting Arbitration 

 

Clause 1 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to please introduce the 

officials that are with him here tonight. 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and members, I have 

with me tonight Brent Prenevost, the Crown solicitor from the 

Department of Justice for one of his many appearances before 

the House on these Bills. 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Just a couple of short questions regarding this 

Act, as we've had some discussion on it before and certainly 

discussed it with the minister.  First of all, it talks about 

arbitrators being independent and impartial, must disclose to 

the parties circumstances which may cast doubt on his or her 

independence.  Who chooses the arbitrators?  Is it the 

committees or the parties that seek an arbitration process? 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes.  It is the parties to the arbitration 

that select their arbitrator. 
 

Mr. Toth: -- And we also talk about the fact that the Bill 

clarifies the role the courts will play in arbitrational 

proceedings.  Is this Bill giving parties the ability to call in an 

arbitrator and supersede any action in the courts, that way 

getting around the process of having to go to the courts, if the 

arbitrational process works or is allowed to work?  Is that what 

we're doing, Mr. Minister? 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, the 

whole idea underpinning the private arbitration process in 

commercial matters is to avoid the recourse to the courts -- 

much quicker, much cheaper, much simpler.  The Bill builds on 

that idea by clearly defining the role of the courts, the limits to 

the role of the court, and further supporting the idea of a private 

arbitration outside the court system for the reasons that I 

mentioned earlier. 
 

The Chair: -- Are the members agreed to proceed through the 

Bill on a part-by-part basis? 
 

Part 1 agreed to. 
 

Parts 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 83 -- An Act respecting Pension Benefits 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to please introduce his 

officials. 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have with 

me tonight the deputy minister, Ms. Merran Proctor, 

Dave Wild, the superintendent of pensions, seated behind me, 

and Art Milne, the assistant superintendent of pensions sitting 

beside Mr. Wild. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And, Mr. Minister, 

certainly this is a substantial Act that we have before us.  And I 

also want to thank the minister for giving me an opportunity to 

sit down with Mr. Wild for a while.  I'm not sure I totally 

understand everything we discussed, but I think . . . I believe 

Mr. Wild has certainly worked on this Act or the changes that 

have been discussed here for a period of time. 

 

And maybe for the sake of the House and anyone who may be 

interested, the minister could just fill us in on the reasons for 

the changes to the Act and the groups, individuals that would 

be affected by this Act.  And maybe also inform the House 

when the process started.  I think it's been a period of years 

now that we've been discussing pension benefit changes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, the work within the 

department on these amendments that are in the Bill began in 

1988 and have been ongoing since then.  And then of course 

we had the committee in the early part of this year that was 

formed and worked very intensively and very quickly produced 

a report. 

 

It is the fact that pension legislation has moved very quickly 

through the 1980s.  By that I mean that there have been 

significant advances and improvements to the standards 

respecting pension plans in legislation across the country and 

there has been a lot of close co-operation between the industry 

and the regulatory authorities throughout that period. 

 

We are in most respects accepting changes to the legislative 

frameworks in other provinces in passing this Act.  We are 

bringing ourself for the most part into line with other 

jurisdictions. 

 

The member will know, from reading the Bill, and from 

briefings from Mr.  Wild, that some of the significant changes 

here are the coverage of part-time employees.  That of course, 

is a very important point considering the fact that there is now 

so much more part-time work than there used to be in various 

sectors of the economy.  So I think that's a very important plan. 

 

The idea of a pension being vested after two years of 

employment is also a very significant advance for reasons that I 

know the member is familiar with. 

 

There is also improved provisions for the transfer of pension 

funds to the retirement vehicle of the pensioner's choice.  And 

that's significant in many work places including the 

Government of Saskatchewan of course, where the money 

accumulation plans have heretofore been directed towards 

annuities.  This will open that up and allow the retiring 

employee many more options for retirement pension vehicles.  

I think that that's an important one and it's certainly one that 

has been much discussed across Canada.  There have been 

many 



3028 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

representations to the previous government and to us with 

respect to introducing some flexibility into that. 

 

And those are some of the major items in the Bill.  Some of 

these have cost implications but those have been handled in the 

Bill as the member will have understood and for the most part 

they are simply minimum standards that pension plans have to 

meet.  How much better plans are than the minimum standards 

depends on the employer and the work place and the attitude 

that they take towards the pension plan that is in effect at the 

work place. 

 

The Act also establishes more clearly the duties and 

responsibility of plan administrators and has some provisions 

in it for the governing of pension plans, for the running of 

pension plans by boards, by trustees. 

 

There is also important provisions respecting the valuation and 

division of pension benefits on marriage breakdown.  And I 

remember in the member's second reading speech, that item 

was specifically mentioned and I believe that that matter was 

covered in detail in the meeting with Mr. Wild. 

 

But I can tell you that its importance is known to me because 

my wife has practised a great deal of family law and in many, 

many cases the question of evaluating and dividing a pension 

plan as a family asset is a matter of considerable controversy.  

And so I could identify with these proposals from that 

perspective.  And these are coming into the pension benefit 

standards Acts of most jurisdictions and will be very helpful to 

the courts and to the legal profession in resolving these 

separation questions. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, you 

mention that this affects all pensions.  You're talking of all 

public pension plans in the province, private pension plans . . . 

Are we talking of . . . when we talk about all pension plans that 

are available? 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That Act does not apply to the public 

sector as such.  However, there is a review under way with 

respect to the public sector pension plans.  And the adoption by 

this legislature of these provisions will have a direct impact on 

that review and the recommendations coming from that 

particular review.  So I think we can take it, as we work on Bill 

83 tonight, that we are impacting directly on the provisions that 

will affect public sector pensions in the province. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying is there's another process 

that has to take place to address public pensions.  I know there 

are people that work in the public sector that certainly have 

raised the question of pension plans, and the ability to have 

direct or more control on their plans when they retire. 

 

And I remember another part of our conversation.  And 

certainly with the changes to even the . . . in the public plans 

from the formula to the annuity type of plans back in '81.  I 

think there are a number of even elected representatives who 

would like to have be included or have be part of having an 

ability to have some control on 

their plan so that maybe consideration could be given in that 

area. 

 

Another thing, Mr. Minister.  You talked about part-time 

employees.  I think there's a portion where I read where it 

talked about some 350 hours of work in a year.  When we talk 

about part-time employees is there even for part-time 

employees . . . does it establish a period of time, and I just don't 

remember all the conversation that we have had on this, but 

just for the sake there might be some part-time employees out 

there right now just wondering how they can qualify for a 

pension plan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The legislation of course does not 

guarantee a pension to part-time employees, but obviously no 

one is compelling employers to provide pension plans by 

legislation.  But if an employee working part time is entitled to 

become a member of a plan the employee may apply to become 

a member after completing a part-time employment over a 

period of 24 continuous months.  That is: 

 

 . . . 24 months of continuous . . . employment with the 

employer; or 

 

 (b) after completing a minimum period that does exceed 24 

months of less than full-time continuous employment with 

the employer and, . . . in each of two consecutive calendar 

years (either) . . . 

 

  (i) earnings not less that 35% of the Year's Maximum 

Pensionable Earnings with respect to that 

employment; or 

 

  (ii) completing 700 hours of employment with the 

employer. 

 

I know that's a little complex but it is a complex idea.  But if 

the employee has satisfied one of those two criteria then the 

employee is entitled to become a member of the plan. 

 

The first part of my answer to you of course related to full-time 

employment over a period of two years, but the second part 

related to part-time employees, which was your question. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I understand as well 

that this, certainly the Act before us and the changes that have 

been brought forward in the Act, will simplify and probably 

bring The Pension Benefits Act more in line with the national 

standards and along the lines of uniform national standards. 

 

And I think, if I understand correctly, it's going to make it 

easier especially when people as they retire don't necessarily 

decide to retire in the place they've worked all their life.  They 

may look at -- I don't know why -- they take a look at B.C. 

(British Columbia) or maybe even down in California for 

awhile.  But I guess it's appropriate that the people do have the 

ability to have some control so it gives them that.  So it gives 

them that, and I think that's appropriate that the Act does work 

and builds out a uniform type of Act that will work in. 

 

Because I think in our country, despite the fact that we 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3029 

have 10 separate provinces, I think we must and should 

continue to work towards bringing all our regulations closer 

together so it's easier to work, move, and operate, and transfer 

from one province to the next. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well that's certainly correct, and I would 

just add to what the member said by saying that pension plan 

administration in Canada, with all of its provinces, is also much 

simpler if the legislation is uniform. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Another area, and I know the Act doesn't 

specifically talk about it, but we talked about certainly 

part-time employees.  And we've had a fair bit of discussion 

and we'll probably get into it tomorrow as well, Mr. Minister. 

 

But I think an area that has really been overlooked specifically 

by your government at this time is the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan.  And for a lot of people who really haven't had the ability 

to become involved in a pension plan of any kind . . . And I 

think a lot of small businesses that gave in that way some of the 

part-time employees in small businesses -- and small 

businesses were able to finally put aside or to establish a 

pension plan for their employees.  And I know a lot of . . . 

especially women across this province finally had that 

opportunity. 

 

In light of the fact of the way pension plans have been 

addressed regarding the marital problems that we see and the 

fact of the difficulties that couples have had when it has come 

to a problem in a marital relationship, deciding, well how do 

you divide a pension plan, and what I would again ask the 

minister is to certainly take it up with your colleagues. 

 

I know that you're reviewing the matter, but I think it would be 

very appropriate in the long term that we look at . . . and 

whether it's something that could fall into such a Act.  I don't 

know if it is, if it's possible, but I think we should take a very 

serious look, for the long term and generations down the road, 

about making some form of pension plan available such as 

maintaining the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, even if it is 

changed somewhat to what it originally started out.  But 

making it the type of plan that . . . creating a plan that people 

can become involved with so they can plan for their future. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well the member and I have discussed 

this previously, privately and I just leave it tonight on the basis 

that we'll study your remarks and just give the matter some 

consideration. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, another thing, and here's a question 

that's come up in a number of departments and areas.  Under 

the administration part of the Act, Part II, we have clause 5, 

and it's laying out the regulations for the superintendent, or any 

person authorized by the superintendent, basically talking 

about the entrance of: 

 

 . . . may at any reasonable time enter without a warrant into 

any premises or place where a plan is administered, any 

property is kept, anything is done in (conjunction) with a 

plan, or any records are or should be kept pursuant to this Act 

. . . 

And then it goes through what the superintendent may do.  The 

question we have and we've raised, I think with the Department 

of the Environment, and I believe there are four other Acts . . . 

In fact the Minister of Energy has the same authority. 

 

We're asking why that type of authority would be given to a 

superintendent.  Is it necessary in light of the ability that 

already exists for individuals?  If they feel they need to check 

up or follow up or whether it's on a pension plan or whatever it 

is, I think there is the ability there.  And we just feel that you 

are . . . we're going a little too far when we start putting in an 

Act or in legislation, giving people that type of authority just to 

act on the basis of their own suspicions and be able to enter any 

premises at any time to follow up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to make a couple 

of points here.  The first is that these provisions are probably 

less restrictive than the ones that have been in existence under 

this predecessor to this legislation.  The previous power of the 

superintendent with respect to these matters was short and 

expressed in general words but is capable of much wider 

powers than the specific ones that have been detailed in section 

5.  We've gone to some lengths in section 5 to limit precisely 

the kinds of investigation that can be carried out and the type of 

information that can be required to be produced and the types 

of documents that can be demanded. 

 

And I might also mention in connection with this first point 

that this legislation is consistent with powers of the 

superintendents in other jurisdictions, probably more restrictive 

than, for example, the legislation in British Columbia.  That is 

to say, the superintendent here has narrower and fewer powers.  

That's the first point I wanted to make. 

 

The second is why we do it, and I want to say first of all that 

there are in excess of $8 billion held by plans on behalf of 

Saskatchewan members and Saskatchewan pensioners -- $8 

billion, a lot of money.  And for the individual member or the 

pensioner, this is probably their most significant asset and is 

their source of income in retirement years and is their whole 

security.  The member may recall the recent scandal in the 

operation of the Robert Maxwell companies in Great Britain.  

And in the collapse of those companies, the information that 

came to light about the way in which Maxwell had handled the 

pension funds illustrates the need for the superintendent of 

pensions to be able to keep on top of the situations or to 

demand information and to access to records in order to protect 

the investment and the future and security of plan members. 

 

And in the case of Maxwell, several hundreds of millions of 

dollars had been stolen from the plans and the pensioners didn't 

know about it and nobody knew about it and there is a lesson in 

the Maxwell case.  I think something like 14,000 pensioners 

were affected by those defalcations or thefts or whatever you 

choose to call it. 

 

So we are very conscious of the responsibility of the 

superintendent and in shaky situations where something comes 

to light which rings a warning bell with the 



3030 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

superintendent, it would be appropriate and I'm sure every 

member of this House would agree, that the superintendent 

ought to act, ought to investigate and ought to ensure that the 

future income and security of pensioners are protected. 

 

(1930) 

 

So we want to be sure that in those cases the superintendent has 

the power to satisfy himself or herself that the investment is 

safe, that the plan is safe, that things are being done properly.  

So that's what these provisions are all about.  I know and I 

appreciate some of the questioning that's gone on in this House 

with respect to The Environment Bill and other speeches of 

members opposite, the sensitivity of this subject.  And we have 

been at some pains to try and limit it to powers that we think 

the superintendent should have in the event that there is a 

suspected situation where pensioners' money is at risk and 

where some action is necessary in order to protect them. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well I would take it, Mr. Minister, that the 

superintendent of pensions basically would be, I guess if you 

could use the term a watch-dog, it would be their responsibility 

to keep an eye on the pensions. 

 

And I would also assume that any pension fund that is 

established the superintendent would be getting . . . there would 

be annual reports presented to the superintendent.  Are those 

reports also made available to members of the pension plan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes they are, and while I'm on my feet, I 

just might mention to the member that it has been our practice 

in Saskatchewan, through the previous government and the one 

previous to that and we have continued in that, to assure 

compliance through desk audits. 

 

And it has been more than a decade since the superintendent 

has found it necessary to actually go into the premises of an 

administrator for audit purposes.  That's not to say that field 

audits won't take place, they will take place in the future, but 

they haven't been necessary for at least a decade.  So as we're 

discussing this tonight we're not really dealing with something 

that occurs often in the province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, we went through the search and seizure and without a 

warrant in The Environment Bill and it's again in this Bill, and 

I have some concerns about it.  You mentioned the Maxwell 

case where money had disappeared.  Well, Mr. Minister, I don't 

think if the superintendent had had the opportunity to walk in 

when Mr. Maxwell disappeared or at some point later, that the 

money would have been found.  It was already gone. 

 

So if there is a problem developing within a benefit program, 

there's no reason in my mind why the superintendent can't get a 

warrant to go and search.  Perhaps a better item to do would be 

to have regular monitoring of the pension programs with the 

agreement and compliance of those organizations that are 

running the plan, rather than simply having the power to march 

in 

the door and beat it down and walk in and take whatever you 

want.  It just seems that Big Brother is alive and well in 

Saskatchewan in 1992. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I thank the member for the question, Mr. 

Chairman.  And I think it quite important that we look at the 

contents of section 5 carefully.  Let me just briefly mention the 

powers that appear there. 

 

Subsection (1) deals with investigations and that allows the 

superintendent to enter premises without a warrant.  And that is 

for the purpose of administering the Act or the regulation, the 

regulations.  That is to enter the premises of the administrator 

of the plan -- not a member, not a private citizen, not an 

employer, but an administrator -- for the purpose of carrying 

out an audit or carrying out an inspection and may require the 

production of records and accounts and vouchers and that sort 

of thing. 

 

Secondly, to require the administrator to give all reasonable 

assistance with the audit; third, to make inquiries of the 

administrator relating to the conduct of the audit and related 

powers. 

 

Secondly, in subsection (2) the superintendent, if he takes any 

records, shall carry out the copying of those records with 

reasonable dispatch, and promptly return them to the 

administrator. 

 

Subsection (3) says that the superintendent shall not enter into 

any room or place actually being used as a dwelling without the 

consent of the occupant -- so that protects the citizen -- except 

with a warrant issued by a justice of the peace or a judge of the 

provincial court. 

 

Fourth, where the superintendent . . . Subsection (4) rather, 

where the superintendent, as a result of an audit or an 

examination or for any other reason, suspects that a violation of 

the Act has occurred, then the superintendent has to advise the 

person -- the administrator -- of the violation and also advise 

the administrator that the administrator is not obliged to make 

any written or oral statement, sort of like a warning in a 

criminal investigation, that may be used against them in any 

subsequent proceeding. 

 

And fifth, where the administrator refuses to produce records 

required under subsection 1, or refuses to allow them to . . . the 

records to be removed, then the superintendent has to go to a 

justice of the peace or a judge of the provincial court for a 

warrant authorizing the superintendent to enter and search the 

premises and to seize and take possession of documents. 

 

And subsection 6 lays down quite clearly what the obligations 

of the justice of the peace or the judge is, if he's satisfied by the 

oath of the superintendent that there are reasonable grounds for 

believing that a violation of the Act has occurred, etc., etc., to 

lay down some criteria that the judges do apply in issuing those 

warrants. 
 

So we have tried to respond to the objections that we heard you 

make in the previous Bill to try and give you something that 

would protect the citizen, limit it to administrators of the plan, 

and place the onus upon the superintendent to do it properly 

and do it in accordance 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3031 

with law. 

 

Sorry to be so long-winded about it.  But we really have tried 

to meet the concerns that we heard you express earlier in this 

session. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I can agree with 

everything that you have said there, everything that's in this 

section of the Bill, excepting for three words, and that is: 

"without a warrant".  I still don't understand what the supreme 

urgency is that you can't possibly go to a judge and say, your 

Honour, we believe there's a problem here.  Will you give us a 

warrant to enter and to search their premises and their 

information? 

 

Surely if you have some suspicions that there's a problem there, 

you can go to a judge and get that warrant.  I simply don't 

understand the urgency to enter the premises without a warrant.  

If, in the case of The Fire Prevention Act, if there's a fire in the 

building, you need the right to enter, fine.  In the case of the 

environment, while I didn't like it, I can understand in certain 

circumstances the need to enter.  But for a pension benefit Act, 

Mr. Minister, I simply do not understand the need for the 

urgency to enter without a warrant. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We tried to cover that also, Mr. 

Chairman, and to the member.  The structure of this section is 

exactly as follows: the superintendent goes to the office of the 

administrator, goes in, announces who he is and says I've come 

to look at the books.  If the administrator says no, I won't let 

you do it, then all the superintendent can do is turn around and 

go back out and go to the court and try to get a warrant. 

 

The superintendent has no right to impose himself upon the 

administrator, and nor is the administrator committing any kind 

of an offence by saying, no I won't let you look.  So it's not the 

kind of arbitrary situation that I understood you were raising in 

connection with the previous Bill.  We tried to make this very 

much a matter of a less arbitrary process than you were 

drawing to our attention on the previous occasion. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  It would almost appear 

to me from the answer you just gave us, the fact that the 

superintendent can walk in and ask to see the books, and if the 

administrator says no, he still has to go out and get a warrant.  

Then it would almost appear that "without a warrant" really 

doesn't mean anything and probably could have been left out of 

here and just said, reasonable time enter into any premises or 

place and ask for that information.  So it might be just as well 

to have left the three words out if that's exactly how the 

superintendent is able to operate. 

 

One other thing to take note of and we go to section 7 and 

section 7 at (2).  Section 7 talks about superintendent making 

copies for record and in section 7(2) it talks about the record 

being certified by the superintendent or any person authorized 

by the superintendent to be . . . a copy made pursuant to the 

section . . . talks about the copy being admissible in evidence 

without proof of the office or the signature of the person 

appearing to have certified the document.  I'm wondering how 

a piece of . . . a copy of a document or a copy of information 

could be evidence 

in the court, or legal evidence without at least having the 

signature of the individual who has seized that document to 

make it available to the court. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, this kind of provision 

where a public officer certifies as to the correctness of the 

document is common in The  Evidence Saskatchewan Act, in 

certain provisions of The Land Titles Act, and in many other 

statutes where . . . so that you don't have to call the public 

official onto the stand to prove that a copy is a copy. 

 

Now the other side -- and I think this very important to the 

member's point -- the other side has the right to challenge the 

authenticity of the copy and to obtain a court order, which 

would be given as a matter of course, to require the original to 

be produced. 

 

But here's the problem.  I drew to the member's attention earlier 

the fact that where the superintendent takes documents, he 

copies them and he returns them as soon as possible.  That's 

because the administrator of pension plans has to have 

documents in order to administer the plan, so we want those 

documents returned as quickly as possible.  The superintendent 

will, having seen the original and seeing the copy, is then able 

to certify that the copy is a true copy and the original can then 

go back to the administrator. 

 

So it provides a smooth and simple way of handling these 

copies of documents and using them in a meaningful way in 

any subsequent court proceedings.  So I think those two points 

cover the objection of the hon. member. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- One more question before we allow the Bill to go 

clause by clause.  Coming back to section number 5 and the 

comments just made a minute ago by yourself, Mr. Minister, 

where you . . . I indicated as well, the superintendent can go 

into any premises at any time and ask for information but still 

has to ask for a warrant.  Would the minister allow for an 

amendment to take the "without a warrant" out of the Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes. I don't think we have an objection 

to that, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I think the minister has given us his assurances 

that we can allow it.  Why don't we just . . . We've got a couple 

of other amendments that we can introduce if you want to pass 

part no. I.  And we'll get part no. II, and we've got a couple of 

other amendments there we can discuss and come back with 

the proposed amendment for clause 5. 

 

(1945) 

 

The Chair: -- I just want to test the members on this.  We have 

76 clauses in 9 parts.  I understand that there are now questions 

with respect to clause 5, and that one, members have indicated 

they want to hold for now.  And there are either amendments or 

questions with respect to clauses 12, 19, 27, and 45.  Are the 

members agreed that we proceed through this on a part-by-part 

basis with the exception of the aforementioned clauses . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Leave all of part II? 



3032 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

Part I agreed to. 

 

Clause 11 agreed to. 

 

Clause 12 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, in clause no. 12 we're asking 

for an amendment to clause 12 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 12 of the printed Bill by deleting subclause (1) 

thereof and substituting the following therefor: 

 

 12(1) Where the employer is the administrator of a plan, the 

employer may establish a pension advisory Committee. 

 

For clarification, I should just read the reasons that we brought 

this forward.  It came, the request came, I believe the minister 

did receive a copy too, from Doug Simon, chairman of the 

Labour Committee.  And they were mentioning that in section 

12, the pension advisory committee: 

 

 we believe that this is a matter which should be left to 

collective bargaining whenever there is a collective 

bargaining agreement; it is a matter of industrial relations and 

it is deemed to be inequitable to give one party an advantage 

by means of legislative provisions; furthermore, there is a 

cost element in this requirement which should not be 

imposed during difficult economic periods. 

 

And therefore we've asked the Law Clerk to bring forward an 

amendment that would address this concern. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Speaking to the amendment, Mr. 

Chairman, I regret to say to the hon. member that we are not 

prepared to accept it.  The question here is whether or not a 

pension advisory committee should be established.  And the 

duties of a pension advisory committee are described in 

subsection (3) of section 12 and they are not deciding anything. 

 

I point out to the House that these committees are to "promote 

awareness and understanding of the plan among the members 

and potential members," which is certainly a laudable kind of 

objective, promote awareness and understanding. 

 

Secondly, to "advise the administrator with respect to matters 

of concern to the members," which is to say that the committee 

will pass on any concerns that members and former members 

have with respect to the plan and make sure the administrator is 

aware of those. 

 

Third, to "review periodically the financial, actuarial and 

administrative aspects of the plan."  And fourth, "carry out any 

other duties that are specified by the plan or the employer." 

 

Now in many provinces these advisory committees are . . . I 

should say in a number of provinces these advisory committees 

are mandatory in all cases.  We have not done that.  We have 

made these advisory committees voluntary, voluntary on the 

part of the employer if the 

plan has fewer than 50 members.  If the plan has 50 or more 

members and a majority of the members so request, then we 

have provided that the employer shall establish this advisory 

committee. 

 

Now this applies only, Mr. Chairman, in situations where the 

employer is the administrator of the plan.  And it is our sense 

of this provision that it is a good provision, that the advisory 

committees have a limited but important role to play, and that 

we should preserve that idea in our Act. 

 

Now we have limited it to large employers only and I think in 

the Saskatchewan context we can say that an employer with 50 

or more members is a large employer.  But it would seem to be 

a sensible kind of provision.  And so, as I say with regret, we 

are not able to accept the member's proposed amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 12 agreed to. 

 

Part III agreed to. 

 

Part IV, clauses 16 through 18, agreed to. 

 

Clause 19 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- There's an amendment to clause 19.  

And the amendment is to subsection (5) of section 19.  The 

amendment would read as follows, Mr. Chairman: 

 

 "(5) Where an amendment that confers on an employer any 

ownership or entitlement to the benefit of any surplus assets 

of a plan is made to a plan, the amendment is not effective 

unless it has been approved in the prescribed manner by the 

persons entitled to benefits pursuant to the plan". 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 19 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 20 to 26 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 27 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, the concern raised here was the 

fact about making sure or having people being vested in a plan, 

having been part of a plan for two continuous years.  And what 

we're suggesting here is that in sections 27(2) and (3) of clause 

27, we are saying: 

 

 Amend subclauses 27(2) and (3) of the printed Bill by adding 

immediately after the words "where a member" where they 

occur in the general words preceding clause (a) as being 

enacted therein the following words: 

 

  "who has been a member of a plan established after the 

coming into force of this section for at least two 

continuous years of membership". 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I took some time 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3033 

with officials with respect to this because I had not seen this 

particular amendment before now.  Our concern with the 

proposal is that it would be a very significant cost item for 

existing plans.  And we have tried to be responsive to the cost 

implications of moving from the old vesting rules to your 

vesting rules. 

 

What we have done to limit the financial impact is that we 

draw the line at January 1, 1994 in terms of the service that has 

been accrued.  And with respect to vesting benefits, we have 

distinguished between service prior to January 1, 1994 and 

service after that date.  So that up to January 1, the vesting 

provisions are -- January 1, 1994 -- that the pension vests with 

the member on termination if the member's age plus service 

total 45.  And then pension service after January 1, 1994 vests 

after two years of service. 

 

So if a member is terminated in 1997 at the age of 36, say, with 

seven years of service, the pension accrued prior to January 1, 

1994 would not be vested, but the pension that accrued after 

January 1, 1994 would be vested.  And that was a transition 

provision, a bridging provision that is designed to try and limit 

the cost impacts of moving to the new vesting provisions. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 27 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 28 to 44 inclusive agreed to. 

 

(2000) 

 

Clause 45 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, the feeling in the Chamber here is 

that this clause is really a clause that is unenforceable and they 

just don't feel that it's necessary or appropriate to have clause 

45 in the Bill at all.  And they're just suggesting that we vote 

against it or not include this clause.  And maybe the minister 

could just elaborate on it.  But there's a strong feeling that it is 

an unenforceable clause so why have it in the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I could answer it simply on the 

basis that other jurisdictions have adopted this 

non-discriminatory clause and let it go at that.  But I want to 

press it a bit further. 

 

We are simply not prepared to not have this in the Act.  We 

think that it is just not permissible that the rates of 

contributions or the amount of contributions or the amount of a 

pension or the entitlement of a person to become a member of a 

plan should have anything to do with their sex.  Men and 

women ought to have equal access to pensions and should be 

treated equally under them, and we think that the law should so 

provide. 

 

Clause 45 agreed to. 

 

Parts VI to IX inclusive agreed to. 

 

Part II, clauses 3 and 4, agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 

Mr. Toth: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  We would ask that we: 

 

 Amend clause 5 of the printed bill by striking out the words 

"without a warrant" where they occur in subclause (1) thereof 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 6 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to take a moment to 

thank the minister and his officials for being so forthright and 

forthcoming with their responses to the Bill.  And we 

appreciate their time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to 

add my own thanks to the officials and particularly to the 

superintendent and assistant superintendent who have worked 

very, very hard over a very short period of time in order to 

produce this Bill, following the recommendations of the 

committee, and for their help in our consideration of the Bill in 

committee tonight. 

 

Bill No. 81 - An Act respecting the repeal of The Criminal 

Injuries Compensation Act 

 

Clauses 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill 82 - An Act to amend The Victims of Crime Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to please introduce the 

officials that are here with him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- With me, Mr. Chairman, is Susan 

Amrud of the Department of Justice, a Crown solicitor; and Jan 

Turner, a research officer in the policy, planning, and 

evaluation branch of the department. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- Are the members agreed to proceed through this 

on a page-by-page basis. 

 

Pages 1 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Even though the minister's assistants have already 

left, I just want to thank them for having taken the time to wait 

around for this Bill to be brought forward.  And I'm just sorry 

we didn't have the time to get into some very detailed 

questions, but actually it was a pretty good Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I adopt the member's remarks as my 

own, Mr. Chairman. 



3034 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

The committee reported progress. 
 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 64 -- An Act respecting Arbitration 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 64 be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 83 -- An Act respecting Pension Benefits 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I move that the amendments be now 

read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 

I move that this Bill be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

Bill No. 81 -- An Act respecting the repeal of The Criminal 

Injuries Compensation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 82 -- An Act to amend The Victims of Crime Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(2015) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Environment and Public Safety 

Vote 9 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I understand the minister will be joined 

later by her officials.  And when she is, she can introduce them 

at that time. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the officials are a 

little bit late.  They'll be here in a few minutes. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, I believe we gave you a set of global questions quite a 

while ago now, the same, similar questions that we have given 

to all of the ministers and asked for their responses.  And I 

believe you have turned that over to us.  We would like to 

thank you for that.  The staff has gone through it -- they're still 

going through it -- and I'm just wondering if we could get your 

commitment to supply any answers that we find may be 

missing at an equivalent level to those answers supplied by the 

other ministers. 

 

We received some very good detailed responses from the Rural 

Affairs minister and many of the other ministers.  I'm just 

wondering if we can have a commitment from you this evening 

that if we find any questions that have not been answered, if 

you would make a commitment to respond in a manner 

equivalent to your other colleagues. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chair, yes certainly we most 

willingly will make that commitment to supply the answers that 

you have found lacking in the information we've given you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  One of the 

issues that has come up with the environment Bill, particularly 

with Bill 3, and it seems to be creating some concerns across 

the province with a number of people, and that is the fuel 

storage tanks and the elimination of underground fuel storage 

tanks, or special environmental requirements for farms that 

have more than 3,500 litres of storage on site. 

 

I'm receiving a number of phone calls from people with 

concerns about that because in the case of farmers, the added 

cost of handling it in a proper environmental manner, of 

building perhaps dikes around it, etc. to store larger amounts of 

fuel on their farms, or particularly in cases where farmers have 

had underground storage tanks . . .  

 

Now we all know that we don't want gasoline or diesel leaking 

into the environment.  Neither does the farmer because every 

drop of gas that happens to leak out of his tank is money out of 

his pocket.  So they're very careful with it.  But while we do 

realize that there are at times leaks that do occur, one of the 

concerns that has been expressed to me, Madam Minister, is 

the -- and we talked about this in Bill 3 -- the need to have 

somebody on site to inspect as the tank is being dug out of the 

ground as it's removed.  I don't know just how we could go 

about that but if some manner could be found to make it less 

costly when this tank is removed . . . I realize that you would 

like to have . . . the department would like to have soil samples 

taken and if there is not a person on site that could . . . that's 

certified to be there by your department, then you may feel that 

there's a problem in identifying whether or not proper measures 

were taken when that soil was removed from around the tank, 

when the tank is removed. 

 

But have you given any consideration perhaps to having the 

contractor who removed the tank or the owner of the land site 

filling out an affidavit and swearing that soil samples were 

taken, that they were presented to your department, that they 

are the accurate ones taken at various levels as the tank was 

removed as could be designated by your department.  Samples 

from on top, samples from the side, samples from underneath 

at various locations so that you could get a good representative 

sample, rather than having to have either a member of your 

department or a technician certified to be there to collect the 

soil samples and to review the digging out of that fuel tank 

when it needs to be removed, Madam 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3035 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the member 

opposite for bringing that to our attention.  Obviously we don't 

want anyone to have to be paying unnecessary expenses in the 

certification process.  And we're dealing with that now.  We're 

looking at the situation.  If there is an alternative process that 

we could bring in that would ensure the adequate level of 

supervision then we will bring it in. 

 

We make a commitment to you that we . . . neither the 

government or obviously the public or you want to impose any 

unnecessary expenditures on farmers or anyone else who has 

underground tanks.  And if it's not necessary for the inspector 

to be at the site for the entire duration of the removal of the 

tank, then we will take another process to try to make sure that 

this problem is rectified. 

 

I think it's important to make sure though that . . . We're 

dealing with contaminated sites and we're finding now across 

the country there are many sites that have lost their value 

because people have left underground tanks sitting in the soil 

and the soil around it has become saturated.  And that has had a 

depreciation value on the property. 

 

So I think it's a two-edged sword here.  If the property is to 

maintain its value then we have to make sure that if there is 

contaminated soil it cannot be just covered up and left there.  

And this whole process that we're developing now speaks to 

that end of the problem as well as to the end of making sure 

that any tanks that are put back in are certified properly. 

 

Yesterday we announced that people who had underground 

storage tanks had until October 31 of this year to register those 

tanks with the department.  And then they have until March 31, 

1994 to have the tanks certified.  So if we find that that process 

is too short, we can extend it.  But we do stress that we have to 

start somewhere and we have to set some time lines, and 

respecting the fact that there is a problem with cost here and we 

will try as much as possible to alleviate those concerns with 

making the public or the owners bear any unnecessary costs. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I believe 

perhaps your officials are outside the door, if you would wish 

to contact them and bring them in. 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister like to introduce her official? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I have with me Larry Lechner, director of 

air and land protection services. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Chairman, Madam Minister, we understand the concern for 

contaminated soil and that it needs to be disposed of properly, 

but it's up until the point that the soil is determined to be 

contaminated where the cost seems to be in place. 

 

I'm just wondering, what's the process now?  You've taken the 

sample out of the ground. How long does it take 

to find out that the soil is actually contaminated?  What do you 

do with that soil after it's been determined to be contaminated?  

And what do you do with the fuel storage tank that is removed 

from the ground? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, the tanks that are found to 

be deficient are taken up and transported to a steel mill like 

IPSCO if they're no longer usable.  The soil that is 

contaminated is taken and hauled to an approved landfill site 

and spread there. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- And, Madam Minister, are all fuel tanks 

taken directly to IPSCO or is there some spot in the intervening 

time, from the time they come out of the ground to the time 

they end up at IPSCO, that they are stored at? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- There are a number of companies in the 

province who are handling these old storage tanks.  They 

usually cut them up and store them until they have collected 

enough steel and they sell them to a steel mill.  They're not held 

as a tank.  They're usually cut up and packed away, and the 

company that is contracted to do this takes care of that. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So, Madam Minister, there are a number 

of sites then around the province where these tanks would be 

deposited until such times as they ended up at IPSCO, because 

that was one of the concerns that had been expressed to me by 

a number of the people whose tanks are being removed.  They 

were unclear as to what to do with this tank after it had been 

removed from the ground.  They didn't know whether they just 

left it sitting there or what they had to do with it. 

 

So I think perhaps, Madam Minister, what needs to be done is 

some information clarified and given out to the public as to 

what the process really is.  If you remove your tank, what you 

do with it afterwards because I know that was one of the 

concerns that was brought up to me as people didn't know what 

was to happen to their tank after they had removed it from the 

ground. 

 

In the case of some contaminated soil, Madam Minister, is it 

possible to recycle that soil?  I know from experience in the oil 

field that when soils are contaminated with an oil spill, that it's 

possible to wash the soil, recover the oil from it, and the oil is 

then clean and ready to be reused again in the proper manner 

soil is, to grow plants, etc.  Is it possible to recycle the soil that 

has been contaminated from leaking fuel tanks, and is that even 

done? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the first question . . . to the last 

question first.  Yes, it is possible to recycle the soil depending 

on the extent of the contamination.  It can be just spread out 

and aerated and the contamination will evaporate, and it can be 

mixed back in after a certain length of time.  So yes, the soil 

can be recycled. 

 

In regard to the problem that you've identified: what do people 

do with these tanks if they're no longer usable; that was a very 

good question and we appreciate your information on that.  We 

will make available to the public, if they phone and ask us, but 

we maybe have to set up a 



3036 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

better process to give them the names of the companies, the 

contractors that are in the business of picking up these used 

storage tanks.  It may be something that we have to streamline 

a little bit to get the message out.  We have the list of the 

contractors.  It can be gotten from us by phoning, but perhaps 

we should make it available even through the rural service 

centres or something like that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Perhaps 

one of the things you could do is . . . you're going to get all 

these tanks registered by October this year.  Once you have that 

registration in place, perhaps then you could notify all those 

people with the underground tanks that if there's a problem 

with their tank that this is the manner to go through to dispose 

of it.  But I have a question too. 

 

When not all of these sites are any longer necessarily owned by 

an individual or an identifiable company . . . I'm thinking of 

some of the very small areas around Saskatchewan that used to 

have a rural town but no longer have so.  There was a site just 

down the highway, the No. 1 Highway, that my colleagues 

reported they were digging a tank out of the ground.  Now who 

becomes responsible for that, when you can no longer find an 

owner for that underground storage tank?  Is it the RM (rural 

municipality)?  Is it the government?  Who becomes 

responsible for looking after that and the costs associated with 

that removal? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- It is always the owner of the property 

that's responsible for the tanks and whatever contamination is 

there.  If it's a abandoned tank, it is the responsibility of the 

owner of the property. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, in some of these 

situations there no longer is an identifiable owner or an owner 

that you can find.  What happens in that kind of a case? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I have more officials with 

me and I would like to introduce Les Cooke, to my left, deputy 

minister, and Donna Kellsey, director of financial management 

branch, behind me.  There may be one more official coming 

later. 

 

I'm sorry.  If the member opposite would repeat that question. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, in some cases, though, 

it's impossible to find the owner.  I'm thinking of a small town 

in our . . . where there used to be a town and there no longer is 

a town.  I'm sure there's a name on the title of the old village 

site but nobody's paid taxes on that land for years now.  And 

the RM has not taken possession of that land for tax purposes 

because it has no value.  Now in that case where there is an 

underground storage tank there, who becomes . . . who's 

responsible for that tank at that point in time?  There's no 

longer an owner that's identifiable.  The RM does not have 

possession of it.  Who is responsible? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- If there is contamination on the spot that 

is endangering the public in that it's leaking into a water system 

and it has to be cleaned up, then the department will undertake 

to take and clean up that site. 

The process that they go through from there is, they endeavour 

to find through the proper channels, the legal channels, who 

has title to the property and try to recover the cost that way.  If 

there is no way of finding the proper owner or of recovering 

the cost, then it's absorbed by the department. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- In the case of an RM that has maybe 

taken the land back after quite a number of years as a tax lien 

against it, would the RM then be responsible? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- As titled owner of the property, they 

would be responsible. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well I guess that tells RMs not to 

repossess any old service stations. 

 

Madam Minister, when a tank is removed from the ground and 

your officials are not on site, but you have a certified person 

who has taken some training, who is, I gather, employed by the 

construction company, perhaps, that is removing the tank, 

would it possible to . . . or I should say, is there a limit to the 

number of these certified technicians that are around the 

province?  Is that limited, or can you have an unlimited number 

of these people that are certified to take the proper soil samples 

and to remove the tank, to inspect it while the tank is being 

removed? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Maybe a point of clarification here.  The 

person who is doing the installation of the tank is the person 

that's doing the certification, who is the person qualified as the 

certifier.  He possesses the necessary qualifications to certify 

that tank.  So it's the installer.  And there can be any number of 

people who install underground tanks in Saskatchewan.  It's a 

business. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, the concerns that have 

been expressed to me is that there seems to be, in this particular 

location, in that area of the province, one person who is 

certified to install the tanks and that person has to be there 

when that tank is removed.  There are other contractors in his 

area who can do the work to remove the tank, who have the 

backhoes necessary to do the job, but they have to get this other 

fellow from another community to come to their community to 

inspect it as the tank is being removed.  And this seems to be 

an added burden on the business. 

 

In some cases, the business may indeed own a backhoe 

themselves with which they could remove the tank, but they 

have to have the other fellow come and watch the tank being 

removed and then certify it as it's replaced.  And this seems to 

be an added burden to the people who are involved in this 

because they have to pay . . . and the figures I'm getting are 

anywheres from 30 to $36 an hour, to have that man standing 

there watching while the dirt is being dug out and the tank is 

removed.  And this seems to be the part that's causing the 

concerns and the problems for people. 

 

If a greater number of people could be certified and bonded to 

do these soil samples and to remove the tanks, perhaps that 

would alleviate some of the problems that seems to be 

developing with this. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The problem you have described, I 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3037 

think, is simply one of lack of perhaps communication as the 

program starts off.  Anyone can be certified at no cost.  The 

department offers a course for anyone.  If someone wants to be 

able to come into the department, take the course so they can 

remove the tank, they can receive their certificate by taking the 

course from the department at no cost.  And then they go out 

and do that themselves. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, that is perhaps 

what the problem here is, is because the program is new, there's 

very few people certified, and people don't understand how it's 

to work.  It seems to be the problem is the cost that I'm hearing 

about anyway. 

 

So, Madam Minister, perhaps as the program goes on, if you 

can advertise it that the certification is free and anybody can do 

it, providing they meet the qualifications I suppose -- the 

technical know-how to do the job -- that will alleviate the 

problem. 

 

How long does this course take?  Is it an eight-hour course?  Is 

it a week?  Or what is involved in it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- It's about a one-day course.  The 

department has certified over 200 people to this point in time.  

If there is an area that we have missed and we haven't provided 

the course, if you would give us the area that you're talking 

about, perhaps we could go and make sure that people out there 

who have an interest in taking the course have the course made 

available to them. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well the area I'm receiving the 

complaints from mainly, Madam Minister, is the Nipawin area, 

the north-east area.  So perhaps that's an area where you could 

take a look at. 

 

I'd like to go onto storage tanks still, but this time above 

ground.  I have a letter of concern from a farmer who is 

concerned about the storage of greater than 4,000 litres of fuel 

above ground.  I'm just wondering, what procedures do you 

have to go through to be able to store fuel above ground 

legally? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- For storage tanks above ground, the 

hazardous substance regulations that are in effect are the ones 

that are the . . . need to be in compliance with.   As I said, by 

October of this year people who have those storage tanks above 

ground have to be registered with the department, and by the 

first . . . no well, March 31, 1994 then those tanks have to be in 

compliance with the regulations. 

 

And the regulations deal with two issues.  One issue is with the 

containment issue and the other is with alarm systems, so that 

there is a fire alarm system in there.  And the other is the 

building so that whatever contamination might be possible can 

be contained within that area. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, Madam Minister, when you talk 

of a system it says on the piece of paper I have here any tank or 

multiple of tanks within a system where total system capacity 

is 4,000 litres or larger. 

 

Now, when you mean a system, do you mean . . . like on farms, 

tanks are not often connected up to a central pump.  You have 

tanks lined up in a row, but they all have separate hoses on 

them and you pull up to the one you want to use and you fill 

out of it. 
 

Now because they're all lined up in a row, is that a system?  Or 

do they have to be all connected into a central point where you 

would use one nozzle to extract whatever fuel you wanted? 
 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- They do not have to be interconnected.  

It's just the number of tanks. 
 

(2045) 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, Madam Minister, how far apart 

can tanks be to become not a system?  Is it within two feet of 

each other, within twenty yards, or what?  When are a set of 

tanks no longer a system? 
 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We don't have any regulations.  I don't 

think anybody really decided to carry it to that extent.  

Common sense will dictate what is the appropriate distance one 

should be from the other. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I know farmers 

,and when you tell them that they have to meet certain 

requirements in a system, that they have to be registered, that 

they have to have containment, that they have to have alarms, if 

it's a system, they're going to spread their tanks around the yard 

and say it's not a system.  These are individual tanks.  This is 

where I keep my diesel.  This is where the gasoline is and so . . 

. to avoid having to meet these regulations because that's a 

bunch of paperwork for them.  It's not that they're trying to 

break the law.  They just don't want the hassle of having to deal 

with all of the regulations. 
 

So, Madam Minister, I think it would be important if you had a 

definition of what a system is.  I know a number of farmers 

who have a large amount of fuel.  And a lot of it is not even 

situated at their home sites.  It's on the section of land 10 miles 

away.  Or it's down the road three miles over at the other bins 

and that type of thing. 
 

So what is a system and what is not a system? 
 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- You have perhaps identified something 

that hadn't been looked at closely enough and we perhaps 

should expand or look at the definition of what a system is.  

Maybe it's not clear enough. 
 

I guess the other issue that is important that farmers, for their 

own safety, should want to make sure that wherever they're 

storing their fuel, it should be in a regulated . . . an area that it's 

got proper containment and safety features. 
 

This isn't to frustrate farmers; it's to hope to reduce accidents 

on the farm and to preserve the environment at the same time.  

So perhaps the problem you've identified is something that we 

should look at.  I don't think we had anticipated the complexity 

that you talk about. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, when you talk 

about containment and alarm systems . . . I farm a very small 

piece of land.  I'm not a large farmer.  I have five quarters.  

And I'm sure that I have well above your 4,000 litres.  But for 

me to put in a containment system; for me to 



3038 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

put in an alarm system; a fire prevention . . . it's an extravagant 

amount of money. 

 

And to avoid having to do that, I'm sure a good many farmers 

will simply move that tank because they're all generally on 

portable stands that can be moved.  Move it 50 yards away or 

move it to the other side of the yard.  Because farmers make 

sure that those fuel tanks are away from their water supply to 

prevent contamination.  They ensure that they are away from 

their buildings in case of fires. 

 

But they cannot afford to go to a system like this, where you 

would be having, I'm sure, a considerable cost.  Because I 

know that fire alarm, fire detection systems for that kind of 

facility do not come cheap. 

 

Now I realize that this will not affect all farmers.  But it will 

affect all those farmers that are carrying out some commercial 

activity such as crop spraying or custom combining or the 

applications of anhydrous and other chemicals. 

 

So you're going to hit a large number of farmers throughout the 

system because more and more farmers are indeed going to 

some sort of a custom operation within their system.  They may 

not own a combine, but they do custom applications of 

chemicals and the neighbour down the road, who they work for 

in the spring, comes back and combines for them in the fall. 

 

So in some cases there's no exchange of money; in some cases 

there is.  So those ones that do have that exchange of money 

are running a commercial system.  In a lot of cases, they're 

even registered and they go out and around their 

neighbourhoods and work.  And a fair number of them go 

south across the border when it comes to custom combining. 

 

So you're going to affect a large number of people here and 

while they are no more desirous of pollution than anyone else 

there is a cost factor here. 

 

Now when you talk about containment for somebody who is 

selling fuel on a commercial basis, that's one thing.  He's 

running a large amount of fuel through his system.  He is 

generating his income through that fuel and he needs it for his 

own protection.  Because if you dump a 10,000 gallon tank 

some place that's going to cost him some money.  If it's in a 

system that's contained he can recover a good portion of that so 

that is in effect insurance for himself to recover his costs. 

 

But for the farmer, if he has to put up a cement slab with 

cement walls around it to contain this fuel tank, it's going to be 

an exorbitant price and the farmers are simply not going to be 

able to afford it, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, these regulations we're 

talking about are not meant to be prohibitive to farmers.  

They're trying to be the basic steps necessary in order to 

prevent contamination and to protect the farmer and the 

environment. 

 

They're very simple.  They don't have to be elaborate systems 

but because we realize the pressure, or the cost 

may have some pressure on the farm operation, we're 

considering extending the time that farmers would need to 

come in compliance by another three years or making it five 

years before they have to come into compliance with the 

regulations.  So there may be an exemption. 

 

We're looking at it to see whether we can extend a couple more 

years or three more years to the time frame to allow farmers 

some time to adjust and to make sure that we don't impose on 

them any unnecessary cost. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I know of one 

farmer who is not a commercial operation, but who has over 

30,000 litres of fuel storage on his farm site.  And that 30,000 

litres is spread over 11 different locations around his farm. 

 

So when you talk about containment in this . . . if this was a 

commercial operation where they were doing something for 

hire, what is the containment that would be necessary for them 

to make these kind of storage sites safe, environmentally 

sound? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- If he has tanks, individual tanks that are 

less than 4,000 litres spread around his farm then he's exempt.  

If he's got 11 quarters and he's got a small tank, less than 4,000 

litres on each quarter, then he's beneath the threshold limit for 

regulations. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, Madam Minister, I wonder if you 

could give me an explanation though of what you mean by 

containment, first? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- It's a berm around the tanks. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- This could be a dirt berm, or would it 

have to be something more substantial and something 

impervious? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- A clay-soil berm. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, Madam Minister, we've 

determined that 11 tanks spread over 11 quarters would not 

constitute a system.  What if 11 tanks were spread over one 

quarter of land equidistant from each other? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- It would still be exempt. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, can you give me 

some sort of determination as to how close together they would 

have to be to constitute a system? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We haven't drawn the regulations this 

fine.  I think it's a matter of common sense.  If you have 15 

tanks sitting within walking distance of one another, where 

perhaps there is danger of widespread contamination or of 

whatever, of leakage, I mean then you would see that as a 

system. 
 

I think we have to take a look at it.  We haven't really tried to 

define it to the fine terms that you anticipate it should be.  If 

you have some suggestions, if you want it defined more 

clearly, if you want us . . . If you don't feel these regulations are 

quite strict enough, you tell us and we'll try to accommodate 

your wishes if you feel that they should be more restrictive. 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3039 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, perhaps what your 

officials need to do is sit down and determine, make a 

determination on what would be a realistic system.  What 

would realistically be a system?  And I would like to make the 

suggestion, Madam Minister, that the limit, rather than being 

4,000 litres be raised to at least 4,546.  That would be a 

minimum. 

 

That number translates into 1,000-gallon tank.  So if it could be 

over that, I think that would cover most fuel tanks held by the 

average farmer.  There will certainly be some farmers with 

some larger fuel tanks than that but that would cover the 

average farmer, Madam Minister.  If your officials could work 

up a determination as to what would be a proper determination 

of a system . . . how many tanks within a certain distance?  One 

of the members of the House suggests six tanks per acre would 

be a proper determination. 

 

Madam Minister, I would like to go on to some other matters 

now.  On the answers that you did supply us, Madam Minister, 

on the question 1(f) which was dealing with reclassifications of 

positions within the department, I note that there are two 

positions that are classified as vacant and yet have received a 

new classification and a new salary level.  I'm just wondering 

why these positions were raised in their level and in their salary 

when there's nobody in there to do any work. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- In two of the cases, the responsibilities 

were enhanced so they were reclassified prior to advertising for 

the position.  They reviewed the job description, the 

classification was enhanced because more duties, 

responsibilities were added; hence the reclassification. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Are those 

positions filled at the present time, and if so, by whom? 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We aren't quite sure which two positions 

you're talking about.  Do you have names of the positions or 

just . . . Numbers.  Can you identify the numbers? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, position no. 141769 

and position no. 356028. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Position number 356028 was reclassified 

to director of policy and legislation.  And the position has been 

filled by David Beckwermert, through open competition. 

 

And the position 141769 was a clerical position, and it was 

upgraded to an inspector's position.  And it is not filled yet. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I'd like to 

go back to the issue of the fuel tanks just for a second.  Perhaps 

were you . . . if your officials were to consult with SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) on the 

issue, I think they could probably give you some good direction 

on what would be a proper 

system -- to use the term system.  They're quite familiar with 

the needs of the rural communities.  And I think that would be 

the proper place to find out the information that would be 

needed. 

 

Madam Minister, the department subscribes to a large number 

of magazines, journals, news-letters, etc.  And I'm just 

wondering, when it talks about some of the magazines that you 

subscribe to from the U.S. (United States), the dollar figures 

that are used, are these figures the full cost or are they the face 

value that you see on the magazine? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- First of all I want to thank the member 

opposite for the suggestion we should consult SARM.  That's a 

very good idea, and we will be doing that --- make that 

commitment.  If the dollar figure is $90 U.S. (United States), 

that's $90 U.S. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- That's the fee you actually paid to 

receive the subscription then, was $90 U.S.  Okay, Madam 

Minister, thank you. 

 

In your answer to question No. 26 regarding what travel agency 

is used by the department, the answer was, we have been 

assigned to National travel agency as the Travel Shoppe has 

gone out of business.  Madam Minister, who did this assigning 

and why was National travel agency chosen? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I understand under the last administration 

travel agencies were assigned.  In this circumstance they were 

just picked as somebody who provides good service.  I don't 

think there was any way of deciding who it was.  They were 

just given a name out of the phone book. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- And who gave this name, Madam 

Minister?  The quote says, we have been assigned.  So 

somebody must have made that decision that this is the people 

you're going to use.  Who was it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I gather that the word, assign, came from 

past practice and it was something that the former 

administration did.  And what they did was phone our office 

and said, who to use?  And someone in my office said, use such 

and such a person . . . or travel agency.  And that's what we've 

been doing.  There is no reason other than that was the one that 

was recommended by someone who obviously feels that they 

provide excellent service. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, it seems we're 

dealing here with a case of the mythical they -- they decided.  

So surely somebody though has the responsibility within your 

office to make those kind of decisions, or within your 

department; that this is the way it's going to be done.  

Somebody ultimately says yes or no.  Who was the person who 

did that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I guess I would say that it matters 

not to me who the staff want to use.  They phoned our office, 

as they had done in the past under the former administration.  

They phoned the minister's office and said, who should we use?  

A name was given to them by probably the secretarial services 

in my office.  They can 



3040 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

use anybody they want.  It matters not to me who the 

department chooses to make travel arrangements. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, it doesn't matter 

to me either which travel agency is used, as long as the 

government is getting the best return for their dollar on it.  And 

I would find it surprising though that one of your department 

people phones up your office, and your secretary tells him to 

use this particular travel agency.  I would have thought that 

somebody at a management level would make a decision like 

that.  Because if this is the travel agency they're going to be 

using from now on, surely -- I don't know how much money 

you've spent on travel, I haven't had the opportunity to look 

through the files yet to find that out -- but if it's a significant 

amount of money it's certainly worthwhile to a travel agency to 

get that business. 

 

And I would suggest perhaps, Madam Minister, the thing to do 

in that particular case is to tender it out.  Because travel 

agencies do make a profit when you buy tickets from them.  So 

they are interested in getting your business.  So I would think 

that they could give some sort of relief in the price if you were 

to tender that system out. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That's not quite true.  The difference is in 

the quality of service that they will provide, but effectively all 

travel agencies charge the same commission. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I encourage you 

though to tender it out and to find out who is actually making 

the decisions in your office. 

 

On a news item in the Leader-Post of June 12, '92, it talks of 

students being hired for environmental jobs: ". . . 70 

post-secondary students under the Environment Youth Corps . . 

." 

 

Madam Minister, what are these students going to be doing?  

How were they chosen?  Where are they from?  And who made 

the decision as to which students would be chosen? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- They were hired through the Public 

Service Commission as students' applications came in.  And we 

would be pleased to provide you with a list of the students and 

where they worked.  The program just wound up today.  It was 

a very good program, and the students were very eager and 

pleased they had an opportunity to participate in it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister, I 

would appreciate that information. 

 

Madam Minister, when I look down the list of your votes and 

the items of expense in the budget books here, the Estimates 

for '92-93 -- I see you have an increase in vote number 1 of 2.7 

man years.  I'm just wondering, what were those extra positions 

for?  How did they come about, and what are they for? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- They are non-permanent positions to 

assist in the administration of the environmental protection 

fund. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, on your vote no. 7, 

grants to local authorities and other third parties, who would be 

receiving those grants, Madam Minister?  I'm particularly 

interested in whether or not the environmental study that is 

being done on uranium mining in the North would be receiving 

any of this funding. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, all provincial 

costs associated with the Uranium Board of Inquiry are under 

subvote 9, item 5, $750,000.  That's a total cost that is incurred 

by the province for all aspects of that board of inquiry. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, and in this subvote 

where you're paying out $750,000 to carry out this study, the 

people who are carrying out the study, do they hire their own 

employees as they see fit, or what kind of controls do you have 

on this money and how it's spent? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- There's $750,000 that we have allocated 

to the Uranium Board of Inquiry.  As you will go back in time, 

the former administration established the Uranium Board of 

Inquiry.  At the time it was set up, there was no money 

allocated to it in last year's budget, the '91-92 budget year. 

 

The budget that the former administration established had no 

money allocated to that board of inquiry even though it was 

established by that administration.  We appealed to the federal 

government to pick up our share of the costs last year if we 

would pick up the costs this year.  So $750,000 is our share of 

that board of inquiry, the two-year board, and the 

administration and the budget of that board of inquiry is 

through FEARO (Federal Environmental Assessment Review 

Office), the federal environmental assessment organization, 

and they handle all of the details as far as administrative cost 

and budgeting. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  I 

found it kind of strange or surprising though, when after the 

election, one sitting member of the New Democratic Party was 

defeated and shortly thereafter shows up working for that 

uranium board of inquiry -- one of the participants who is 

supplying . . . who will be making requests to that board.  And 

that was the member Peter Prebble, who is working now for 

one of the groups that is receiving funding under this program 

to make submissions to this uranium inquiry board. 

 

I just found it a little strange, Madam Minister, that all of a 

sudden there's one NDP (New Democratic Party) member who 

was defeated and is actually getting government money -- 

indirectly, perhaps -- but still getting government money as an 

employee of one of the groups who will be making 

submissions to the uranium inquiry board. 

 

I think that is one of the things that makes all of us as 

politicians look bad, Madam Minister, when defeated 

politicians are given jobs on the government payroll. 

 

Madam Minister, I would like to go to another matter now 

dealing with Water Appeal Board.  Is this board in place now, 

Madam Minister?  And is it operating?  I know that 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3041 

there was a problem earlier on in the spring where the board 

was not in place and there was some judgements that needed to 

be looked at. 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the first question regarding Peter 

Prebble's involvement.  There's intervener funding provided 

through the board of inquiry for certain groups.  The 

Saskatchewan Environmental Society is one of the groups that 

has been provided with intervener funding.  That was under the 

terms of reference that was set up by the former administration.  

And Mr. Prebble represents the Saskatchewan Environmental 

Network.  It has nothing to do with this government.  We do 

not allocate the funds.  We do not decide who should get the 

money and who should do the work.  It is totally and 

completely independent and this government has no role 

whatsoever as far as deciding those participants. 

 

In regard to the Water Appeal Board, the members of that 

appeal board have been nominated.  The board is in operation 

and they have been hearing appeals. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  It 

certainly strengthens the hand of the environmental society 

that'll be making those presentations to this inquiry when 

you're supplying the money and they turn around and hire an 

ex-MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from your 

party.  I think it would probably enhance their capacity to 

lobby the government. 

 

Madam Minister, I'm glad to hear that the Water Appeal Board 

is up and running and operating, because I know that there was 

some concerns there by some of the people who had appeals 

before the board and were looking for some settlements. 

 

At this time I would like to thank the minister for her responses 

and for her responses to the global questions, and to thank her 

officials for coming in here tonight. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I would like to thank the member 

opposite.  But I would like to engage in a debate on that last 

remark but I will resist the temptation and perhaps we can 

debate it at another time.  But I do appreciate the help and the 

questions from the member opposite and I would like to thank 

my officials as well for coming tonight. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 9 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Environment and Public Safety 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 9 

 

Items 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 9 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Environment and Public Safety 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 9 

 

Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 9 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I would like to thank the members for the 

opposition for their help this evening. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like 

to thank the minister and her officials again for their 

co-operation and their work this evening. 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Economic Development 

Vote 45 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I would ask the minister to please 

introduce the officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, it's my pleasure to 

be back again in Estimates.  We spent some time -- oh, a week 

ago -- on these Estimates and our anticipation is that we will 

want to get on with them.  I have with me tonight Mr. Bill 

Allcock, the associate deputy minister of Economic 

Development, to my right, and Mr. Peter Phillips, chief 

economist in the department, to my left. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I'd like 

to express some thank you for the Estimates . . . or I mean the 

information that was provided to the global questions that we 

started with, to your staff.  We appreciate them taking the time 

to provide that.  We'll deal with those in a little bit later as we 

move on this evening.  There was a few questions that were, in 

our judgement, not answered in complete fashion and we'd like 

to see if we could pursue them a little bit. 

 

We're going to try and move this along fairly quickly, so with 

the minister's co-operation, I'm sure we can. 

 

With respect first of all to AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada 

Ltd.) and the agreement, I'm wondering, as I understand the 

agreement, if the provincial government, the duly elected 

provincial government, backed out of the agreement, there was 

a penalty clause, I understand, in the agreements.  And I'm 

wondering if the minister could elaborate a little bit on that, 

whether that penalty was indeed paid and what the penalty in 

dollars was? 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, the members 

opposite will be aware that there was a penalty clause in the 

original agreement -- this being the memorandum of 

understanding between AECL and SaskPower -- that would 

have meant $2 million being paid by the provincial government 

if the deal didn't go ahead.  Now I think, as evidence that the 

negotiations are still going on, the fact is the payment has not 

been made nor been called for by the federal government.  And 

there's good reason for that because we've indicated to them, 

very directly, that we are interested in fact in an agreement 

whereby research staff would come from AECL's Ontario 

operation to Saskatoon.  And these negotiations 



3042 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

are ongoing.  I've spoken to both Bill McKnight and Jake Epp 

recently, as recently as last week. 

 

I think it's fair to say, although there is no agreement at this 

point, there is open discussions going on about the potential of 

employees of AECL engineers and others coming to 

Saskatchewan to do research into the use of radiation as would 

be used in irradiating food; as it might apply to medical 

research; research as it might apply to the development of a 

CANDU 3 (Canadian deuterium uranium) reactor up to the 

point of actually making a commitment to a CANDU 3 reactor. 

 

That is, the province has stated publicly and privately to Mr. 

Epp and the federal government that we do not have the need 

for a CANDU 3 reactor which would provide 450 megawatts 

of power in the near future, in fact not before the year 2003. 

 

And we've set up an institute to study the needs of the province 

between the years 2003 and 2020.  Now that institute will look 

at all of the options.  It will look at hydro; it will look at coal, 

thermal energy; it will look at wind; it will look at solar; it will 

look at biomass and other alternatives, including conservation; 

and it will also look at the potential of nuclear. 

 

Now this is how we have approached AECL, telling them that 

we don't need the CANDU 3 reactor right now.  But in the mix 

and the bundle that we would look at between the year 2003 

and 2020, nuclear will be looked at along with all of the other 

energy options. 

 

But in the mean time we have clearly indicated to AECL that 

we would look at and be very much in favour in fact of 

engineers from that corporation coming from Saskatchewan to 

do research in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, is there any deadline date on the 

penalty clause of that agreement that you're aware of? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well there was.  As you know the 

agreement was stated in such a way that if there wasn't a 

conclusion by a certain date, then the penalty clause would be 

invoked.  But I think the federal government realizes that 

obviously negotiations are going on and there is a relatively 

good mood between the federal minister and the provincial 

Minister of Energy and Mines and the Minister of Economic 

Development.  And we're still looking at options whereby we 

might come to some resolve of this and see jobs coming to 

Saskatoon in the area of research through AECL. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, it's been your party's position over 

time, official party's position over some time, that as new jobs 

opened up in the North to replace uranium mining jobs, that 

you had phase down the development of uranium mining.  And 

I'm wondering is that still the official position of your 

government. 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- This policy of the party -- I want to 

make it clear -- this party policy is that no mines will be shut 

down until employment is found for people in northern 

Saskatchewan.  And this has been a policy of the 

party for some time.  And it's expected that, at least for the 

foreseeable future, although our conventions are held annually, 

I believe this year in November -- I don't know whether that 

will be reviewed or not -- but this is the policy at the present 

time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Is that also the policy of your government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The policy of the government at the 

present time is to keep the existing mines in production.  And 

obviously the party has influence on the government, as with 

any political party.  So it's fair to say that we intend to keep the 

mines open and because they create a lot of jobs and the job 

rate in northern Saskatchewan is very, very high after a number 

of years where we feel that more should have been done in 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

There are actual towns and villages in northern Saskatchewan 

where the unemployment rate is over 50 per cent.  So it's very 

unlikely that the policy of keeping these mines open until we 

have jobs for our people of northern Saskatchewan, that 

anything other than that, that there would be any indication of 

moving away from that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm wondering a little 

bit about your feelings, your thoughts, on the implications of 

breaking of contracts. 

 

Now we can argue and debate about whether you believe the 

contracts, for example, in the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) contracts with farm families, were broke.  And you 

would probably suggest they haven't been broke and we'll 

suggest that they were broke.  And we'll just leave it out there 

that there's some question of whether or not there was a 

contract broke in that case. 

 

And with respect to the upgrader at Lloydminster, I'm sure we 

can engage in that same debate of whether or not there was an 

agreement, not a contract necessarily, but a sort of 

commitment, obligation, whatever you want to call it, that the 

province pick up their share of the cost overrun. 

 

And we can, as I said, we can debate that the same as we can 

debate the contract issue.  But again, I would submit that that is 

out there.  That people would, in some circles, I would suggest 

to you, believe that perhaps the government didn't live up to its 

obligation in that area. 

 

And in another area, with the contracts with public servants last 

fall, their contracts were essentially changed or broke, 

whatever you want to . . . And again, we can debate whether 

that was indeed the case.  But I would suggest in a third 

circumstance, that certainly is out there; that there's a feeling 

within a certain group of people out there in society that I think 

they would suggest in those three incidents that the government 

either broke, broke intentionally, or broke inadvertently, or 

didn't live up to their commitments in certain areas. 

 

And I'm wondering whether or not you, as the Minister of 

Economic Development and Trade, have given that any 

thought to the possible implications, ramifications of that type 

of thing.  And whether, in your judgement, it has 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3043 

impacted at all on companies perhaps being interested in 

relocating in Saskatchewan or expanding in Saskatchewan.  I'm 

wondering your thoughts on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Just to indicate to the member 

opposite, that the issue of the perception of government is very, 

very important.  And I think that you'll know that we are 

working very hard to establish a close relationship with 

business and working people, with farmers.  And it's fair to say 

that you don't always succeed in every area. 

 

And I guess we disagree on the amount of success that we have 

had, obviously.  But when I look back to the days of the 1982 

election and the newly elected government of that day and the 

dismantling of land bank, and I remember within the first few 

months there were 500 farmers on the steps of the legislature 

demonstrating against the government because they felt that 

their agreement and contract with that Conservative 

government had been broken.  And obviously the government 

went ahead with that, and that was their prerogative, and they 

passed legislation to make that happen. 

 

And beef stabilization, the member from Morse will know that 

there are still outstanding court cases against the government as 

a result of changes to the beef stabilization plan.  And I know 

that we all wish that everything always went smooth in 

government, but obviously it doesn't -- not for your 

government, and I'm sure it won't go smooth for ours all the 

time. 

 

Although I think it's fair to say in some of the so-called 

perceived breaking of contracts, I think we have large public 

support for the legislation.  I want to say the legislation, which 

is very much different than breaking contracts as it applied to 

the upper echelons of the Crown corporations -- for example, 

we had people running Sask Power who were earning over 

$400,000 -- and I think the public very much supported the 

position that there was no reason why you would have to pay 

an individual that much to run a Crown corporation. 

 

When it comes to Promavia, another example that your caucus 

has used as an example of us breaking a contract, that was not 

breaking a contract.  Money had been put to the company and 

there was a promise that more money would come into 

Promavia -- but after the private money came in and the private 

money didn't come in.  Therefore the taxpayers, we believe, 

shouldn't have to put more money into the project.  We don't 

feel that is a broken contract or agreement. 

 

With Husky Oil we think the taxpayers are taking a huge risk 

in that project and for us to put in $33 million more because 

there's cost overruns, easily and quickly, we felt was 

irresponsible because the taxpayers are not in much of a 

position as compared to Husky Oil and others to pick up that 

kind of an overrun. 

 

Now it's fair to say that had you been government you may 

have wanted to put in another chunk of money into Promavia 

and to see if you could entice the private money to come, or 

you may have left the head of Crown corporations, SaskPower, 

SaskEnergy, and others at those high levels of $400,000, and 

you may have put in $33 

million into the overrun in Husky Oil.  But I think all of those 

signals you were sending to the public of loan guarantees and 

spending, spending, spending at a time that everyone knew that 

we were broke was damaging very severely the confidence that 

business people had in the province.  That's my argument. 

 

Now your argument is is that we're sending the wrong signals 

by bargaining toughly, and what I see as being conscious 

business people in looking after the public interest in terms of 

spending the taxpayers' dollar very frugally and this is . . . and 

we do have a difference of opinion here. 

 

But my opinion is is that the taxpayers should be treated with 

respect when it comes to spending every cent that they put into 

the treasury of hard-earned money. 

 

So I don't think it is causing us a problem in terms of 

investment.  That is why Roger Phillips is saying not . . . I 

won't put it in glowing terms, but he's expressing satisfaction 

with changes that our government has made and then has 

announced an expansion of his steel plant, of the IPSCO steel 

plant here in Regina.  I think that's an expression of confidence 

in the economy of Saskatchewan and also in the role that our 

Premier has played in making this a good place to do business. 

 

If you go back to last Friday, the press conference that was held 

with the Minister of Energy and Mines and Mr. Ted Renner, 

the president of Saskoil, and myself in the head office of 

Saskoil, in the board room with hook-ups to Calgary and 

Lloydminster and Weyburn and Saskatoon and Swift Current, 

and where Mr. Renner was saying, this is a government that we 

like to do business with as an oil company, I think that sends a 

very positive signal to the business people of Saskatchewan. 

 

When Hitachi, a couple of weeks ago, announced that not only 

weren't they going to be shutting their plant down in Saskatoon 

-- that had been the original concept, that after Shand 1 was 

built there was good potential that plant would shut down -- 

they not only announced that they weren't going to shut it down 

but were going to expand it.  This is the only industrial plant 

that Hitachi has outside of Japan, not only being kept open in 

Saskatoon but expanded, clearly indicates to me that business 

people right around the world, and in Saskatchewan, are saying 

that this in fact is a good place to do business. 

 

And I know the Norquay Alfalfa plant.  They came to us early 

in our mandate and asked us for some help and assistance.  We 

insisted clearly that the credit union and the local people put 

their money in first and there was a long discussion about that. 

 

And the member from Pelly who spoke to me about this on 

behalf of his constituents, will make a . . . would tell you that 

we were very tough to deal with; that we just didn't put the 

money in.  We insisted that the local credit union and the local 

people have their money in the deal first and the plant is now 

built. 

 

And so I say to you, it's not perfect.  Obviously we could do 

much more and we're trying to do much more.  But in terms of 

the signals that are being sent in the last month by 



3044 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

Hitachi, and IPSCO, the Norquay Alfalfa plant, Saskoil, I think 

these business people are saying, Saskatchewan with an NDP 

government that is moderate in its approach to business, that 

Saskatchewan is a good place to live and build your companies. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well I'm not quite sure 

that a lot of people in the business sector would agree with you 

on that, on your assessment of what kind of signal you're 

sending.  In the past you used as examples land bank and other 

situations.  Mr. Minister, with all due respect, those situations 

are very, very different than what we see today.  And the 

significant difference is one simple thing.  At that time, those 

people had the right to a court action to find out whether indeed 

the government was acting improperly or not.  Today, in your 

actions of your government, your Minister of Agriculture and 

in other areas, they don't have that similar right to court action. 

 

And so I would suggest that that is very clearly a signal to the 

business sector of society that perhaps if you people get into a 

situation that you find uncomfortable, you're willing to put in 

legislation -- able, willing, absolutely capable of putting 

legislation into place -- that extinguishes the rights of anyone to 

challenge you in court. 

 

And while people can only speculate about how that damages 

the opportunity for investment in Saskatchewan, I think it very 

definitely . . . I believe it is a serious impairment to people 

looking at the province as a good place to invest with when 

they're faced with that kind of climate, governmental climate. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, it seems that while we agree with you, 

companies are expanding in Saskatchewan, we only can submit 

to you that perhaps your actions have been a bit heavy-handed, 

to say the least.  And I think it's unfortunate, very unfortunate, 

particularly with respect to the GRIP contract situation, that a 

government got themselves into the kind of jam that they got 

themselves into.  If they'd have done it properly, provided 

adequate notice and that sort of thing, they'd have never found 

themselves in the jackpot you find yourselves in today. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I'm wondering whether it's having an effect.  

We've seen in your budget statement and other public 

statements that you and others have made in your government, 

that 700 new businesses, 700 corporations are looking at 

expanding into Saskatchewan, and yet we don't see much 

evidence of that.  I don't recall there being any announcements 

with governmental involvement that you've been able to make, 

other than ones that were already there, like the Norquay plant 

up there. That was a community bond offering that was already 

put together, essentially.  The IPSCO thing was essentially a 

situation where a tax measure was put in place and then your 

government . . . the government changed hands.  Then you 

stopped it.  And then you reversed your decision in the budget.  

So I don't see a lot of activity that points to your contention that 

business isn't being a little bit cautious, to say the least, about 

your government's intentions and things of that nature. 

 

(2145) 

Now, Mr. Minister, I'd like to go on and deal with the upgrader 

in Lloydminster.  I wonder if you would provide for us details 

of the agreement, both the basic agreement and the cost 

overrun agreement.  We were wanting pretty specific 

information on that total agreement. 

 

As well, I wonder if your department has prepared any detailed 

analysis of those agreements -- both the basic agreement and 

the cost overrun agreement.  And I'm wondering if you can also 

provide us with any analysis that your department has 

conducted with respect to the length of time that the taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan will be without any return on their investment 

as a result of your cost overrun agreement.  It's my 

understanding, and I stand to be corrected, but it's my 

understanding that the Government of Saskatchewan and the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan won't get 1 cent of return until all 

other . . . all other governments, and all other players in the 

upgrader, will be paid out on the cost overrun portion. 

 

And I'm wondering if you could provide us with an analysis 

from your department -- table it, please -- on all of those types 

of things that we talked about, an analysis of that length of time 

that we're looking at. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I just want to make 

it clear that I will answer this to the best of my ability, although 

it doesn't fall under the purview of Economic Development.  

It's part of the Crown Investments Corporation.  No, I intend to 

get an answer for you.  But I just say that the Department of 

Economic Development had nothing to do with negotiating the 

deal while you were in government.  Here was an area that was 

handled by the Crown Investments Corporation. 

 

Now the member opposite indicates that . . . I mean, I think in 

almost a . . . well in a strange way that projects that we do 

through the community bonds can't be attributed to the work of 

our government because it was a program established by their 

government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . no, but that's the 

implication. 

 

I mean the same thing I guess could be said about CIC (Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), that you used to do 

the fertilizer plant and the Weyerhaeuser deal, and Millar 

Western.  Obviously that wasn't your work, because CIC was 

in place when you took over government.  You see the folly of 

that kind of an argument.  It just doesn't make sense. 

 

But I would say to the member opposite, that what we are . . . 

one change that we have made in Economic Development is 

this: that because of the fact that we're $14 billion in debt, the 

opportunity to, even if we wanted to, of signing very large 

contracts of taxpayers' money . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

yes, like upgraders, like upgraders, simply isn't possible 

because even if we wanted to we don't have that kind on money 

at our disposal. 

 

So we're taking quite a different approach.  And we're using 

small tax changes directed at attracting business, like IPSCO 

and the expansion and the small tax change that you can 

directly attribute that expansion to.  Or the changes to 

legislation, the Saskoil amendments that will lead to 350 new 

jobs and 50 new horizontal wells being 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3045 

drilled in the province of Saskatchewan as a result of that 

amendment to The Saskoil Act. 

 

And I think in many ways this makes for a much stronger 

province, where the taxpayers aren't asked to backstop every 

deal.  And I'm just curious as to why a Conservative 

government would believe that it's the role of the taxpayers of 

the province to head up all the risk that's taken in the province 

to create employment.  That seems like a very backward 

looking kind of philosophy for a Conservative member to take 

-- that taxpayers should take the risk and somebody else should 

make the profits. 

 

We're certainly not intending to go that way.  When it comes to 

the Husky Oil overrun in terms of the construction, there was a 

demand put on the taxpayers of Saskatchewan for an extra $33 

million over and above what had been committed.  We said to 

them very clearly that we didn't believe that we would and 

should have to pay, that the taxpayers should have to pay the 

$33 million.  And it was decided in the end that the federal 

government will put in that money and the Saskatchewan 

taxpayers wouldn't.  And they also said that in order to retrieve 

that money from Saskatchewan that when profits start accruing 

to the corporation that that $33 million would be deducted. 

 

It's our analysis that at the present price of oil that the Husky 

Oil upgrader, the Bi-Provincial upgrader, will not make money 

in the foreseeable future and therefore the $33 million will not 

be paid in the foreseeable future. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Your department hasn't prepared any analysis of 

the time frame then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The department certainly hasn't 

because it's not within the purview of our department.  Crown 

Investments Corporation, which is the Crown corporation that 

you put the project in . . . the member from Estevan and the 

then premier did not put it in Economic Development.  This 

was a deal done in a Crown corporation, Crown Investments 

Corporation.  And I'm giving you the best knowledge I can 

from the department's point of view which is basically a repeat 

of the news releases and documents that are already public.  

But I know when we get to Crown Investments Corporation, 

either here in the Assembly or more likely in Crown 

Corporations Committee, that that information probably should 

be asked for and would be forthcoming. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could update us on 

the Crown Life move to Regina here.  Is everything proceeding 

as planned in that one? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Here again this is a deal that your 

government originated in Crown Investments Corporation.  But 

it's my understanding that it's proceeding well.  The building 

that will eventually house the employees is, I believe, under 

construction.  People are coming to Regina either to look for 

residences or to move their families to Regina in the near 

future.  I think the project is well underway. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, I think these all have significant overlap 

into your department of ED&T (Economic Diversification and 

Trade) and that's why the questions 

are being asked. 

 

I'm wondering, does the same apply for FCC (Farm Credit 

Corporation)?  Is everything, to the best of your knowledge, 

proceeding as planned? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The FCC project is proceeding and 

I believe the people will be coming here this fall.  I think this is 

an interesting project, where you have a Crown corporation -- 

FCC -- moving to an area where it does most of its business.  

That seems to make perfectly logical sense that the federal 

government would in fact move some of their employees into 

an area where much of the money in FCC is loaned out. 

 

And it was also done in a way where it didn't cost the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers a lot of money.  And it shouldn't 

because the people who pay for FCC are mostly the farmers 

who pay interest on their loans.  So that is logically centred in 

Regina. 

 

Unlike the AECL deal, whereby the provincial government of 

the day put in $25 million -- a commitment of taxpayers' 

money -- to get 170 jobs.  It seemed to us when we looked at 

the deal that using Saskatchewan taxpayers' money to attract 

federal civil servants -- while we don't disagree with it -- it was 

a much different arrangement than was made with federal civil 

servants in FCC. 

 

It might interest the member that one of the decisions that we 

made early on was to see whether or not, when jobs are created 

in Ontario in AECL, it wasn't clear that the taxpayers at the 

provincial level paid for any of those jobs, or when AECL did 

research work in Manitoba, that the Manitoba government put 

money into AECL. 

 

And what we're questioning is whether or not your agreement, 

where you were putting $25 million of taxpayers' money from 

Saskatchewan into this project, made a lot of sense when that 

wasn't the formula that was used in any other parts of Canada.  

Now it may be in the end that because the research that is done 

benefits Saskatchewan more directly than other provinces that 

might make some sense, but we wanted to look closely at that 

section of the deal to make sure the taxpayers here again 

weren't being taken to the cleaners on trying to get jobs into 

Saskatchewan that should be legitimately here as a result of the 

federal government decision. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, hopefully we can try and 

curtail your enthusiasm for partisan rhetoric here a little bit and 

we'll move along a lot smoother I think than wanting to get into 

that kind of stuff.  You suggested for a moment that the AECL 

agreement might be good and might not be, and whether you 

should or shouldn't invest in it, and all this kind of flimflam, 

but yet you don't want to talk about what . . . these things we're 

talking about directly.  Why don't we just confine ourselves to 

the questions tonight and we'll move along a whole lot quicker. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'm wondering if you could provide us with a list 

of all projects and investment dollars that the community bond 

corporation has been responsible for, and how many 

community bond projects are pending 



3046 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

approval. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'll get that summary sheet for you.  

I don't have it right at my fingertips, but I'll get it to you like 

before the committee ends tonight.  We'll just pull that out for 

you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, there was a few orders in council 

that your department dealt with back in the fall and early 

spring, and I'm wondering if you could provide us with an 

analysis of each one of those orders in councils and what they 

were for. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- For the member opposite, I have the 

community bond monthly statistics that take us up to July 31, 

'92.  I could read these out or I can just send them to you. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Send them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Okay.  And on the issue of the order 

in council, could you just clarify.  I mean there's any number of 

orders in councils that we have pass through the department in 

this time period since the election.  Is there certain ones that 

you're interested in? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- No, Mr. Minister, there isn't any certain ones that 

we're interested in; we're interested in them all.  I wonder if 

you could provide us with copies of each and every one of the 

orders in council that your department is responsible for and an 

analysis of what those orders in councils were for. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I wonder if the member would look 

at question 4 in the package that I gave you.  I believe that they 

were all included there.  These would be the appointments that 

were made by order in council.  I think this is what you're 

referring to.  And they should be . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No, spending. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Spending order in councils.  I know 

there are a number of employment order in councils, and I 

believe those are the ones that you have.  And they'll be just a 

few that would have financial implications.  I believe there 

were a couple of studies that were commissioned.  I believe 

one by Peat Marwick just recently, and one by Mr. Jack Stabler 

and Midwest Research.  I'll get these for you.  And there may 

be a few others.  There aren't many, but I'll get them for you 

with a bit of an explanation of what they were for. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I think, to the best of my 

knowledge, there are three that we had in mind: one on April 1 

of '92, one on November 26 of '91, and another one on 

November 26 of '91.  The first one is for 343,500, the second 

one is for 1.548 million, and the third one is for 2.198 million.  

And I'd like to have a detailed breakdown of what those monies 

involved. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'll get those for you.  To the 

member from Kindersley, I'll get those for you and then we'll 

discuss them once I pass them over to you.  I just have to go 

and get that information and we'll have it back in a minute. 

Mr. Boyd: -- Okay. I wonder if we could deal a little bit just 

briefly with the Promavia situation.  The Associate Minister of 

Finance, I guess, moth-balled the plan, whatever you want to 

call it.  I'm wondering if you could, as Economic Development 

minister in the province, provide us with some information on 

the project, whether there is any plans to try and revive the 

project or anything of that nature. 

 

(2200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The project was . . . the file was 

closed, so to speak, because we had -- I think it's fair -- 

extended it several times.  We had extended several times the 

deadline for the company to raise the private capital, and I 

think as the minister at the time indicated that it was put into 

the so-called inactive file, which means basically that if they 

came forward with the private capital, we would certainly have 

a look at it. 

 

But as far as keeping it open and having people working on it 

on an ongoing basis, it didn't seem to make a lot of sense.  But 

on the other hand if the Promavia folks were to come forward 

with the private money to make the deal work and put it on the 

table, we would certainly be interested in having a look at it. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, is your department aware of the 

potential that the Promavia deal certainly is slipping away from 

our grasp, and we see newspaper reports that other 

governments, Quebec, I think it is, is possibly interested in it, 

and I'm wondering is there any likelihood that the project will 

be revived, or do you consider it not only inactive but 

completely gone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I wouldn't put it any stronger than 

inactive.  It's inactive, and if the folks who are involved, the 

Delhamendes, would come forward and raise the money where 

ever they might choose through the private sector, we would 

certainly put it back into the active column. 

 

I think it's often the case in business that you really have to 

look at each one individually, and some business you will do, 

some deals you will do: IPSCO, Norquay, Hitachi, Saskoil.  

Some you won't do.  It simply is unreasonable that you would 

expect . . . and I'm sure you yourself as a farmer and as a 

small-business person know full well that on a yearly basis, 

you have the opportunity to make many deals. 

 

And many of them you simply walk away from because you 

believe that they weren't right or the quarter section of land that 

was for sale was too much.  And because you walked away 

from it, doesn't mean you made a bad deal.  It could be the best 

deal you made in the . . . sometimes the deals that you leave on 

the table are the best deals that you ever made. 

 

Now that will all be judged after four years, whether the deals 

we've made with IPSCO and Hitachi and these are the right 

grouping of deals or whether we should have went after 

Promavia and some of the other more exotic deals that your 

government was chasing.  But I mean these are all debatable 

and I guess that's what we're doing here tonight. 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3047 

But Promavia is an interesting concept, and we looked at it for 

some time and would have been . . . and had the taxpayers' 

money ready to go into the deal if the private sector money 

could have been raised.  But when the private sector folks 

didn't have the money available, then we set that file into 

inactive and that's where it stays at the present time. 

 

I guess if you're asking, are we hopeful that the private sector 

money would be available and this plant would go forward, we 

would be very interested in that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I can't recall where I saw it, 

whether it was in one of your news releases or whether it was 

in the budget address or the throne from the speech, but . . . 

Speech from the Throne, Speech from the Throne, sorry. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'm wondering if your department has any plans 

to open any new trade offices throughout North America, or 

perhaps the world.  And if you do, I wonder if you could 

provide us with a list of those. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- We're presently reviewing and 

looking at options for trade.  And obviously we have an office 

in New York and we're having ongoing discussions with our 

office in New York.  And there are suggestions around that you 

might look at satellite people as opposed to offices, but people 

who might do business on your behalf in other parts of the 

United States. 

 

It's not seen that if you were to have a satellite in, let's say, 

Houston and Los Angeles that you would necessarily open a 

store-front, where you'd rent expensive office space and have 

secretarial staff and computers and all of that.  But there may 

be the need for us to have an agent in Houston or an agent in 

Chicago or an agent in Los Angeles.  And we're looking at that 

as a possibility. 

 

We haven't come to the determination yet whether that's the 

right way to go or not.  But it's clear to us that trade offices . . . 

And there was an interesting article in the Toronto Globe and 

Mail, I believe it was about two months ago, about the need of 

all provinces . . . and in that report they referred to the 

Saskatchewan closures of offices by your government and by 

our government as sort of leading the way of provinces, really 

taking a close look at the expenditures of large amounts of 

money, which were basically places to put people who for one 

reason or another had helped out a political party and then were 

placed in these trade offices around the world. 

 

And we made the decision early on that when it came to 

Minneapolis and Hong Kong, that these offices were far more 

expensive than what they were bringing in for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The other thing is that the we believe that the day of shipping 

former politicians or former political staff people to these 

places to do trade offices really wasn't working very well.  And 

we won't be re-establishing that kind of a concept.  We may, 

however, look at agents in some of these various parts of the 

world where we do very direct trade.  But I don't think it will 

mean, at this point, that we will be looking at opening up a 

trade office per se. 

Mr. Boyd: -- I wonder if your department has an analysis of 

each one of the trade offices that were throughout the . . . to 

indeed substantiate your claim that there was nothing 

essentially going on.  Do the people of Saskatchewan know 

that to be a fact?  And I suggest if it is a fact, well the people of 

Saskatchewan would be interested in knowing that. 

 

I'm wondering if the minister could provide us with any list of 

contacts, any list of sales that were as a result of the trade 

offices that we did have. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I could get for the member, because 

it's a public document, when we closed the Minneapolis and 

Hong Kong office and made the decision to leave New York 

open, you'll recall that we had a press conference and a 

statement was released on internal studies done by the 

department as to the amount of exports and trade that were 

generated through each of these offices.  And I can get you that 

information, because it was a public document, and it clearly 

indicated to us that Hong Kong was very, very expensive and 

was not generating enough money. 

 

But that wouldn't mean that an agent in that area that just 

worked the shops and the streets, so to speak, might not make 

sense.  And that's what we're analysing over there. 

 

The same was true of Minneapolis, although that office was 

very, very close.  I mean it was not making money but it was in 

a much better position than was Hong Kong.  So there's some 

indication that Minneapolis or Chicago there may be the reason 

why you would want an agent in that area. 

 

When it came to New York the numbers clearly indicated that 

the New York office was not only breaking even but generating 

a good deal of trade into the north-eastern United States, and 

therefore the decision was made to keep it open.  But I will get 

you that bit of an analysis that was done.  I believe it was in 

December, 1991 when we released that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Also I'd like to know what the length of time the 

office in New York has been open relative to the office in 

Minneapolis as well as relative to the office in Hong Kong. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'll get that for you.  But you'll 

remember the Hong Kong office was recently . . . was more 

recent vintage, and Mr. Taylor was the trade representative 

over there, and Minneapolis much the same with Bob Andrew. 

 

And the other thing that I'll add in the package is the article, if I 

can find it, from the Toronto Globe and Mail that talked in 

some detail about trade offices and went through some of the 

other provinces and the very, very expensive allotment that was 

given to so-called trade offices.  And they did a bit of an 

analysis of who the people were in each of these trade offices 

across the country.  And the determination was that at the end 

of the day, most of these people had little or no experience in 

trade, but were in fact political friends of the government. 



3048 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

I'm not being overly critical of your government because you 

weren't the only ones doing it.  But these trade offices were 

really becoming -- right across Canada -- a place to put people 

who had very little knowledge of trade, but were more in line 

with the political thinking of the government.  And so the 

concept is very much . . . it is our opinion that we can do a 

much better job of trade by having . . . If we're moving in the 

direction of having people in these areas, of having 

representatives or agents as opposed to a full-fledged office 

with staff and equipment and putting a political person in place, 

much better to have someone from that area who understands 

trade. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I'm wondering, in the last 

opportunity that we had to discuss the Estimates of ED&T, you 

gave us the commitment that you would provide us with certain 

pieces of information, like the 21 new projects that you have 

had direct involvement in and the 890 jobs created from them.  

I'm wondering if you'd provide us with that information now, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member asked, I believe it was, 

for the projects in the fiscal year.  And I have those projects 

here.  I can read them out to you or I can send them across.  

But they include:  Prairie Cables of Melville, 10 jobs; Western 

Bottlers in Moose Jaw, 5; the Spar expansion in Swift Current 

-- do you remember earlier this year? -- 60 to 80 jobs; 

Rendamax at White City, 40 to 50 jobs; Norquay Alfalfa, 15 to 

25; Rotary Airforce in Kindersley, 14 to 25; Blowhard in 

Saskatoon, 8; Hudson Bay Mining at Creighton, we're involved 

in that project, and there were about 325 jobs saved there.  

Those weren't new jobs.  But as a result of . . . Remember we 

said jobs created and jobs saved.  We had the two items. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I'm not just too sure that was 

indeed what you'd said.  If we go back to August 17, Hansard, 

you said that: 

 

 The member will want to know that (there were) 21 new 

projects that have been completed, (and) of those, 890 (new) 

jobs . . . From the Business Resource (Sector) (Pardon Me) 

From the Business Resource Centre, about 770 jobs created, 

371 saved. 

 

We'll look through this information and see if it indeed comes 

up with the numbers that you suggest. 

 

I'm also wondering if the minister has an analysis of when 

these projects were started. Were they started prior to your 

administration or after your administration? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- It would be both in there.  And I put 

to the member, if there's more information you need about 

these projects, I can certainly get them for you.  But it is fair to 

say that because of the overlap in the period that we're talking 

about, some of them would obviously be as a result of 

decisions made while you were in government and some of 

them would be as a decision made by our government.  But it 

would be a mixture. 

 

The member had asked about the opening of various offices 

that have been closed.  The London office, which your 

government closed, was opened in 1947.  The New 

York office, which remains open, was opened in 1985.  Hong 

Kong, which we closed, was opened in 1986.  Zrich was 

opened in 1989, although we have kept a presence in Zrich.  

And Minneapolis was opened in 1990. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I want to deal now with the 

situation with respect to Piper Aircraft Corporation.  I wonder 

if you would provide us with an update on the relocation of that 

aircraft manufacturer. 

 

(2215) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- As the member will know, the 

Government of Saskatchewan has made a arrangement with 

private sector investors through SEDCO (Saskatchewan 

Economic Development Corporation), Mr. Chairman, and 

while that doesn't come under the purview of the Department 

of Economic Development, I will take this opportunity to give 

a brief report. 

 

The private sector group led by Paul Hill of Regina is actively 

pursuing acquiring and moving the interests of Piper Aircraft 

from Vero Beach, Florida to Saskatchewan.  And this would 

include the assembly line for 14 main aircraft models.  It would 

include the moulds and tooling as well as the assembly line 

equipment, and much of the research that would be included in 

the corporation. 

 

As you know, the company at the present time stands at chapter 

11 bankruptcy in the United Sates and the courts have been 

assigned to protect the creditors, secured and unsecured.  And 

normally that means that the assets would be sold in such a 

way that the amount of money that was received for the assets 

would protect the creditors who obviously have money 

involved and owing in that corporation. 

 

The one other thing that could happen here is that Piper 

Aircraft could actually come out of chapter 11 itself in the 

United States and stay in its existing plant.  So at the present 

time, the private sector along with some financial help through 

SEDCO is looking at making an offer that would acquire the 

assets of Piper at Vero Beach.  And I know that Mr. Hill is 

working very diligently, gives us reports from time to time.  

But it's still, I believe it's fair to say, optimistic that he has a 

good chance of acquiring the assets. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well that's some news, Mr. Minister.  We're all 

hopeful that the relocation of Piper may come together and 

start indeed building aircraft in Saskatchewan. 

 

Is there any analysis that your department has done on the 

move?  I wonder if you could also provide us with some cost 

analysis of the move to Saskatchewan. 

 

I think it's relevant.  You say that it's the responsibility of 

SEDCO and we may . . . That's true, I guess that's indeed the 

case.  But it certainly has economic development and trade 

implications and that's why we think it's relative to the 

discussion to ask those question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- This deal, Mr. Chairman, is a loan 

that is being given by SEDCO and it is a loan that is being 

done to acquire the assets and move them to 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3049 

Saskatchewan.  Obviously the private sector group who is 

doing the work will have done a great deal of work and 

analysis in terms of what the cost will be to move the 

equipment and factory, not the physical factory, but to move 

the tooling and that from Vero Beach to Saskatchewan. 

 

I obviously don't have those details and obviously wouldn't 

make them public at this time because it would be . . . even if I 

did have them obviously the private sector shareholders would 

not be terribly interested in us making public details of a deal 

that's presently under negotiation. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I want to deal now 

with the questions that were submitted to you, the global 

questions, and we had a number of things that we want to touch 

on quickly as we move through this to complete that package 

of information. 

 

I'm wondering if the minister, in the interests of time here, 

would prefer -- I'll leave it up to your judgement -- but if you 

would prefer, we could move through this very quickly if you 

would give us simply the commitment to provide us with the 

answers to the questions to the same extent that some of your 

other colleagues have. Some of your other colleagues, for 

example the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Community 

Services as examples, provided very detailed answers to all of 

the questions, virtually all of the questions, and I would wonder 

if you would provide us with a commitment to do the same. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- We'll do the very best we can, and if 

we've been . . . I went through it quickly before I gave that 

information to you the other day.  If there's deficiencies, and I 

hope there isn't, I would very much make the commitment to 

get you more information in any area that we could possibly do 

that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- To the same extent that the other ministers have? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, we'll certainly try to meet that 

need of giving you detailed reports. 

 

On the issue of the order in councils that you referred to, there 

were three of them -- one for $2.198 million.  That was part of 

the special warrant, you remember at the time.  In fact all three 

of them, the 1.5 million as well as 343,000, they were part of 

the special warrant that was needed during that interim period 

when there was no budget passed and they were . . . dealt with 

the spending appropriation of the department for those periods. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Is there an analysis of the spending of those 

amounts of money within the special warrant? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Let me just give you a brief outline 

and I . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, it basically is the $2.1 

million.  It was ordinary expenditures for administration of 

human resources, policy research, and just the basic breakdown 

that you'll see in the Estimates tonight.  It would be that 

appropriation for a given period of time for those various areas 

of administration and various functions of the department. 

Mr. Boyd: -- Okay, Mr. Minister, with respect to the question 

no. 4 in the global questions, it seems the firm of Cooper, 

Quine & Fraser has received over 1.5 million through tourism 

initiatives.  Were these projects put up for tender?  Were these 

projects advertised?  If not, why not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, they were tendered.  And when 

we came to government, we set up a different arrangement than 

having an agent of record, so-called, for the department.  What 

we did is we set up a committee that was made up of the 

industry -- we had industry representation on the committee as 

well as government representation -- and we advertised the 

project.  We did interviews to look at proposals, and it was one 

of the first times that I'm aware of in government where the 

industry itself actually had representation on the interview and 

selection board.  And if you remember back at that time, I 

believe it was the Leader-Post followed it very closely, and I 

think had relatively positive things to say about the government 

in terms of the process that they went through in order to arrive 

at hiring an agency. 

 

So it was an open tender and there was involvement from the 

industry.  And I think we have arrived at a pretty good solution 

as to how advertising is allocated in the province of 

Saskatchewan through this process. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, your department conducted a direct 

mail campaign in 1992 that cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

$260,000.  I'm wondering what that direct mail campaign 

involved that cost your department $260,000. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, I'm going to pull out the exact 

direct mail components that we did.  But we did a fairly major 

direct mail into the United States dealing with tourism in 

Saskatchewan.  And I also want to give to you the results 

because the results of our ad campaign and direct mail into the 

United States really increased the number of inquiries fairly 

significantly.  And I'll get those for you.  They're just pulling 

them out, and when I get them, I'll send them across. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Yes, we would appreciate that, Mr. Minister, if 

you could provide us with the complete details of that package 

of the direct mail campaign, who conducted that campaign, 

perhaps examples of the literature, things of all of that nature. 

 

Could you please provide us with a comparison, of comparison 

figures of tourism dollars this year that were spent relative to 

1991? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Is this the advertising mostly that 

you're talking about there?  I just want to give you a few 

numbers.  I'm just looking up the exact amount of advertising 

because the number I have here is sort of a global 

communication for the whole department and I just want them 

to break it down into what was actually done in advertising and 

tourism in two years. 

 

But I did want to give you a bit of an update on the U.S. 

inquiries which was where a lot of the direct mail went.  But in 

1991 we had 56,000 inquiries, and in 1992, 78,000 for an 

increase of just about 40 per cent. 



3050 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

And we didn't do a lot of TV advertising in the United States.  

It just didn't seem possible for us to cover a big enough area 

and we believe that a lot of this increased inquiries came as a 

result of the direct mail that we did. 

 

But we also did some advertising in some of the tourism 

magazines in the United States.  But we think that it's been 

relatively successful although we won't know whether those 

inquiries actually materialized to people coming to the 

province.  But we're hopeful that at the end of year -- in spite of 

the cool weather that we've had which has kept some people at 

home -- that our tourist numbers will be at least maintained or 

increased. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I wonder if you'd provide us with an estimated 

total of the tourism dollars expected to be generated in 

Saskatchewan in 1992? 

 

(2230) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member will know that the 

amount of money generated through tourism in the province of 

Saskatchewan is significant; the millions of dollars that are 

spent in tourism in Saskatchewan generate literally thousands 

of jobs.  And directly and indirectly, we would employ 

something a little over 20,000 people in the province of 

Saskatchewan directly and indirectly through tourism. 

 

And it's our goal in the department to try to increase that by 10 

per cent.  We could increase tourism, which means bringing 

people obviously from outside Saskatchewan, but also means 

keeping people at home, particularly in the summer-time and in 

the winter-time.  If you could increase tourism overall in the 

province by 10 per cent, the present numbers would indicate 

that you could create an extra 1,500 or 2,000 jobs. 

 

So when you look at this and compare it to other projects in the 

province -- Piper, which at full tilt would create 500 new jobs, 

and compare a 10 per cent increase in tourism to 2,000 jobs -- 

it is very, very meaningful and significant. 

 

The numbers that we use, although they're probably within a 

million or so, but in 1990, tourism spent approximately $780 

million in the province of Saskatchewan.  There are about 

4,700 businesses related to tourism.  And so it is very, very big 

business in the province of Saskatchewan.  We would hope 

over the next few years that we would be able to increase those 

numbers. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Could you give us the 1992 figure of the tourism 

dollars and also the '91 tourism dollars that were spent in 

Saskatchewan, and then we can compare to see whether you've 

met your goal of 10 per cent increase. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- We certainly won't know the this 

year's numbers at this point.  We would still be working with 

previous numbers.  But what I can tell you is that in generating 

a very large increase in the percentage of inquiries both within 

the province and without, the advertising on tourism has 

actually dropped by $800,000.  In 1991-92 it was 2.9 million 

and in '92-93 we budgeted 2.1 million.  So that's a decrease of 

about 

$800,000 in advertising, and yet the inquiries at every level in 

Saskatchewan, outside of Saskatchewan, in the United States, 

and in other provinces is up very considerably. 

 

So we're hopeful that in doing more with less, that that will 

actually translate into more dollars being spent.  But obviously 

we'll have to wait till the end of the year because the fall 

season, in terms of tourism, is a big event in Saskatchewan and 

so those numbers won't be completed actually until later this 

year. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Does your estimate of the tourism dollars for '92, 

does it show indeed an increase?  I'm sure your . . . I don't 

know, but I suspect your department does updates on it as you 

move throughout the summer, and I'm wondering whether it is 

indeed showing that increase that you were hopeful of. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- We're just not able to quite tell you 

that, although the major events, if you take the Moose Jaw air 

show, the Regina air show this year, Big Valley, attendance at 

the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) depot, that the 

numbers are very good.  But I don't want to say here that we're 

up drastically or anything like that because we simply don't 

know. 

 

I think it's fair to say though that the main indicators are 

relatively positive.  If you look at the big, major events like the 

Regina exhibition and the Agribition and those functions, the 

numbers are staying very good and in many cases they're 

actually increasing. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well we'll look forward with interest to those 

figures when they become available.  I wonder if you'd give us 

that commitment that we'd get that information.  I don't know 

when you consider the tourism season closes off, but when it 

does, I wonder if you'd provide us with that information. 

 

With respect to question no. 13 of the global estimate 

questions, I see that your department has spent around $92,000 

in the last 10 weeks on travel.  I'm wondering if you could 

provide us with a breakdown of those travel dollars. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I wonder if the member could 

clarify for me, the question that you're referring to is question 

13? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- And the question is which week?  

Like I'm not sure where you're breaking this out.  We have sort 

of a global number, and I had thought that we had given you 

the total number there. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- My information is that you suggested that the 

American Express card that your department has is only used 

for travel.  And the figure that we were provided with was 

$92,000 that that card had rung up over the last 10 weeks.  And 

if it was indeed only for travel, I'm wondering if you can give 

us a breakdown of those travel expenditures. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'll certainly get that for you.  I 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3051 

haven't got that right here because that's going to take a minute 

to put together, but I'll get that for you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- You've also, Mr. Minister, not listed the cost of 

any legal cases against your department.  I wonder if you can 

confirm that your department or agencies that your department 

is responsible for are not involved in any actions by former 

employees. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- There are a number of confidential 

legal actions, some that will go back to questions you asked 

previously about certain individuals that we were referring to, 

and some of these are confidential. 

 

I don't know whether we . . . Obviously our legal opinion from 

Justice is that these ongoing cases, which are the only ones that 

you'd be referring to here in the question, are confidential.  And 

I'm not sure that we want to get into that because I just think 

that most of this stuff is . . . most of these cases are confidential 

at this time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Confidential for what reasons, Mr. Minister?  

We've found in our global questions to other departments that 

the other departments have provided information on every 

action that their department was involved in.  And I'm 

wondering why your department can't provide that information.  

Confidential for what reasons? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Let me have a look at it.  The 

opinion that we have here is from our legal experts.  Let me 

take another look at that and we'll see what we can get for you.  

If there's any way . . . Like I really have an interest in giving 

you all of the information on this that I can.  And let me have 

another look at this and I'll see what I can do. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well we'd appreciate more than just you having 

another look.  We'd want some kind of commitment from you 

that you'd provide us with that information. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I mean if there's some legal 

restrictions on what we can give you, that would be a 

restricting factor.  But I will give you all the information that 

we can legally give you at this point in time.  Obviously there 

may be some that are in a position, if they're before the courts 

and that, that obviously we'd have a difficult time giving.  But 

I'll give you everything that we possibly can. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- If they're before the court they'd essentially be 

public information.  I wouldn't think it should be a problem. 

 

Mr. Minister, you found it necessary to eliminate the Buy 

Saskatchewan Agency.  I'm wondering if you can provide us 

with any analysis of the reasons why you took that action.  I 

think the public of Saskatchewan would be interested in 

knowing how that department was doing, and the reasons why, 

and an analysis of why that department was cancelled. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well first of all, I want to say that 

the Buy Saskatchewan products program has been around for a 

long time, and buy Saskatchewan, buy Alberta, buy Manitoba 

are important parts of government 

policy.  In fact, the Buy Saskatchewan program, it's fair to say, 

I had my officials take a look at where this program actually 

came from -- and it can be traced back to 1955 when Tommy 

Douglas was the premier of Saskatchewan and has been 

modified a number of times, most recently in your government 

called Buy Saskatchewan in an attempt to run an efficient 

department.  It was needed to roll a number of agencies into the 

department in a more general way. 

 

And in fact the Buy Saskatchewan functions now are carried 

out within the department with a great deal of vigour and 

enthusiasm through diversification division of the 

Saskatchewan Economic Development.  And it's fair to say that 

here again we're trying to do as much as ever with Buy 

Saskatchewan but to do it using existing staff in the 

department.  And do it in a much more efficient and in a way 

that saves the taxpayers of Saskatchewan money.  It certainly 

doesn't mean that we're not committed to buying 

Saskatchewan.  We are and we do in every way we can. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Just one final question, Mr. Minister.  It's my 

impression of the work of your department and your work on 

behalf of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, that as a Minister of 

Economic Diversification and Trade that the people . . . I think 

the assessment basically is is that your department hasn't and 

yourself haven't been doing very well. 

 

There's concern with your direction.  There's concern with your 

lack of plan.  There's concern with obviously your success of 

your various initiatives that you've put forward or indeed the 

lack of initiatives. 

 

Mr. Minister, right from the very outset you said and your 

government said that within a very short time of taking office, 

they would be putting together an economic plan direction that 

you would be coming forward with.  And yet we've seen 

nothing. 

 

In question period of July 6, '92, the Premier of the province 

was asked this very simple question: 

 

 Will you commit to this Assembly today that you will be 

tabling an economic development plan for this province 

before this session ends? 

 

And in answering, the Premier of the province provided this 

information: 

 

 . . . it (is) our intention to table an economic development 

plan before this legislature adjourns or prorogues.  The 

answer is yes. 

 

Mr. Minister, we've been in session here for some time now.  I 

think it's fair to say that we won't be sitting all that much 

longer, and yet the province of Saskatchewan has not seen the 

unveiling of your economic development plan. 

 

(2245) 

 

And as a result of that I think it is providing significant amount 

of doubt that there ever was an economic plan put together or 

ever was any indication of an economic 



3052 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

plan, and I think you're just kind of, sort of floundering on the 

rocks hoping that eventually you'll come up with some kind of 

an idea, a direction of where you're going. 

 

Mr. Minister, but yet we see very little evidence that you have 

any plan -- very, very little evidence.  There's been a few 

companies that have expanded, a few companies have moved 

to Saskatchewan, but yet no overall development strategy.  And 

you promised that; your government promised that; the Premier 

promised that.  He promised it before this session ends, and this 

session is going to end fairly soon it appears.  And, Mr. 

Minister, I'm wondering if you would commit to this Assembly 

when, when in light of your promise, when this economic 

development plan will be unveiled. 

 

You've got probably -- if you're going to live up to the 

commitment that your Premier made to this Assembly -- very 

little time left.  And I think it is incumbent upon you to provide 

the direction that your government is going to take with respect 

to economic development. 

 

Mr. Minister, the last and final question that I have is, when 

will you be unveiling that long-awaited economic development 

strategy that you have promised? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to say to the member 

opposite that we have made a commitment to releasing a white 

paper on the economy, and it is an important part of our 

government plan and strategy.  Obviously releasing papers is 

important, and having a strategy and a game plan that people 

can look at and analyse and make plans around is important. 

 

But I think it's fair to say as well that we have seen a lot of 

rhetoric around government plans and announcements in the 

past.  In 1982 we had the open for business conference, and we 

spent a lot of money bringing people from around the world 

here, bragging about how people were going to rush here and 

fill the economy.  There was a lot of news releases and hype, 

and then nothing happened. 

 

And then we had the privatization plans and a lot of hype in 

1985 about how this was going to turn the economy around.  

And then that one was laying on the rocks without a great deal 

going on.  And then there was Fair Share, and there was a huge 

announcement that this was going to be the saviour of 

Saskatchewan.  And then we had the announcement of a 

factory in every town.  We remember that. 

 

So I think it's fair to say that the department -- and I think 

wisely -- is taking a different approach; that it's a much quieter 

approach -- as you see, $800,000 in less advertising in one area 

but overall the advertising down considerably.  So I think you 

will see a much quieter approach to economic development but 

more meaningful, i.e. Hitachi and IPSCO, Norquay. As you see 

many community bonds coming into place, the unemployment 

rate in Saskatchewan the lowest in Canada. 

 

I believe that with this kind of approach that may not be as 

flashy as the member from Estevan had with his huge 

conferences, and his $30 million a year advertising 

campaigns, but I think it's fair to say that when the smoke 

clears away and you check the numbers on housing starts, jobs 

being created, when you look at the number of houses in 

small-town Saskatchewan, Estevan, Moose Jaw, North 

Battleford, you'll find that in fact most of the indicators, most 

of the indicators are very strong in Saskatchewan and much 

stronger than other provinces in western Canada. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I welcome the 

minister and his officials this evening.  I'm very pleased I have 

this opportunity to ask you some questions, sir. 

 

The Department of Economic Diversification and Trade has as 

one of its objectives, and I quote, the "identification, 

encouragement and assistance for projects" that offer the 

potential to bringing employment to Saskatchewan. 

 

What factors or criteria does the department's diversification 

and investment branch use to decide which projects are or are 

not viable? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, the analysis that goes into 

projects . . . Obviously there is a due diligence process.  

Obviously we want to make sure that the projects are viable.  

Because I think we've seen a number of projects where that 

wasn't the case; where the government had involvement and 

taxpayers' money was involved and when the project went 

bankrupt, what we find is there was very little analysis of 

whether the project was viable in the first place. 

 

The other thing that seems to be lacking in many projects and 

business plans in Saskatchewan is a marketing concept.  You 

can have the best ideas in the world of a new mousetrap or a 

new toboggan or a new telephone, but if you don't have a 

market for them -- you can build all of the best telephones in 

the world or all the best noodle factories in the world, but if 

you don't have a market, if you don't have a place to sell it, then 

the company isn't going to be viable.  So marketing analysis is 

very, very important. 

 

The potential of job creation and the number of jobs that a 

project will create is important.  Location, suitability is 

important, as well as the technology that might be involved or 

created that would have spin-off effects on other aspects of the 

economy are important as well. 

 

And in those areas where we see weaknesses in the plan, the 

department is in a . . . and I think a powerful position to not 

only advise of weaknesses but also to give positive alternatives 

that might make the business plan stronger and make the 

company successful. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm to take it 

then, if I've accurately heard you, that the criteria used by the 

department's diversification and investment branch to decide 

whether or not the project is going to be viable is based upon 

job creation, the suitability of that particular project -- which I 

don't quite understand how you judge that without some 

measurement tool -- technology, location, and marketing 

analysis. Is that correct?  Thank you. 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3053 

If I may, I may take it upon myself to have some 

communication with your department of how I think that 

perhaps there can be a better way of analysing the viability of 

projects. 

 

My second question is with regard to the labour-sponsored 

venture capital program.  According to the latest annual report, 

this program raised the sum of $8.392 million in 1991-92, and 

this was at a cost to the department of $1.678 million.  Does the 

expense of raising these monies include money foregone by the 

provincial government via tax expenditures?  And if not, what 

is the overall total expense of raising these funds? 

 

Now I know that it's a late hour, sir, and in fact if that's 

something that is going to be difficult for you to produce this 

evening, I'm more than willing to give that to you as a written 

question and you can provide me with a written response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- That number is going to take me 

just a little bit of time to get out, but I'll make every effort to 

get it for the member. 

 

The one other thing I might add in terms of the department's 

ability to deal with proposed businesses as people coming 

forward, I'd like to use an example of a company that might, in 

Saskatoon, want to do a project.  The business resource centre 

in Saskatoon -- if they were the first contact, and our contact 

person there, Raj Manek -- I mean you would walk through the 

door and he would, or his staff would, sit down and go through 

the criteria.  Although I'm giving you very much a thumb-nail 

sketch; it would be much more involved than that. 

 

They also have in the office videos and books and manuals that 

would tell you very quickly, if you were from Biggar, 

Saskatchewan, for example, and you wanted to open a car 

wash, they could very quickly tell you a great deal about the 

potential of that succeeding, what you would have to invest, the 

kind of employment it would create; and he would give you 

advice, or the resource centre would give you advice, on 

whether or not this had a good potential of succeeding or a 

poor potential and how all that would fit together. 

 

And I think it's fair to say that one of the problems that I've 

identified, if I could be, I guess, critical of ourselves this early 

on is that much of what we have in our resource centres is 

unknown to the business community.  And this is something I 

would be very interested in knowing your opinion of how to 

handle it.  We've made attempts to obviously advertise and you 

have your store front and you hope everyone knows about it. 

 

But I just have this feeling that in many areas of the province 

that this is something that the taxpayers have paid for through 

their taxes.  Obviously they pay for the resource centres but 

they go, I would expect, virtually unnoticed by many, many 

business people who could actually use them. 

 

What we're striving with is a concept where we would have 

more of an outreach and a community involvement by our 

resource centres -- not only in the city of 

Saskatoon but in the rural areas where we're involved -- but to 

be more active in the business community as opposed to sitting 

in an office with your files and documents and manuals of how 

to do business and that's not to say that that's all they do.  

They're out on the streets a great deal, and Mr. Manek is one of 

the hardest-working people I know of in government.  But it 

just seems to me that there should be more that we can do to 

promote those expertise that we have in our resource centres. 

 

I really don't believe it's a lack of knowledge and expertise, but 

it seems to me it's a lack of ability to reach out and actually 

help the business people who should be coming to us for that 

kind of assistance. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  If I may just add 

something before I go into my third question, and that is that I 

think that you've actually put yourself on the right mark on this 

one.  If indeed one of the things the province would consider 

doing is having, what I've talked about on numerous occasions, 

a Saskatchewan economic diversification or economic 

development group, that is at arm's length from government, 

but would work in a co-ordinated fashion with something like 

the business resource centre, that in fact I think would be a very 

valuable tool along with having a business-labour council.  

Now I know that the government is considering . . . and I can't 

quite recall the term, although it's going to be called PACE 

(Premier's Action Committee on Economic Development), I 

believe. 

 

I don't know if that's going to resemble the Saskatchewan 

economic development authority, I do hope indeed it does, 

although the fact that it's called the Premier's group in and of 

itself ends up reflecting some political involvement, which I 

think is not what we need in terms of producing some 

economic development and diversification both within and 

outside the province. 

 

Now I guess I have at this juncture a question to ask.  It looks 

as though in your discussions with your officials you may be 

coming up with some numbers.  Is that correct -- to my second 

question? 

 

If I may then, what I will do is perhaps allow you to respond to 

my second question, if you have that information.  If not I'm 

more than willing to have you give that in writing . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . all right.  If that's the case then, sir, 

what I would appreciate is for you to contemplate this third 

question which is contingent upon your response to the second.  

And if you would have your officials take this down please. 

 

How does your department justify spending 1.678 millions of 

dollars to raise money through the labour-sponsored venture 

capital program when it represents a cost that is equal to over 

15 per cent of the total capital raised?  The reason I state this is 

because it's obviously uncompetitive with the administrative 

costs of private mutual funds whose expenses tend to be far 

nearer the 3 per cent of the total money raised.  So if you would 

take that under consideration please and give me some 

rationale, because I can't make sense of it.  Okay? 

 

The fourth question which is related to my previous two 

questions that you can also respond to in writing is this: 



3054 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

are these monies already invested in some ventures or do they 

remain tied up in other investments such as federal treasury 

bills? 

 

(2300) 

 

I would appreciate if you would put all of those responses in a . 

. . Thank you. 

 

I am pleased with your decision to place the community bond 

program within the Department of Economic Development and 

Trade.  And I'm concerned about its future.  I have raised some 

concerns previously.  I think that, over time, the taxpayers' risk 

should be reduced.  I hope that that is in fact being looked at. 

 

I'm really interested in what the cost is of maintaining this 

program on an annual basis, and how can those costs be kept at 

a minimum, unlike other government investment capital 

programs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The community bond program -- 

and if I missed the last part of your question just re-ask it again 

-- but the community bond program, in my mind, is an 

excellent form of community economic development.  And I 

say that because it is an opportunity for people in the coffee 

shop, for example in Shaunavon, to do more than complain 

about the fact that there's no economic development in their 

town, that the federal government isn't doing enough, or that 

the provincial government isn't doing enough, or why doesn't 

somebody come here and do something for us. 

 

It's a perfect opportunity for them to use the vehicle, to change 

the tone and the tenor of the debate to say: look, we can now, if 

we believe in our community, take money out of our own 

accounts, go out and find a project, and we can actually save 

our community because the government is providing a vehicle, 

first of all, for that kind of economic development to take 

place; and secondly, will guarantee our bonds, 100 per cent of 

our bond return.  It won't guarantee interest but 100 per cent of 

our bonds. 

 

And it seems to me that there has been a mood change of those 

people who like to see economic development in their 

communities to now where you have literally hundreds of 

people sitting around in various communities around the 

province, instead of just complaining about no one doing 

anything, actually going out, forming community bond 

corporations and discussing the survival of their community as 

what they can do in terms of risking some of their own money, 

at least taking a loss on their interest and investing in their 

community. 

 

And many of the communities are doing exactly that -- 

sacrificing interest on their money in the credit union or in the 

bank or in some sort of another economic instrument, invested 

somewhere else in Toronto or New York, and saying we're 

going to take and invest that money in our local town and try to 

create economic development. 

 

And I think the list of projects that have come on stream, 

although they're not all without problem, we've had some 

problems in the community bond, most of them 

seem to be very successful because of that community input. 

 

Now is there risk involved to the taxpayers?  Obviously there 

is.  And Trinitel, which has been one of the projects that has 

not been successful to date would indicate that they can have 

problems. 

 

But to the member, I think obviously there was a problem with 

this one from day one, because I believe -- some may argue 

with this point -- but I think there was political involvement 

with that project.  And it was pushed from somewhere other 

than the local community and proper information wasn't given 

to the bondholders. 

 

But we've made a commitment both in the community bond 

program and in SEDCO and in every area where we do 

economic development that we are going to do whatever we 

can to make the decisions based on economic viability and the 

best interests of the community as opposed to somebody's 

political agenda. 

 

And whether a government will succeed at that or not I don't 

know.  But it seems to me that if economic development is 

driven by a political agenda in most cases it fails on both 

counts, economically and politically and therefore I for one am 

very much opposed to doing economic development based on 

some constituency needs versus the community needs. 

 

I really believe that the strengthening that has happened to the 

community bond with the legislation amendments that we 

introduced in past in this session, that is to strengthen the due 

diligence in advance to the community bond being approved, to 

look at the marketing aspect in a much stronger way to make 

sure that there is a market for the product that is produced and 

to allow co-ops to come into the projects, will actually make 

the program much better and add a significant amount of 

security to a number of these projects. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'll actually 

restate my questions and this too is something that if you don't 

have the numbers at hand you can respond in writing.  At the 

same time I want to preface this with at least some comment 

about the fact that Mr. Goodale did introduce this in 1986, 

called the Saskatchewan capital investment bond.  And since 

he's never given credit for it, I give him credit now. 

 

My questions were this: what is the cost of maintaining the 

community bond program on an annual basis?  And secondly, 

how can those costs be kept at a minimum unlike other 

government investment capital programs?  And it's unnecessary 

for you to respond tonight. 

 

Many people with whom I've spoken have stated that they're 

deeply concerned about the economic environment in the 

province and I'm wondering if your department did any studies 

to calculate -- and this would be along with other departments 

-- what effects additional taxes, reforms to the occupational 

health and safety laws, what may be forthcoming with 

minimum wage, workers' compensation and pension benefits, 

and the impact that that may have on the Saskatchewan 

economy. 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3055 

And I have a second question which accompanies this, Mr. 

Minister.  Did the department attempt to assess whether these 

changes may in fact have a serious impact on private and 

government efforts to diversify our economy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Much of the studies that would have 

been in this area would have been done in the Department of 

Finance.  Obviously Finance, as the main administrator of 

government economy in terms of the finance of the province 

when tax changes are made, would have done a good deal of 

study and analysis.  Obviously our department would have fed 

into that.  But most of the actual research as to tax implications 

would have been done by the Department of Finance. 

 

I think it's fair to say though that in the years leading up to the 

1991 election, the thing that we heard over and over again, and 

I'm sure the member will agree with this, from the business 

community, is the biggest single item that was killing business 

confidence in Saskatchewan was the rapidly increasing deficit 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And whether it was talking to Paul Hill or Roger Phillips or 

people in the oil industry, what they clearly said to us, that one 

of the first priorities of your government has to be to come to 

grips with is the massive escalating deficit in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  So one of the first things that we did as a 

government was to try to establish a tax regime that was, one, 

fair to the people who had to pay the tax.  So it was 

broad-based across a huge area of the economy, as broadly as 

could be expected.  That it didn't hurt anyone inordinately to 

the point where they couldn't survive, but that it went some 

way to setting a base so that the tax level was set in a way that 

would start to come to grips with the deficit. 

 

At the same time we tried to do selective tax changes that 

would allow for some new economic development, i.e., the tax 

change that allowed for the IPSCO expansion.  And that we 

will . . . when we're looking at tax incentives, rather than have 

blanket tax incentives that may hit and miss and cost the 

taxpayers a great deal of money, I think you'll see not only the 

Government of Saskatchewan, but governments in general, 

look at ways and means that will be very, very selective in their 

tax approach, and will do it with a great deal of study and 

analysis, because things like the GST (goods and services tax) 

that we believe was a tax that was . . . has created huge 

problems and dislocation for business in Canada, was not done 

with that kind of selective approach and meaningful research. 

 

So, I think it's fair to say, that at the end of the day, we'll be 

judged on whether the economy is working or not.  But I think 

it's fair to say that in terms of new development, without 

putting at risk taxpayers' money, and I stress that as being a 

major point, that the previous government was spending a 

billion dollars a year more than it was taking in.  That's one 

way of getting economic development. 

 

But to get economic development without borrowing that extra 

money from New York to make it happen, and then tell your 

kids to pay for it some day, to do it through selective tax 

approaches to the economy and through 

changes to legislation that doesn't cost the taxpayers, I believe, 

will be the way that this province will come out of the massive 

deficit without costing taxpayers money, and without the 

dislocation of jobs and wealth creation.  In fact, I believe that it 

will lead to wealth creation. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I have just a few 

comments to make in response to your answer.  One of the 

things that I raised consistently with the Department of Finance 

was questioning whether or not they had done cost/benefit 

analyses as well as impact analyses.  Unfortunately it appeared 

as though that had not been done.  And I think one of the things 

that is crucial is to ensure that there is going to be an 

understanding of the interdependency of departments. 

 

It's become clear, for example, with some of the Bills that have 

come before this House, that in fact the impact of occupational 

health and safety, some changes to environmental Bills, etc., 

that these things in co-ordination with one another have had an 

extraordinary impact on some businesses within the province. 

 

In fact it appeared that the left hand did not know what the 

right is doing.  Now that's understandable when we're talking 

about the complexity of government.  And if there's one thing 

that the business community would very much like -- and they 

do desire, and they talk about this as well -- is that there would 

be much greater co-ordination of all the different departments 

which leads me into my next question which is derived from 

the Gass Commission. 

 

The Gass Commission recommended that the government 

rationalize its economic development efforts.  And they 

suggested that fewer agencies need to be working in this field 

and that a greater level of co-ordination must be brought about.  

I ask you please to tell us what the government has done to date 

to reduce the number of agencies involved and to further 

co-ordination and at what date can we expect to see 

rationalization completed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I think the member raises a very 

interesting point and that is the multiplicity if areas where you 

can approach government to have access to a program and 

funding for business and economic development.  This too was 

one of our complaints that we had while we were in opposition, 

that we set out to deal with. 

 

The new president of SEDCO is taking a lead role along with 

the deputy minister of Economic Development.  Susan 

Strelioff, who is the new president, along with Mr. Hart, are 

working with the president of CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan), Mr. Ching, to come forward 

with a concept and a plan that I hope will be put into a 

legislative form during the next session, that will allow for a . . 

. I guess it will never become a single entry point for business, 

but something that will be much reduced from what it is now, 

or was at least in 1991 where there were departments, I think 

fair to say, a number of areas of government actually 

competing with one another for the same project.  That simply 

won't do.  We have eliminated that process.  But what hasn't 

been 



3056 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

completed, but we're working as quickly as possible, is to put 

together a program of business economic development, 

something that would look at combining parts of CIC, SEDCO, 

parts possibly of other areas where economic development 

takes place, could include the banking institution, private 

banking institutions, along with pension plans. 

 

(2315) 

 

This is a concept that many people have talked about.  Some 

jurisdictions have actually done a bit of work on.  But it would 

be a much more hands-off in terms of politicians rather than 

have it as a government agency. 

 

So I think it's an exciting place to be at right now.  And I know 

nothing ever happens as quickly in government as we would 

like to see it.  And I mean I share some of those frustrations 

with people who would like to have seen something happen 

already this year. 

 

But I'll tell you that when you get into these things -- I'm sure 

you know, having been around this business for some time -- 

that setting up some sort of a new institution, or changing an 

institution of government which is firmly and solidly in place, 

is like turning a steamship around.  It takes time. 

 

The other thing I want to make a comment on is that rather than 

doing something hastily and launch it and then have to 

relaunch it, in government that's virtually impossible.  So 

whether it's the white paper on economic development, whether 

it's the Premier's Action Committee on the Economy, or 

whether it's a new banking institution, merchant bank or 

whatever it will end up being, we want to make absolutely sure 

that if it takes a few extra months, that the launch of it is the 

right launch and that it's successful for business people. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Just a comment 

before I go on to my next question.  I very much appreciate you 

raising the potential for banking which in fact was written 

about, as you are probably well aware, by Doug Richardson in 

comment in the Star-Phoenix where there were people actually 

representing all political parties talking about what they 

thought should lead to some positive economic development in 

the province.  And he was the only one to raise this. 

 

And I agree that something should not be approached hastily.  

At the same time, I think that it's imperative in planning to have 

a time frame to be able to put in place something that may in 

fact start showing people that something shouldn't be done in a 

four-year political term.  It may take longer.  That there should 

be short-term, mid-term, and long-term goals and built-in ways 

of assessing whether or not you're meeting your objectives. 

 

And I would like to see that in fact that kind of thoughtfulness 

and plan go into the Department of Economic Diversification 

and Trade when it in fact is trying to make greater strides in 

co-ordination with other departments. 

 

Our colleague from Kindersley had raised some questions 

regarding the trade offices.  And I have some 

questions.  He did ask enough that I shan't go into this in too 

much detail. 

 

But after reviewing your departmental Estimates, it's quite 

obvious that the government has undertaken a number of trade 

missions to date to promote Saskatchewan trade.  So far this 

year missions were undertaken to Asia, to Latin America, and 

to the eastern United States.  And my question is this:  how 

does the department decide who should accompany them on 

these trips?  How does it decide what expenses it will bear and 

what objectives the missions are designed to achieve? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'll get my staff to look into the 

trade missions, but I do want to respond to your notion of time 

lines and the importance of time lines as a means of measuring 

productivity or meeting your goals.  And I guess it's fair to say 

that I very much agree with you on that.  I think if you don't 

have management by objective . . . I know you can't do that as 

a perfect science in government because you continually are 

nudged one side or the other.  But I think if you don't have 

management by objective you never get anywhere. 

 

And I would like to say that we could spend some time -- and I 

wish we did have time to spend tonight and we can if you like 

-- where I could lay out for you the time lines that we have in 

SEDCO overlaid by our plans in Economic Development in the 

white paper and the Premier's Action Committee on the 

Economy.  Because we do have time lines for the consultation 

process, for the revamp of the paper for the public release and 

leading to a legislative process that will bring this together. 

 

And I would be more than willing to meet with you and I know 

the deputy or the president of SEDCO would be willing to meet 

with you to show the concept and the time lines that we have 

on this project.  I want to make sure that in the process that we 

go through that the proper consultation takes place with this 

white paper. 

 

And I was at a meeting in Shaunavon last Friday night where 

we met with about 35 business people from, oh they were from 

Climax and Frontier and Eastend and Shaunavon, I believe 

there was someone from Ponteix and the RMs in the area.  And 

they're very excited about the potential of regional authorities 

where . . . and we met in Yorkton on a similar basis where they 

want to get together to do . . . not competition for projects, but 

they want to sit down and say, look what are you doing in 

Frontier and how does it fit in with what we're doing in 

Shaunavon. 

 

They're very interested in seeing our white paper on economic 

development and as much as possible I want to take the time to 

go out and share this with them in advance.  And I told them 

very clearly that we can't let you write the paper because you'd 

end up with nothing, but we would very much try to 

incorporate ideas that you have in terms of this theory of 

regional economic development. 

 

I say again, in all seriousness, I would be interested in sitting 

down where I could show you the proposed draft of the white 

paper and the time lines that we have set on it that lead to some 

sort of a culmination in legislation with 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3057 

the new idea of some sort of a bank that would be different 

than SEDCO.  It may be SEDCO revamped.  It may be 

SEDCO done away with and a new institution formed.  We're 

just not quite at that point yet.  But there is a plan and it does fit 

together and I believe it will work. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well I'm pleased to hear that and I would 

be delighted to get together with you.  I'm sure that the majority 

of our colleagues in the House would prefer that we get 

together at another time rather than your sharing that 

information with me tonight. 

 

I'll repeat my questions to you, and again, Mr. Minister, I'm 

more than willing to have these responded to in writing.  So 

what I will do in fact is to group together the questions 

regarding trade outside of the province and you can respond in 

written form. 

 

I will repeat my initial questions then.  How does your 

department decide who should accompany your personnel on 

trips to promote Saskatchewan trade?  How does it decide what 

expenses will be incurred?  In other words, how it can bear 

expenses.  What objectives the missions are designed to 

achieve?  Next, there has been criticism lodged provincially 

about sponsored trade missions, and that too many people are 

making repeat trips when in fact the perception is that there are 

some individuals, who should indeed be involved, who are 

being excluded.  So my question regarding this is what is the 

government doing to ensure that in fact specific people from 

companies are going to be involved? 

 

Next, what programs have you decided to encourage 

participants to complete the crucial follow-up work needed to 

make certain that your trade missions, in fact, are as effective 

as they can be?  And what we want of course is continued trade 

links.  This can't happen without follow-up.  It's one thing to 

make the contact, but then what?  How much, if any, I'd like to 

know are you actually spending on this? 

 

And lastly, regarding . . . Well, actually there are sort of two 

here.  Before closing the trade offices in London, Zrich, Hong 

Kong and Minneapolis -- I know that this may be very much a 

repeat question from the member from Kindersley, and if so, 

please feel free to tell me that it was answered in this way -- 

did your department do any assessments to calculate what 

impact the closures would have on Saskatchewan's 

opportunities for trade in Europe and Asia?  If these offices 

were proving to be ineffective, did you in fact investigate ways 

to attempt to make them more effective before you decided to 

close them? 

 

There was no question in anyone's mind that the individuals 

who were in these positions were perceived by many to be 

patronage appointments.  But simply because of that, that and 

that alone is not enough reason to close them entirely.  So I'm 

wondering what criteria was used to determine whether or not 

there would be any value in maintaining these but taking a 

much more professional approach. 

 

Lastly, there are many, many exciting opportunities that are 

forthcoming, particularly in Malaysia and other Pacific Rim 

markets like Taiwan.  In fact people are saying that these two 

areas of the Pacific Rim are very much 

reflective of what was happening with Japan in the '60s. 

 

I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you considered how you're 

going to approach trade in these countries and making it 

perhaps an even more valuable replacement for the one that 

was closed in Hong Kong?  All of those things related to trade 

offices or trade outside the province; I'd be very, very pleased 

if you'd respond in writing.  Would you like to make a 

comment now or should I go on to NAFTA (North American 

Free Trade Agreement) . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. 

 

Without an overall strategy for diversifying our economy in 

Saskatchewan, it's really unclear how trade is going to fit into 

such a strategy.  And I know that you have expressed serious 

concerns and you have reservations about NAFTA; in fact the 

free trade agreement that we currently have with United States, 

and the potential agreements that are forthcoming with GATT 

(General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade). 

 

Without an overall strategy, and we keep talking about strategy 

here, I'm wondering how you can be confident that your trade 

policies are really going to be in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people who rely on trade of $7 billion for 

economic activity.  And I would be more than interested in 

trying to understand how your department is conceptualizing 

and putting into place some plan for how you can deal with 

that. 

 

I know that the Premier spoke at some length about concerns, 

not just with interprovincial trade barriers which I shall talk 

about in a moment, but of course the implications for what was 

going to happen with NAFTA, and not just the country but of 

course our province. 

 

The final question on this kind of area of trade in particular 

does deal with our greater interprovincial trade.  And my 

question is, what efforts is the department making to encourage 

greater interprovincial trade?  To what extent will those efforts 

reduce impediments that Saskatchewan companies face in 

developing markets for our own products? 

 

Now what I will do, Mr. Minister, is to be seated at this point 

and allow you to have the opportunity to respond in whatever 

way you wish.  And please feel free . . . I know that it's getting 

close to 11:30.  I have a particular area that I wish to address 

regarding small business.  And I'm more than willing, given 

that I'm sure you have an early morning meeting and I have a 

7:30 meeting on Constitutional Affairs, if you wish to respond 

to all of the questions I've just read in writing, it's fine with me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I won't take very long at this 

because I will provide for you . . . We made copious notes and 

will provide for you a detailed answer.  But just in passing, I 

want to say, in terms of trade missions, I think it . . . especially 

in the Pacific Rim, there is business-to-business contacts that 

are absolutely essential.  But in dealing and in talking to a great 

number of people, there's also a need for 

government-to-government contact and 

government-to-business contact, especially with, oh, some of 

the Japanese and Thailand and Cambodian governments who 

have a great involvement in their 



3058 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

economy, that it's very important that trade missions include 

contacting and touching base with the government officials as 

well as business people. 

 

So these trade missions are often -- if they're done properly -- 

very, very effective in terms of making deals and making 

contact.  You talked about some of the importance of trade, and 

it's true that Saskatchewan is the biggest per capita trader of 

any jurisdiction in the world, even ahead of Japan or even 

ahead of Germany.  And there are few people who know that, 

but virtually everything we produce here, we have to export or 

trade.  We're a province that exports almost everything that we 

produce and imports almost everything that we use.  Tractors 

and combines, even though they're a major consumer event in 

our province, we don't build any of them in Saskatchewan.  

And yet over 90 per cent of the grains that we produce, we 

export. 

 

There isn't another jurisdiction in the world that's more 

dependent on trade than the province of Saskatchewan.  And 

that's why trade missions, as you know, become a very, very 

important part, but more than that, how they're done -- and 

you're absolutely right.  Follow-up, taking the right people with 

you, becomes absolutely crucial. 

 

(2330) 

 

When it comes to the NAFTA deal, you know that our 

approach has been that we're opposed to the deal going forward 

at the present time because of the already complicated 

Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement that is agreed to but not 

working in many cases very effectively.  We're now overlaying 

that with an even more complicated trade agreement that no 

one is sure how it underpins or strengthens the U.S.-Canada 

Free Trade Agreement. 

 

What we do know is that trade with Mexico is important.  At 

the present time, we export to Mexico about $500 million 

worth of goods, and we import from Mexico about $2.5 billion.  

And there's a trade imbalance that we would very much like to 

correct by exporting more pork, beans, peas, into the Mexican 

party, into Mexico City, a huge consumer market for food 

products.  We should be doing more of that.  When it comes to 

U.S.-Canada, we export into the United States something over 

$100 billion and import from them about 94 billion.  So our 

trade is in a better scale than it is with Mexico.  So we need 

trade with Mexico but it depends on what kind of a trade deal it 

is, and at this point, we still have not seen and had the benefit 

of consulting with our industry with the final text of the 

agreement -- even though the Canadian government says we're 

in favour of it. 

 

What we'd like to know is how on earth can you agree to a 

trade deal that we haven't even seen -- a government, let alone 

the business people and farmers that it will affect -- so 

therefore, our opposition to the deal going forward at the 

present time. 

 

In terms of interprovincial trade, you'll know that our 

discussions with Manitoba and Alberta about the expansion of 

SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) into these 

provinces, the attempt to take SaskEnergy to deliver gas into 

eastern Manitoba, that we're committed 

to integration of the economies in western Canada with proviso 

on protecting some our Crown corporations. 

 

I've met with Mr. Axworthy here in Regina a couple of times -- 

once in my office, once downtown at a more public meeting -- 

to talk about Prairie integration.  I've met with and discussed 

with the ministers of Economic Development at the provincial 

level.  And I've also met with Mr. Bill McKnight and Charlie 

Meyer and Jake Epp about western projects that we should be 

doing jointly. 

 

So I think there's a lot we can do in western Canada in terms of 

joint efforts that would save money and actually create bigger 

economies that would make it possible to do more business.  I 

want to prepare for you a more complete answer, but this is sort 

of a thumb-nail sketch of my view of economic development 

and the trade deal. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  There are two 

questions that are related so I will cite them together.  Although 

they seem somewhat different, they're related. 

 

Recent applications were made by livestock organizations in 

both Oregon and in the north-western United States, that 

threatened to place U.S. countervail duties against the export of 

Saskatchewan red meats.  I'd like to know what your 

government is going to do to help avert the ill effects of this 

and what it will have . . . it will have an extraordinary, I think, 

impact on Saskatchewan producers. 

 

Similarly countervail proceedings have also begun against 

Canadian steelmakers accused of dumping steel products on 

the American market and given the ill effects that this will have 

on recently expanded operations to which you have referred 

earlier at IPSCO, when the ruling comes down probably a year 

from now, I'd like to know what your government is doing in 

co-operation with industry and other levels of government to 

stave off what I see as a serious potential crisis. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Obviously we're very concerned 

about countervail duties that are being looked at by the U.S. 

producers.  I think it's fair to say that election time is a very 

difficult time for Canadians because we have a much different 

system in the United States where people running for election 

will use the countervail and the pretence of an attack on their 

industry in local areas especially along the border with Canada 

to try to vault themselves back into Congress or into the 

Senate. 

 

And so the next few months are very, very vulnerable times for 

our industry and one cannot presume that these attacks are only 

political and will go away after the U.S. election in November.  

But it's fair to say and interesting to note that there are people 

in the United States, Dorgan and Melcher and you can list out 

the names of people who have made a political career of 

attacking Canadian exports in the United States. 

 

And interesting enough every four years . . . and it's not limited 

to Republican or Democrat.  They just get re-elected by 

demanding that Canadian pork not be allowed in or durum 

wheat or forest products out of B.C.  And every four years you 

see the same kind of an approach.  That's not to say that there 

isn't a bigger issue 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3059 

here, and there is.  The steel, for example, the proposal that we 

are dumping steel into the United States is ludicrous.  We've 

had an integrated market in steel between Canada and the 

United States for many, many years.  And it's fair to say that 

we've had an integrated market with IPSCO exporting into the 

United States. 

 

It's unfair for the Americans to say that our exports into the 

United States as a percentage of their usage has gone up -- 

quite the opposite.  It hasn't increased over the past number of 

years.  And we feel our steel industry is very proper in putting 

forward a position of making an appeal that will retaliate 

against the U.S. steel companies.  I mean if we were integrated 

steel and they make an application against us, we're almost 

obligated to do a similar approach on duties back to them. 

 

It's fair to say that the new expansion of the 24-inch pipe mill at 

IPSCO will not be affected by the proposed countervail, but 

what will be affected is the hot-rolled steel which the 

application of the duty does affect.  So if you're asking about 

the new plant, the 24-inch pipe mill will not be affected, but 

some of the existing hot-rolled steel will be very, very much 

affected.  Some of the duties they're talking about are as much 

as 50 per cent.  And for us, I think, Mr. Phillips will tell you 

that's a problem. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I am going to 

make a suggestion and you can tell me whether or not you 

agree.  I'm watching one of your ministers almost commit 

hara-kiri behind you because of the late hour.  And out of my 

consideration for him, knowing what his schedule's been like 

the last while, what I'm prepared to do is to read into the 

record, and for your officials, the remainder of my questions.  

And I'd be more than prepared to have you respond in writing 

to all of them.  All right?  If I may? 

 

The following questions relate to small business.  I think that 

not only have you made reference to the fact that the majority 

of the people in the province want to see the development of 

more small business rather than megaprojects, but many others 

have as well.  And I'm wondering if you're considering in 

government the creation of a small-business equity fund to help 

those businesses with fewer than 30 employees gain the capital 

they require to expand.  If so, I want to know how large this 

fund will be, and if you could provide me with details, please, 

of your plan. 

 

Secondly, the success of such a plan and others like it appears 

to depend on the government taking a hands-off approach.  If 

you are indeed aiming to develop such a fund, will you assure 

the people of our province that you will hire an independent 

management firm to oversee the development of such a 

project?  And will you also assure us that this firm will be 

chosen through an open competition so that the best minds are 

brought in to help with this project? 

 

Raising the capital needed to make such a fund work is going 

to require tax breaks because Saskatchewan residents who have 

money to invest are savers by nature.  And rather . . . it's quite 

obvious that they're more that way than they are of equity 

investors.  So I'd like to know if the government is willing to 

offer tax incentives needed to 

free up this money so that potential investors, many of whom 

are near retirement, are encouraged to take on the risk of equity 

investments. 

 

I ask as well with whom your department has consulted in its 

considerations about developing small-business equity funds 

and when did these consultations take place?  Are others 

scheduled, and if so, with whom?  While I commend the 

government for its attempt to improve the small-business 

climate by reducing the business tax, however modestly, I'm 

really concerned that you have not done enough to address the 

needs of small business in our province. 

 

And one of the problems threatening the expansion of small 

business in Saskatchewan is the need for more management 

expertise.  You made reference earlier to the business resource 

centre.  Many small businesses could expand if they had access 

to better marketing knowledge.  These small businesses need to 

know where the opportunities are.  They need to know what 

people are willing to pay for their products, how long they're 

willing to continue to make purchases, for example.  And I'd 

like to know if your department has any plans to offer a 

program of marketing and management advice where experts 

can actively work with small firms and help them to solve 

some of these problems. 

 

And this would be very much like the government sponsored 

program, the AIM program for farmers.  I'd like to know the 

measures that your department is undertaking to solve some of 

the production problems that are impeding small-business 

expansion; what strategies does your department have in place 

to help small business obtain technical advice and gain access 

to the capital needed to acquire improved technologies. 

 

The recent Greenspace initiative brought forward by the 

western provinces, including Saskatchewan, involves a 

significant expenditure -- in fact I think in excess of some $200 

million.  It's my understanding that the project will place 

Saskatchewan at the edge of remote-sensing technology and 

will provide many opportunities for Saskatchewan businesses. 

 

The construction phases of the project are designed to provide 

work for many small subcontractors.  And my questions, sir, 

are: how will these small Saskatchewan firms be eligible to 

compete for these contracts when they're already finding it very 

difficult to find capital to improve their level of technology? 

 

I have three more questions.  The last in this series deals with 

research and development projects in Saskatchewan.  I'm 

wanting to know what efforts your department has and is 

making to encourage more spending on research and 

development projects in Saskatchewan?  And lastly, I have two 

questions.  One regarding labour capital and the last one in 

immigrant investment. 

 

Labour groups in the provinces, such as British Columbia, have 

successfully used their pension funds to help raise capital for 

economic development.  I'd like to know what efforts your 

department is making to take advantage of labour capital?  And 

what formal process is the 



3060 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

department using to ensure that the innovative ideas of labour 

are heard and encompassed within an overall strategy for 

economic development? 

 

And lastly, Mr. Minister, two related questions.  Recent reports 

indicate that Saskatchewan is not having a great deal of success 

with business immigrants.  Many of the immigrants who chose 

to settle in this province have not fulfilled their obligations to 

invest, and as a result they have not created the employment 

that we thought would come from their investments.  What is 

the department doing to attract more business immigrant 

investors and to improve the accountability process to ensure 

that obligations are met? 

 

And lastly, I'd like you to tell me please what percentage of 

business immigrants have failed to meet their obligations?  To 

your knowledge what has caused these unsuccessful 

arrangements?  And how much potential investment is at risk 

as a result? 

 

And I do thank you very, very much for your responses this 

evening.  I look forward to your written responses, and I thank 

you officials very much as well. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Yes, on behalf of the opposition, I'd certainly like 

to also extend thanks to the officials for their help this evening, 

and to the minister for his answers to the questions that were 

put to him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I would just like to 

say in closing that there were a number of issues by the 

member from Kindersley as well as the Leader of the Liberal 

Party that were put, and we'll make a commitment to get those 

as quickly as we can. 

 

I want to say as well that the time we spent on these Estimates, 

I think, was useful from our perspective.  I hope it was for the 

members opposite as well because some of the ideas that have 

come forward we'll put to the committee that's reviewing the 

white paper, PACE, as well as the new structure we're looking 

at in terms of lending institutions. 

 

I really want to be clear that the offer that we made to the 

members to look at our planning, we would be more than 

willing to sit down, either the deputy or the president of 

SEDCO, and do that for you. 

 

(2345) 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 9 -- Statutory. 

 

Items 10 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 45 agreed to. 

 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Economic Development 

Vote 167 
 

Item 1 -- Statutory. 

Item 2 agreed to. 
 

Vote 167 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation 

Vote 148 
 

Item 1 -- Statutory. 
 

Vote 148 -- Statutory. 
 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

Vote 152 
 

Item 1 -- Statutory. 
 

Vote 152 -- Statutory. 
 

Consolidated Funds Loans, Advances and Investments 

SaskEnergy 

Vote 150 

Item 1 -- Statutory. 
 

Vote 150 -- Statutory. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Economic Diversification and Trade 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 45 
 

Items 1 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 

Vote 45 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Economic Diversification and Trade 

Vote 66 
 

Items 3 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Economic Diversification and Trade 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 45 
 

Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 

Vote 45 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Vote 66 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 

Vote 66 agreed to. 
 

The committee reported progress. 
 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:55 p.m. 

 


