




















































Hansard: June 17, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2617 

 June 17, 1993 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 1 -- An Act respecting the Conduct of Members of 

the Legislative Assembly and Members of the Executive 

Council, respecting Conflicts of Interest and to enact 

Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment 

of this Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that the amendments be now 

read a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- With leave, I move the Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask the Premier to introduce the officials 

who are with him in the committee today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I have the deputy 

minister, Mr. Ron Clark to my left; the chief of staff, Mr. Garry 

Aldridge.  Ms. Louise Greenberg is senior policy adviser.  

Behind me, Mr. Don Wincherauk, director of administration; 

and behind Mr. Wincherauk is administrative budget and 

personnel officer, Bonita Heidt. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wonder, Mr. 

Premier, before I take up where we left off the other day if your 

officials have the standard prepared answers which we 

submitted to your office some time ago.  And if we could have 

those sent over some time this evening.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, we have them and 

they're on their way over there right now.  Thank you very 

much. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, 

Mr. Premier.  We'll review these answers and I'm sure we can 

discuss some of them a little later on. 

 

When we left off on Tuesday last I believe it was, Mr. Premier, 

you had made the assertion that the policy decision behind Bill 

90 was a common one that could have applied in many other 

areas of government.  And you challenged me to send a letter 

to an individual with the Redvers Co-op in response. 

I would ask you to table that section of The Police Act which 

you were quoting from the other day.  That was The Police 

Act, 1990.  I believe it was section 10 that you were referring 

to, but I would ask that you table that section that you were 

quoting from so that I might compare.  Because in my own 

review of that particular Act I find it a little strange that that 

one would be the one that you have chosen to refer to in this 

particular piece of legislation, and the policy position that your 

government has taken. 

 

Because my review of the Act raises several points, and I'll just 

put them on the record in the Assembly and you and your 

officials can refute them.  I believe this particular Act only 

applies to employees, namely police officers.  It does not bear 

on any private citizen's rights.  It deals exclusively with 

disciplinary action that can be taken against members of a 

police force, and those powers are set out in section 58. 

 

A private citizen with an interest in an action retains all his or 

her rights to go to a court to seek redress, either through civil 

action or criminal prosecution of an offending police officer.  It 

specifically makes provision for any serious charges to be 

heard in the courts first, and states in section 64 that the 

decision of the court, the decision of the court, not the minister, 

shall be taken as conclusive proof as to the guilt or innocence 

of a police officer, thereby confirming access to the court. 

 

So the policy on the upgrader, to be legally equivalent, it would 

have to apply only to Crown Investments Corporation.  

Affected citizens would have to retain access to the courts for 

civil damages, and a mechanism for a prior decision of a court 

to be accepted as evidence in a hearing would have to exist. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, you have had the benefit of a legal 

education and a legal background and have people close to you 

with legal backgrounds who can, I'm sure, give opinions.  But 

it would seem to me, Mr. Premier, that the Act that you quoted 

to me that you said I should reply to the ladies from the 

Redvers Co-op, would say that if I did that according to what 

you quoted to this House, that individual as a member of a 

cooperative, a Federated Co-ops' affiliates, would have every 

opportunity to have recourse to the courts.  And that's going to 

be my response, sir. 

 

I want you to tell the House tonight that that provision in The 

Police Act which you quoted is exactly the same as what you 

propose in the upgrader Bill; exactly the same -- that the 

individuals and the rights to go to court against your 

government are the same.  Would you do that, sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman,  the hon. member, with 

the greatest of respect, is a little bit off base on the analysis in 

the following ways.  He tries to differentiate the privative 

clause, as they call it in The Police Act, from the privative 

clause in the upgrader Bill on the argument that the decisions 

taken under the upgrader Act are in some ways -- I'm sorry, not 

in some ways; in all ways -- not appealable to the court. 



2618 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

The Minister of Justice was speaking about this before the 

adjournment at 5 o'clock and articulated the legal explanation 

which in effect disputed that. 

 

But what I'm trying to address particularly is the member's 

reference that somehow, under The Police Act, individuals' 

rights aren't affected.  And I can tell the hon. member as a 

person who has actually practised under The Police Act both 

for police officers and complainants against police officers, that 

he's incorrect there.  The Police Act deals with discipline on 

police officers, but the order of a police commission affects not 

only the rights of a police officer but very often the rights and 

the responsibilities of individuals who most often raise 

complaints about police officers.  It is when that board makes 

that order that the privative clause then applies. 

 

And so too it is in the case of the upgrader Bill.  The wording 

of the Bill is not identical but it is essentially and 

fundamentally the same as the whole series of pieces of 

legislation that when you were the minister your government 

enacted and governments across Canada have enacted. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Premier, I listened very carefully to 

the Minister of Justice.  He's a very learned individual.  

Obviously he talks in legalese in a way that most of us can 

understand.  And he said that that access to the court is there 

for Federated Co-op outside of this piece of legislation.  Once 

this is proclaimed and any action which occurs because this 

Bill is in force . . . that once this Bill is in force and it is used, 

the clauses of this Bill are used, Mr. Premier, then it means 

exactly what it says, that the minister is absolutely above 

reproach by any court. 

 

I don't disagree with the Minister of Justice at all, Mr. Premier, 

that right now FCL (Federated Co-operatives Ltd.), CCRL 

(Consumers' Co-operative Refineries Ltd.), yourselves, all of 

you have the right to use the court system to determine 

disputes, to determine whether the other party to the agreement 

has lived up to their word.  But the minister was clear I think -- 

and you correct me if I'm wrong -- that once a provision of this 

Act is used, then the minister is absolutely beyond reproach by 

the court system or any co-op member in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And the point I was making to you, sir, the 

other night is that I think that is a very weak-kneed approach to 

what you're doing. 

 

The minister could have brought in the first part of the Bill.  He 

could have brought in even the second part of the Bill and 

people would understand.  But what you have done, Mr. 

Premier, what you have said to co-op members around this 

province is that you are not willing, that you are not willing to 

put your government to the test of court action once the 

provisions of the Bill are used.  Once the provisions are used 

then the minister is above the court.  And I say, sir, that as you 

said the other night, that is a political policy, philosophical 

position that you've taken.  And I say to you, sir, it's wrong. 

 

Your Minister of Justice quoted out of the labour Act this 

afternoon.  Upon review of that particular piece of 

legislation, nowhere does it have the power that you are 

assigning to the minister in this particular proviso. 

 

And I'm just wondering, sir, on a policy side, because the buck 

does stop at your desk, why you would have to take that final 

step.  Why that you feel you have to go this final step to make 

you and your ministers above court action in this country.  That 

I just can't comprehend or understand. 

 

You could have brought in a clause that said it is going to 

arbitration.  That is done in labour disputes all the time.  

Governments put workers back to work and they force binding 

arbitration upon the worker and the company.  You could have 

done that.  But no, you have to go the whole nine yards. 

 

What is it about the co-op movement, what is it about FCL that 

scare you so much that you have to go with these final 

provisions that if used, if used, put you above the court system?  

What is it that scares you so much about these people? 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer to the 

question is absolutely nothing scares me about these people.  

But the more substantive point I think what the member 

opposite is trying to communicate is why is it that 

governments, including his government, enact privative clauses 

for the actions of ministers and/or quasi-judicial tribunals 

appointed by ministers acting on behalf of ministers when they 

make decisions? 

 

And the answer is because for the years of parliamentary and 

democratic law and under the principles of the rule of law, 

legislatures, including yours when you dominated it as the 

government side, feel that in the public interest, protection 

needs to be afforded to those ministers and to those boards 

which have acted in honest action in the public interest. 

 

I mean there are many examples.  Here's the Municipal Board, 

section 40.  It's orders of the board -- finality.  And it's got 

virtually the same wording in there.  And you enacted that in 

1988.  Now you strike out "board" and put in "minister"; strike 

out "minister" and put in "the board." 

 

An Hon. Member: -- There is a difference, and you know it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well I mean . . .  The member says 

there's a difference.  I mean . . .  And that, with the greatest 

respect, is an absolutely ludicrous argument because the 

question is who the decision-making authority is. 

 

In fact it's even more protective of the legislature, that the 

minister makes the argument and has to answer in the 

legislature, in question period and otherwise, whereas the board 

does not even appear, the Municipal Board.  And I could ask 

you . . . Excuse me, why don't you just get up and ask a 

question, member from Morse?  Or do you lack the gumption 

to do so? 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2619 

Now until you do, please be quiet till I answer the Leader of 

the Opposition. 

 

And the situation here simply is that the board of . . . Mr. 

Chairman, I gave my answer.  That's it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I say to you, Mr. Premier, that when you and 

Chrétien and McMurtry did your thing in the kitchen there 

back in '81, that you changed that basic premise of 

parliamentary democracy.  You changed that.  That's why the 

notwithstanding clause, I believe, is available to provincial 

governments, right? 

 

So instead of all this whereas stuff every time you get in 

trouble, whether it be with employment contracts or whether it 

be with GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) . . . I mean 

the only time we ever see that from you, Mr. Premier, is when 

you're scared of somebody.  When you're scared of having your 

government's backside hauled into a court somewhere, we 

always get in this situation. 

 

Nowhere else.  I mean you have passed what? -- 80, 90, 100 

Bills per session in here.  But any time that you fundamentally 

are going after a group of people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, we always end up with the same clauses -- the 

whereas. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, you laugh when I say notwithstanding.  

Why wouldn't you throw that in there?  That gives you the right 

under the constitution as I understand it to say, notwithstanding 

this particular section we can do this.  My government used it 

once under heavy criticism from you.  Other governments have 

used it.  Is this the way that you get around that criticism?  

Because it's available to you. 

 

I don't understand why you would not have the gumption to 

bring in this piece of legislation without having that final 

hammer.  I really don't understand that because . . . And I say 

to you again, sir, the reason I believe is, is at some point down 

the road there's more to this story going to come out.  Because 

there is politics involved here for all the Minister of Justice's 

pronouncements this afternoon about your government being 

pure as the driven snow in this issue. 

 

Sir, I believe you're scared.  I believe you're scared that the 

half-truths, that the misunderstandings, that the misinformation, 

that the political pieces that you and some of your political 

friends engaged in over the course of this debate and over the 

history of this refinery will come to the fork.  And if some of 

those things see the light of day, Mr. Premier, if some of those 

things see the light of day then there are going to be obvious 

repercussions.  And you don't want to have to face those 

repercussions. 

 

Mr. Premier, it isn't I who writes all of the articles in the 

various media around the province about the political 

involvement of you and members of your party in this whole 

thing.  It isn't I that have done that, sir.  There are a lot of 

people around the province of Saskatchewan of the firm belief, 

including a lot of the members of the co-op movement who 

say, that there 

are other factors involved here. 

 

And I say the only reason that you don't have the gumption to 

come in with this legislation without that protection is that 

you're afraid when that does finally come out that you'll end up 

in court.  And you'll end up in court and you'll have to answer 

for it.  And I would say to you, Mr. Premier, rather than take 

that chance, it would be much better to come forward with a 

solution that involves negotiation. 

 

And I'll even give you this; I'll even give you this, that maybe 

the front end of that Bill has some merit.  If FCL were not 

willing to sit down and go to arbitration on those four 

outstanding issues, then maybe that's where you should have 

started out and got that sorted out first.  And then maybe we 

could have proceeded with an honest negotiation on the bigger 

questions of the integrity of the upgrader and its long-term 

financial well-being. 

 

If those four issues, according to some of your friends in CIC 

(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), are a large 

windfall of dollars for the Government of Saskatchewan -- and 

there is that belief there and it has been expressed to FCL that 

there is a large windfall of dollars for your government in those 

four outstanding issues -- then why not start there? 

 

Bring in the legislation that puts in the arbitration.  Do the 

arbitration, settle the four outstanding issues, get them off the 

table, and then look at the bigger picture of the financing of the 

upgrader and its well-being to this province, and the oil 

industry in particular, well into the future. 

 

I think that would be a good place to start.  And I think, Mr. 

Premier, you might get a lot more support, both in this 

Legislative Assembly and outside it from Saskatchewan people 

and co-op members, if we went one step at a time instead of 

having the whole hog here, and having your government above 

reproach if there are other issues involved besides strictly 

financial aspects.  Would you reply to that, sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, again it's 

virtually impossible to reply because, with the greatest respect, 

it's very difficult to understand the legal argument the member 

advances.  But I will leave the legal argument aside for the 

moment because, quite frankly, I do not comprehend it. 

 

But if the argument is that we should negotiate a settlement, 

which I think is a substantive suggestion, I agree with him.  I 

think we would want a settlement.  I've repeated in question 

period and elsewhere that we seek a settlement.  We will meet 

anywhere, any time, with people involved in order to get a 

settlement and we still think that that's a preferred route.  And I 

think that part of it is something that I totally agree with, and 

I'm glad to see that the member opposite at least agrees that far 

as well. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- What I'm saying to you, Mr. Premier, is that 

the official opposition is prepared to back you 



2620 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

on the arbitration part of this Bill.  We would more than like to 

see that particular issue settled, and settled in a public way so 

that there's no politics involved, there's no misconception, that 

the keep whole clause, that the operating agreement, that the 

costs on the diesel fuel splitter, and the question of NewGrade 

having to use light crude for eight months while they were 

down after the fires -- that all of those issues that involve 

several millions of dollars that your officials believe have been 

misused, that there is a windfall for your government in that 

area. 

 

I'm saying to you, sir, the official opposition will back you in 

putting that arbitration process out front, binding, and settle 

those issues.  And once you have that done, sir, I think you are 

then in a position to do an honest negotiation on the bigger 

picture without the rest of this Bill in front of this Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

And you could settle that.  You could settle that in a public way 

and I think, Mr. Premier, there would be a lot of credit to you 

that those four issues were resolved, they're off the table, 

they're out in the open.  There's no mystery any more to 

Saskatchewan taxpayers on those issues because they seem . . . 

And I read the correspondence, I read the press reports, I look 

at the replies from your minister to FCL, I look at the letters 

back.  These issues seem to be a large, contentious area for 

your government and the statement was made by the minister 

today that they have been four years and not settled.  Well I say 

to you, sir, let's settle them.  If it takes an Act of the Legislative 

Assembly to put binding arbitration in place to settle them in an 

amicable way, because the original agreement doesn't have the 

power to do it, let's settle the issues. 

 

And I think this Legislative Assembly will help you in bringing 

that forward.  It's the rest of the process, Mr. Premier, that 

we're having a lot of difficulty with.  And we have a lot of 

difficulty, as my colleague from Rosthern pointed out today, 

when we see lined up in this legislature: Premier, Justice 

minister, head of CIC, as he said, the only law firm to go 

totally defunct in the province in such a short time because 

they're all in here in some form or other. 

 

That's the problem that we have and the power that you have 

vested in the third component that was sitting behind you 

tonight.  I won't use the individual's name because that seemed 

to get the Justice minister all exercised today, that we shouldn't 

talk about individuals in here who are political appointments.  

So I'll just say to you, when we see the line-up there, all in a 

row, then there's a lot of people in the province of 

Saskatchewan with some suspicion.  And I think the best way 

to alleviate that suspicion that your friend in CIC, or others 

over there, are causing some problems here as we do this in a 

public venue, that we give you the arbitration powers in this 

Assembly and we settle it in a public way. 

 

And beyond that then you are above reproach, sir, absolutely 

above it.  And I think the official opposition would back you.  

We can do that tonight, and then we can get on with that 

process, and then you are in a 

position to negotiate openly, and settle a bigger question which 

is financing, and maybe you would have some public sympathy 

then. 

 

Don't you think that would be a good start considering where 

we've gone, Justice Estey and all included, that if that didn't 

provide the solution, that maybe we can start here tonight with 

that step and start settling things? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well I thank the Leader of the 

Opposition for at least moving a little bit, and I say this quite 

genuinely, a little bit off his traditional position of opposition to 

what has been advanced by the government. 

 

But I would say in rebuttal that I think his suggestion is 

incomplete because it ignores what I think is the genealogy or 

the chronology of events here, and that is we must always 

remember that this Bill is only the result of the Estey report not 

having been accepted by FCL. 

 

And that being the case, it's the next logical step.  And the key 

elements of this Bill in fact embrace what Mr. Justice Estey has 

identified are the main problems with the agreement.  So I 

think to do anything less than that would be unsatisfactory. 

 

I think the other point I'd like to make is of course that there is 

a bit of a classic conundrum which the member's suggestion 

results in.  And that is, in order to legislate the arbitration, you 

in effect have to legislate provisions of the agreement, because 

the current agreement have tied up the arbitration process and 

have denied it.  It's unworkable, as Estey has pointed out. 

 

And in order to untie the arbitration and to untie the agreement, 

somebody has to make the untying decisions.  And if you 

complain that it's the minister who does it, substitute for that a 

board.  It doesn't matter who does it.  Somebody will do it.  

And if somebody does it, then you need to give that person the 

normal and traditional protection, privative protection, which 

The Police Act, The Municipal Board Act, various other 

legislative enactments which your government -- and 

individual minister's enactments as well -- have received, as is 

the standard case. 

 

So my point is, I think it's a worthwhile suggestion but 

unfortunately it is only but the first yard to what I think is 

required, namely a solution to this very, very serious drain and 

potentially even more serious drain on the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I thank him for his view, but in our judgement we think the 

best way to go is the way the Bill is introduced. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Premier, once again you are drawing 

Justice Estey into this.  Justice Estey did not recommend this 

piece of legislation.  You said so yourself the other night.  You 

said the buck stopped at your desk.  This was your decision.  

This was not Justice 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2621 

Estey.  Justice Estey said negotiate, don't legislate.  This was 

your decision, not Justice Estey.  Let's get Justice Estey out of 

this argument, sir. 

 

The official opposition understands binding arbitration.  The 

official opposition understands this Legislative Assembly 

mandating binding arbitration.  That's been done by all 

governments.  And it is a process understood and accepted.  

Because in my view, Mr. Premier, whether your government 

did it back before 1982 or our government did it after 1982, at 

the end of the day the process was accepted. 

 

There are four outstanding issues.  Why don't we get on with 

settling them?  Because no one is going to see that as an 

infringement of the rights of 240,000 co-op members around 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And if, Mr. Premier, your Minister of Justice is right . . . today 

in his remarks he said that the process, as per the original 

agreement as far as arbitration, was under way.  And he hoped 

that provisions of the Act would not have to be used because 

they had agreed that that arbitration process should flow 

forward. 

 

(1930) 

 

What I'm saying to you, Mr. Premier, because your upgrader is 

not going bankrupt tomorrow or next week or next month, that 

the bigger issues on the financing, if you want to take this thing 

out of the political realm where it should be, where we 

concentrate on issues such as differential, where we 

concentrate on issues such as the interest rate, where we 

concentrate on the consortium of Canadian banks that have 

provided the financing, that those issues have some time in 

front of us to work through. 

 

And I think everyone in the oil patch today will tell you that 

they expect those differentials to widen through the summer 

months and indeed will be above $6 because of the amount of 

supply coming on stream.  And as supply comes on stream the 

differential widens. 

 

So, Mr. Premier, if your upgrader is paying its interest costs, if 

its paying its upgrading costs, if its paying its employees and 

the question is the principle, debt, which is very large, which I 

agree with you, sir, is a potential problem, then why wouldn't 

we settle the outstanding issues and then deal with the main 

problem. 

 

And I've said to you, this opposition is prepared if you think 

you need legislation to make that arbitration process go 

forward, to agree with you to get the issues settled.  And I 

believe when you settle them you will not find that windfall at 

the end of the day.  But if you do find a few dollars for the 

government, a taxpayer, fair ball and so be it.  You will have 

achieved something that no one else could.  And we will back 

you in that sir. 

 

I'm wondering why we must have this headlong push to do the 

whole thing at once.  And there, sir, is where I suspect the 

political motivation, that the policy 

decisions then come suspect.  The policy decisions and the 

ideas put forward by your friends over in CIC, your political 

appointments, your NDP (New Democratic Party) friends 

become far more relevant to this question than they would be 

otherwise. 

 

Because I'm sure we can mutually agree to an arbitrator out 

there who could settle this issue if they had the power of the 

Legislative Assembly and binding behind it.  I'm sure we could 

find an arbitrator, Mr. Premier, that we can all agree to, 

someone that is above politics, above reproach, who can sit 

down and settle those issues, especially that FCL is willing to 

use the existing process to settle them. 

 

And you have still not answered me, why as a policy decision, 

given that the upgrader isn't going bankrupt tomorrow or next 

week or next month that you feel you have to have this whole 

thing wrapped up in one package.  And I say to you sir, I 

suspect that your friend in CIC, Mr. Ching, that has more to do 

with that than anything else. 

 

Tell me, Mr. Premier, show me one piece of financial evidence 

that says that that operation, given where differentials are going 

over the summer months, is going to go bankrupt, that the 

consortium of Canadian banks and other financial people who 

are the financiers on the project are going to pull their money 

out in June, July, August, September, October, anywhere in 

there.  Show me that they are prepared to jerk their financing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, two points very 

briefly.  First of all, the member persists in either forgetting or 

ignoring, which I have to remind him of course, of the 

fundamental conclusion of Mr. Justice Estey.  When he calls 

upon me to give a piece of evidence in support of what we're 

doing, I cite Estey, who said that the project has run financially 

aground.  And he says it cannot succeed operating at full 

capacity.  That's his finding.  I think that this is a very 

important and very serious finding.  So to me that is in effect 

the show-stopper conclusion.  We purposely referred this 

matter to somebody of the calibre and the quality of Mr. Justice 

Estey to give us this kind of an absolute assessment.  And I 

think he's done what, in my own judgement, the documentation 

indicates. 

 

The second point of course is something which the member 

and I fundamentally will never agree on in the way government 

should run.  The member opposite, as I hear him, in effect is 

asking the government to adopt a policy of hope, a policy of 

prayer.  He says nobody says the differential is going to 

shorten, it's going to widen.  Things are going to be looking up.  

Everything's on the rosy side.  What's the hurry.  Well I don't 

believe that's the way a government operates.  I don't believe 

that's the way a business operates. 

 

I think a business and a government that is responsible, acts on 

the facts which are before it -- the facts being the Estey report 

and the fundamental finding of the Estey report and the 

fundamental nature of the deal -- tries to get a negotiated 

settlement or 



2622 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

tries other avenues, and if it's unable to do so, then has to 

exercise its responsibility, do what the people have asked it to 

do.  And I believe that that is exactly what the people have 

asked us to do, to try to bring under control this very, very 

serious debt situation -- probably the most serious megaproject, 

mega-investment made in the 1980s which jeopardizes the 

taxpayers' security and the recovery that we've made; $600 

million exposed already, not counting the $275 million on top 

of the federal government's, not counting the $300 million lost 

by NewGrade.  These are all plus figures.  That's about a 

billion dollars. 

 

Well the member says depreciation, but I mean that, with the 

greatest of respect, is absolutely a non-answer because you 

depreciate your equipment at some point or other, you 

depreciate it to zero value, and then people are going to say to 

you and any accounting operation, what do you have left to 

borrow on or to operate on?  And if you don't have a 

depreciation allowance set aside to replace something like your 

tractor or depreciation allowance aside, you set aside for 

repairs for the plant, the physical plant of the upgrader which 

they don't have here, I mean that is really the funniest kind of 

accounting that I've ever heard in my life. 

 

And again, the hon. member subscribed to it, and clearly he did 

for nine and a half years when he sat on the treasury benches.  I 

say with the greatest of respect, I don't, neither does Mr. Justice 

Estey.  And we want a negotiated settlement, but in the absence 

of it, we have to act. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Unfortunately, Mr. Premier, because of your 

policies there's going to be a lot of depreciated farm machinery 

putting the crop in and taking the crop off in this province for 

some time to come -- believe me.  Because farming people in 

this province can't afford to replace their machinery thanks to 

you. 

 

Anyway, you don't answer the basic question, and I know why 

you don't.  I asked you to give me a piece of financial evidence 

that says that that operation is going down even three months 

from now.  And you don't have it, because it's not and you 

know it.  And you know you have time, if you wish, to do it 

right or not do it in a political way.  And you refuse, Mr. 

Premier, to do that. 

 

And that's why Justice Estey had to go public a couple of 

weeks ago, because he was sick and tired of having his name 

dragged around this province by your government as the person 

advocating this solution.  In fact he had to come public and say, 

you know, if they had just left me alone, I probably would have 

got a settlement in a week to 10 days. 

 

That's why Justice Estey had to go public.  And he shouldn't 

have to do that, Mr. Premier, he shouldn't have to do that.  But 

you and your government have dragged his name all over this 

province as the reason that you're doing this.  Not because you 

and your political friends in CIC want to do this. 

Mr. Premier, you have to come clean with the folks on that one.  

Mr. Justice Estey shouldn't have had to come public again just 

two weeks ago to start clarifying.  He shouldn't have to do that. 

 

Now I ask you again:  you show me some piece of evidence 

that says that the NewGrade project is going to go in the tank in 

the next few months, that the bankers are going to pull the pin, 

that the federal government's going to pull the pin, that the oil 

is going to dry up, that the differential's going down.  You give 

me some piece of evidence, Mr. Premier, that says that the 

solution proposed tonight, which the official opposition will 

help you in . . . and I'll give you a further commitment, Mr. 

Premier. 

 

If three, four months through this process that you can't, after 

the arbitration process, settle the bigger questions, you as the 

Premier can haul this House into session any time you want.  

And I give you the commitment that each and every member of 

the Progressive Conservative Party that sits in this House will 

come whenever, whether it be the middle of harvest, it be the 

middle of winter, whenever. 

 

If you have to have a special session of this legislature to deal 

with it appropriately at that time we'll come in and we'll come 

in here and debate it in an open, public way if the taxpayer of 

the province is at risk that quickly as you say, sir. 

 

But what I'm saying to you tonight is we are more than 

prepared to pass through this Assembly an arbitration process 

that gets those outstanding issues dealt with so that you have 

time to negotiate the bigger picture in the best interests of the 

taxpayer of the province without having to sully this 

Legislative Assembly and co-op members around this province 

with this legislation. 

 

Because I see this as weak-kneed.  I see this as an attempt to 

cover up the political agenda that your party has been involved 

in on the NewGrade process since day one, and your party and 

you, sir, were informed at every step of the way and you know 

it.  And you know it. 

 

And you knew it in the 1986 election campaign and, Mr. 

Premier, there would have been no other reason for the former 

Hon. Allan Blakeney, your Deputy Premier, and others to stand 

in this House and talk about that agreement in the way that they 

did.  And I'm not going to recite all of those verbatims back to 

you, Mr. Premier, but they stood here and you well know it.  

They stood in this Assembly and they talked about that project 

because they knew the background, and when the Hon. Allan 

Blakeney said we know about the $600 million in public debt, 

they knew. 

 

And I say to you, sir, the only reason that you will not accept a 

reasonable solution to what has developed into a crisis for 

co-op members in this province and potentially a crisis for 

people wanting to invest in this province, is because the 

political agenda does not fit what we propose to you tonight.  

And I say to you, sir, that would be a very good place to start, 

to say to 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2623 

Saskatchewan people that you don't have a political process in 

place, that you truly are after the best interest.  Give me the 

information, Mr. Premier, that says NewGrade is going in the 

tank in the next three months, four months, whatever you like, 

sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I have said that Mr. 

Justice Estey has said the project has run financially aground.  

Do you deny that?  That's what he said.  Do you want me to 

ignore that? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No.  He also said it's an operating 

success. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- He has said it has run financially 

aground and he said that the responsibility of the government, 

on page 30, requires remedial or protective action, or at least 

damage control.  This is their solemn task.  And the Premier 

and the provincial executive have clearly recognized it. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- One step at a time.  One step at a time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Now that's another issue.  You say one 

step at a time.  Fine.  But if we can agree that that conclusion is 

the case, then let's put that aside. 

 

Now the next question is whether you want to do it stage by 

stage.  And I say to you, that is your approach but it is not our 

approach because the logical next step, following the words of 

Estey, is to take remedial or protective action, or at least 

damage control based on his recommendations. 

 

And what were his recommendations?  He said, (1) check 

governance; (2) check arbitration; (3) check the deficiencies.  

That's what we've done.  Full stop, period. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- The problem, Mr. Premier, the problem is 

that in this session of the legislature, you brought in a Bill 

which gives your friend over at CIC more power -- more power 

than a person in that position has ever held in the province of 

Saskatchewan before.  Ever before.  You virtually have a 

person over there in CIC that can set rates, that can affect tax, 

without this Legislative Assembly having any recall. 

 

You have a person over there who according to the media, 

according to a lot of people around the province, according to 

people at FCL, has more than just a simple financial agenda to 

deal with.  And quite frankly it scares me, Mr. Premier, to think 

that that individual, under that Act and what you're proposing 

here, will be judge, jury, and hangman.  Judge, jury, and 

hangman as far as settling this dispute. 

 

(1945) 

 

Because in effect that's what your good friend, your former law 

partner, your political crony, the head of CIC, will have the 

power to do.  And, Mr. Premier, that bothers me; that bothers 

FCL; that bothers taxpayers; that bothers anybody in the 

province who isn't a hard 

core New Democrat, quite frankly, and some of them are 

getting a little queasy. 

 

So that's your problem, Mr. Premier.  And trying to tie Justice 

Estey's tail to that individual and his increased power and his 

ability to influence this decision-making process, quite frankly 

bothers people.  And you have not proposed to me one single 

solution to solve that.  Because that individual, by being able to 

set the arbitration, to pick the arbitrator, to take over the board 

of directors, under this legislation . . . yes, it addresses 

governance all right.  It certainly addresses governance, doesn't 

it. 

 

That individual is judge, jury, and hangman, I say to you, sir.  

And that is not proper.  And that is not how a dispute such as 

this should be settled.  And I say to you, you should find some 

process to split it up and to open it up to the public, not in a 

partisan way but in a factual way. 

 

And that's why I ask you tonight to provide me, provide the 

opposition with the financial statements and structures that 

show that this particular project is going to go into bankruptcy, 

into insolvency, that the bankers are going to call their notes 

before the review on December 31, 1994, and thereby threaten 

the taxpayer of this province. 

 

And I take it by your refusal to give me that, that you don't 

have anything other than the words of Justice Estey in his 

report saying this project has financially run aground. 

 

Well, Mr. Premier, after the fires and after some of the start-up 

problems and after the drop in differentials in '85-86 and 

others, I can understand that, believe me.  And maybe that 

project was too highly leveraged to begin with.  But what I 

would like you to provide to this Assembly is the financial 

information that shows me that you don't have the time to do 

this properly and you don't have the time to unleash your 

friend, Don Ching, through the powers that were granted him 

under that Bill 42 and what you're proposing in Bill 90 on this 

settlement process. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, with the greatest of 

respect, I don't think the Leader of the Opposition knows what 

he's talking about.  If the Leader of the Opposition would just 

take the time to read Bill 90, he would understand that all the 

decisions which are taken are taken by the cabinet or the 

minister responsible and subject to the accountability of this 

House. 

 

The member persists in references to individuals.  He can 

continue that until the cows comes home, but the reality is, I 

wish he would read the Bill.  Because your comments, quite 

frankly, reflect a complete lack of knowledge what the Bill 

does.  The decisions are made by cabinet, I repeat.  They're 

made by the Executive Council and the ministers . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Pardon me?  Oh well I mean this is ridiculous.  

Anyway, Mr. Chairman, I'll speak to you. 

 

The Bill is clear as to who has the power and what the 



2624 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

positions are made and there's no use me talking about it.  

They've got this bee in their bonnet and they're just going to 

continue it all night or all week or all month.  I don't care how 

long they continue it.  The facts are there and there's no use 

trying to talk to people who will not accept the facts.  That's 

point number one. 

 

Point number two.  He may dismiss Mr. Justice Estey; I don't.  

Mr. Justice Estey says -- these are his words, I repeat again, if 

he wants evidence -- this has run financially aground.  I don't 

know what could be clearer.  Mr. Justice Estey says, financially 

aground. 

 

And if he says, oh but give me something else, I want to tell 

him that Mr. Justice Estey had access to every piece of 

financial documentation that FCL wanted to provide him.  

They met totally and completely on many occasions privately 

or bi-laterally, I should put it that way.  They have all that 

information. 

 

I mean please, please, let's elevate this debate, at least on a 

factual consideration of what the facts are here.  So when you 

tell me about where is the facts and I say that Mr. Justice Estey 

had possession of all of the facts and made this conclusion, I 

mean how in the world can we carry on a civilized, sensible 

discussion on public policy if one ignores those simple, bald, 

plain truths? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Premier, you can try and be 

condescending.  You can try.  You don't get away with it, but 

you can try, believe me.  Do as much as you want.  The simple 

fact is, sir, I have read the legislation.  Yes, and I'm just a 

simple layman like every other taxpayer in the province, except 

the learned lawyer opposite from me. 

 

And I'm just like every other co-op member. But I can tell you 

what, Mr. Premier, that Gauley & Co., the folks that represent 

FCL, are probably just as learned as whoever the minister had 

in with him today.  And there's lots of opinions about what 

power this minister has and what power he doesn't have.  But I 

know what power your friend, Mr. Ching, has under Bill 42, 

and I also know, sir, that you refuse to provide the information.  

Now I can only take that to mean that either you don't have it . . 

. because quite frankly revealing cabinet documents, revealing 

cabinet documents, has never bothered you in the past.  I mean 

you'll get up and quote, you'll get up and quote documents that 

the former premier did.  The member from Meadow Lake had 

one he dragged into Public Accounts which I questioned your 

Minister of Finance about, okay?  All sorts of public 

documents, or cabinet documents.  You've never hesitated in 

the past so I mean you just . . . why hesitate now? 

 

What I'm saying to you, sir, what I'm saying to you, what I'm 

saying to you is just . . . And if you've got it, provide the 

financial information that says that it's going in the tank.  That's 

all I'm asking you.  Tomorrow, next week, next month.  Okay, 

you've got a document that says the banks are pulling their 

financing.  Table it, now.  Okay? 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I have a document that says this is 

absolutely financially aground.  How do you like that?  Ah, ha, 

ha, ha -- the member from Rosthern laughs.  Dismiss Estey.  

You see you people, when the documents are tabled tomorrow 

involving . . . You were in the treasury benches too, the 

member from Rosthern.  All of you are guilty of this -- 

culpable and guilty -- all of you.  These'll be tabled. 

 

When these documents are tabled when every adviser told you 

about this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .You were all 

involved; you were all involved.  You were all involved and 

you are defending it right straight across the piece and it's not 

very easy or very explicable to say, oh well, it wasn't me.  It 

was the premier.  I wasn't in cabinet.  It's like the piano player 

sitting in a certain house, and says, oh my goodness, that's what 

they were doing upstairs.  Not very good an excuse; not very 

good an excuse. 

 

You exactly, you exactly, you exactly, you exactly know what 

you people are up to.  And the reality is that Mr. Justice Estey . 

. . (inaudible interjection) . . . That may be so.  Mr. Justice 

Estey has looked at all of these documents.  And look, I mean 

please don't misinterpret this any way. 

 

I can only say to you that Mr. Justice Estey has had all of the 

documents before him, financial run-ups.  The documentation 

-- the report even talks about that.  They have case studies.  All 

of this is set out . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes he did.  

And what does he recommend?  He recommends change 

arbitration, change governance, change the cash overrides on 

the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, change governance 

because it's axiomatically in a conflict of interest. 

 

Here's the problem, member from Arm River.  I'll tell you what 

the problem is.  The essence of the deal is this: FCL said we'll 

bring in our upgrader and we'll then form a new, super-arching 

organization called NewGrade, over which there will be a 

board of directors called NewGrade.  But they say the 

documents and the contract must be such that whatever the 

board of directors at NewGrade decides, it cannot adversely 

affect our refinery. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And the member says that's right, 

which is, by the way, by itself an absolutely funny, funny 

principle of business.  That's like saying, you bring your farm . 

. . Sorry, I'll bring my farm into your farming operation, we'll 

form a partnership, but the partnership can't decide anything 

which will affect my farm to the benefit or the detriment of the 

joint partnership.  I've got the right to pull out at any time. 

 

And this is where the bottleneck on the arbitrations has run out.  

When there's been a dispute about what's in the interests of 

NewGrade versus what FCL thinks is in the interests of the 

upgrader, they block the arbitration. 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2625 

Now you've got 50 to a 100 million dollars, and when you are 

the operator of NewGrade in addition to being the owner and 

operator of the upgrader, you are, in the words of Mr. Justice 

Estey, in an axiomatic conflict of interest.  Because you're 

trying to have . . . on the one hand, you're protecting the 

upgrader and on the other hand you're supposed to be looking 

at the best interest of NewGrade.  And if there's a conflict, who 

wins?  Guess who wins? 

 

And not only that, if this thing goes belly up . . . and the hon. 

member says where's the evidence.  And in the last 12, 18 

months, the differential has been anywhere from $4 to $10.  It 

can fluctuate tomorrow and turn on a dime.  But in any event, 

in that kind of situation, if it goes belly up, you know what the 

agreement also says?  It says simply this: the province of 

Saskatchewan has got to render whole and safe the refinery 

back to FCL, whole and safe. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I never read that any place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- That's in the agreement.  You made 

the agreement.  That's in the agreement.  That's why Mr. Justice 

Estey says it's axiomatic conflict of interest. 

 

And you know what we can do?  Sell it for scrap, what's left 

over.  That's what we get, plus we will carry $375 million of 

loan guarantees; plus Ottawa will carry $275 million loan 

guarantees; plus we've got $300 million already lost on 

NewGrade.  And you people are saying don't do anything. 

 

Can you tell me, Mr. Member from Arm River, that that is a 

way that you're going to get back the power, exhibiting that 

kind of concern for the taxpayers? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Talk to him, I haven't asked you a 

question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Oh yes you did, right from my chair . . 

. your chair, you did, and I'm giving you the answer and I hope 

that it satisfies you.  This is why Mr. Justice Estey says you've 

got to deal with governance because it is confused.  That's why 

you've got to deal with the question of arbitration, because of 

governance that's been blocked and you can't arbitrate.  And 

that's why he says the question of the overruns has got to be 

looked at on a 50/50 basis.  Now if you're FCL and you had a 

situation where you virtually put nothing into the operation 

whatsoever and if it went belly up, by contract you get your 

refinery and you don't got to pick up any of the guarantees, 

well I don't, I don't blame them I suppose.  I understand why 

they wouldn't want to see it change.  That's from FCL's point of 

view. 

 

What I can't understand is why you, from the taxpayers' point 

of view, are in that camp.  That's what I can't understand.  You 

haven't taken an oath to FCL.  You've taken an oath, Mr. 

Members, Madam Member, to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan to protect the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

Six hundred million dollars, that's what we're doing.  And no, 

what you do is you say this deal that we negotiated 10 days 

before the election which every adviser says by document don't 

sign -- every adviser . . . That document, that book is that thick 

on the documentation, and by the way, other statements in 

there which will be very interesting when they're released, that 

book, you ignored that advice. 

 

All right, you did it at the time.  Why do you persist in 1993 in 

pretending that those are not the facts?  Why?  Well either (a) 

it's politics, your political agenda, or (b) you want to defend the 

deal, which I understand you made the deal, or (c) it's both of 

those factors or (d) it is just because where you are.  You 

simply don't give a doggone for the taxpayers.  You haven't for 

nine and one-half years and there's no reason why you should 

start giving a doggone for the taxpayers right now either. 

 

You think that all the small-business people out there should 

run the risk of that $600 million, that we should carry it.  They 

can't.  And you know if it was a 60, I said this, if it was one less 

zero, I'd be prepared to adopt your policy of prayer.  I'd be 

prepared to say, you know, maybe something will happen, 

maybe the differential, like the Leader of the Opposition says, 

is going to go sky high and we're all going to be rolling in 

dough.  I'll ignore Estey, that has run financially aground and 

all of that.  I'll do all of that.  Maybe I'd be prepared to do that 

for 60 million and sort of say, well it'll work out. 

 

But for 600 million -- 600 million?  I tell you, member from 

Arm River, I just don't believe that even you would accept that 

kind of a position.  I just don't believe you'd accept it.  And 

maybe you do.  If you do, then we agree to disagree, that's all.  

Sooner or later in a democracy the people will decide who's 

right on this. 

 

(2000) 

 

But we do not analyse it that way.  We do not allow that, 

analyse that governance, that financial, those secret contracts 

and all of the arrangements and that taxpayers' burden in the 

way that you analyse it or would want us to analyse it.  Simple 

and complex, and very unfortunate, but truthful.  And we're 

going to tackle the truth right up front.  Tell it like it is and act 

like we should. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, see the problem with 

what the Premier says is that nobody believes him any more.  

You just said 50 to $100 million.  Because that's what his 

friend over at CIC said that those four outstanding issues and 

arbitration are worth.  The government fundamentally believes 

that there's a large windfall of money there. 

 

And if the Premier were listening tonight, what I said to the 

Premier was that this opposition was prepared to help him put 

legislation through this Assembly tonight.  If he honestly 

believes that there's 50 to $100 million there -- and FCL says 

differently -- but if he honestly believes his officials at CIC, his 

political 



2626 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

friends over there, then this opposition is ready tonight to put 

an arbitration process in place by an Act of this Legislative 

Assembly to go get it. 

 

How's that?  You say we're not interested in solving anything.  

Let's do it.  Let's do it tonight.  Let's put the arbitrator in place.  

We'll sit here tonight and we'll work it out.  We'll put the 

arbitration in place.  If there's 50 to 100 million over there, let's 

put it to arbitration and go get it.  Okay?  Tonight.  And then 

let's forget the rest of the nonsense in here until there is a 

proper negotiating place . . . process in place. 

 

Maybe what we need to do is bring Justice Estey back.  

Because, Mr. Premier, you refuse to acknowledge that there 

have been people on your side with politics in mind, with 

politics with FCL, and politics because this is an endeavour of 

a former PC (Progressive Conservative) administration . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well then why don't you take the 

offer?  Your throw the number out of 50 to 100 million as you 

so loosely throw numbers all the time in this Assembly. 

 

The information I have is that there's only about $40 million 

max at stake here -- $40 million max.  Well let's prove it.  Let's 

find out who's right.  Tonight let's put the arbitration process in 

place and see if it's 40 million max as FCL says, or if it's 100 

million as your friend, Don Ching, over at CIC, says.  Let's see 

which one of them is right.  And we'll help you do it.  We'll 

help you pass the legislation tonight to do that. 

 

So don't say that we aren't interested in the taxpayer, that we're 

not interested in settling the agreement.  But let's do it in such a 

way that when it is done that there is no one going to question 

the process, that there is no one who is burdened by the fact 

that every decision of the minister pursuant to this Act, ta-dah, 

ta-dah, ta-dah, has to live under that.  There's no reason it 

should have to be that way, Mr. Premier, not from a New 

Democratic Party government. 

 

I mean I sat in government from 1985 to 1991, and I listened to 

New Democrats talk in this Legislative Assembly all the time 

that governments shouldn't do that.  New Democrat after New 

Democrat, they just popped up over here like gophers in the 

spring.  And they said, you shouldn't have to do that, you don't 

need that kind of legislation with New Democrats in power.  

The heavy hand of the legislature should not come down to 

bear. 

 

So I'm offering you, Mr. Premier, a way that it won't simply be 

New Democrats.  Conservatives, Conservatives will agree, Mr. 

Premier, to the arbitration process and let's go out and see if 

there's a hundred million bucks there.  Let's put her to the 

process.  We'll see who's right.  And once we get that out of the 

way, then we'll start settling the bigger issues.  And if it takes 

this Legislative Assembly, then we'll come in and debate it. 

 

But for goodness sakes, sir, a fairly newly elected New 

Democrat Premier, wouldn't you rather do it some other way?  

And we've just given you a way.  We've 

just given you an option that you didn't have before.  Why not 

take it?  Why would you want this on your head?  I don't 

understand, sir.  Why do you reject the option we give you 

tonight?  Let's go get the money.  Let's take it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, again I thank the hon. 

member for some movement at long last on this Bill. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I offered it an hour ago, darn near. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I thank the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition for his offer.  But let me counter by saying that it is 

important to note that prior to the tabling of this legislation, for 

four years previously, the contractual arrangements of the deal 

blocked any arbitration before the tabling of this Bill.  Now I 

think somebody has to figure out why that's the case. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Well I've heard stories. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well I know the stories, but don't 

forget, even the the evil Mr. Ching hasn't been around for four 

years. 

 

The reality is that it's been blocked . . . (inaudible interjection) . 

. . And for the member from Morse and his edification, the 

outstanding issues all arose during your term in office.  Not 

even  . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .  Well no, but they blocked 

you.  You people . . .  They blocked you so badly that your 

Finance department . . . our Finance department officials have 

got documents that you instructed them to prepare to put a 

refinery tax on. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Yes. Maybe we would have had to do it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well maybe you would have but you 

didn't for four years.  And for four years, nothing moved.  

That's the point I wish to make. 

 

Now the second point I wish to make is simply this.  And I'm 

glad we're off this argument about contract -- sanctity of 

contract, as the hon. member would have argued earlier in the 

evening.  Because even legislation of arbitration involves an 

attack to the current contractual situation, as I explained to the 

member from Arm River. 

 

Now the third point that the member makes is this business of, 

give me numbers and give me statements.  I'm reading from 

part 10 . . . page 10, I'm sorry, of the Estey report.  Here's what 

Justice Estey writes: 

 

 On the other side of the bargain is Saskatchewan, represented 

herein by NG, a corporation wholly owned by Saskatchewan.  

The parties at the outset of the project did not appear to have 

contemplated the present financial and commercial stalemate.  

The project, the combined Refinery and Upgrader, throws up 

a cash flow which has arbitrarily, by accounting and 

contractual measures, been 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2627 

broken down . . . 

 

I ask the Leader of the Opposition to listen to this: 

 

 . . . been broken down (Mr. Justice Estey says) and allocated 

to the Upgrader element and the Refinery element.  In these 

calculations, the Upgrader cash flow falls short of the amount 

required to service the interest charges on the outside or 

third-party debt of NG (NewGrade) guaranteed by 

Saskatchewan and Canada and which was incurred by NG in 

the course of establishing and launching the Upgrader.  This 

situation has largely developed by reason of the fact that the 

cash outlays in the project so far by Saskatchewan and by the 

public debt exceed the initial projected cost/earnings 

forecasts by a considerable margin.  The program therefore 

cannot generate, at present levels of operation, a cash flow 

which will pay out the outside debt as to both principal and 

interest. 

 

This is only a couple of weeks old. 

 

 Furthermore, at no stage in the foreseeable future (now listen 

to these words -- at no stage in the foreseeable future, at no 

stage in the foreseeable future) will cash flow of the 

Upgrader, by itself, service the interest and principal charges 

falling due on the guaranteed debt, even when operating at 

full capacity, which is now the case. 

 

At no point in the foreseeable future.  Now what more can I say 

or do?  You can say Mr. Justice Estey is right out to lunch but 

that's what he says.  That's what he says and I can read the 

balance of it in terms . . . and then he recommends later on 

page 34 what the solution is. 

 

So when you say why not just arbitration, I say page 10 of 

Justice Estey.  Arbitration talks about cash whether it's 40 or 

100 or 50 or 15 or 25.  I don't know what it will work out to, 

who wins and who loses.  The arbitrator will decide that.  But it 

is the Bill that did it, that got the arbitrations going, but it's only 

one part of the problem.  The other major part of the problem 

remains page 10 as I've read to you by Mr. Justice Estey, and 

his conclusion that at no time in the foreseeable future . . . in 

the foreseeable future -- even with the operator going at full 

capacity -- is now. 

 

That means the financial side is unresolved.  Now if your 

suggestion is that we should adjourn the legislature, not pass 

the other dimensions of the Bill, and that if something comes 

up in July or August which puts the . . . this project which is 

living on the edge, over the edge, and that we should then 

convene the legislature, then again to introduce the legislation, 

I say to you, sir, with the greatest of respect -- because this is a 

good discussion -- with the greatest of respect, that's not the 

way I believe that business should be done. 

 

I don't even think NewGrade or FCL wants it done this way . . . 

that way in their heart of hearts.  They'd much 

rather know what the ground rules are and to deal with it.  

That's not the way to do it.  We will continue to negotiate and 

talk.  I think that is a solution.  Those are my answers to you.  

If you do not accept them it is your prerogative not to accept 

them.  You're not the only one who doesn't accept them, but I 

think they're a logical explanation and answer to the situation, 

and that is our position.  We only have to agree to disagree 

here. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm glad the Premier 

read that out because Justice Estey didn't put any kind of a date 

on when this foreseeable future was going to start or end.  And 

Justice Estey correctly identified -- as does FCL, as does 

everybody else -- that currently the servicing of the principle 

debt is out of the realm of the upgrader project, with a 

differential today, as the Premier says it, $5.85. 

 

And I think the analysis that has been done at $6 says the same 

thing.  And I agree with you, sir.  What I'm talking about here 

is process.  And what you don't want to admit to or talk about is 

the fact that how you are managing the debt of the province, 

how you take your write-downs, how you have done 

everything possible, sir, to balloon the debt of this province for 

political reasons, to position your government a couple of years 

hence as the financial saviour of this province, using this one, 

using Weyerhaeuser, using SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation), using others, is the true crux of the 

problem here, Mr. Premier.  It is the true crux of the problem 

that somehow you are going to mount the white horse and 

come riding in in a couple of years with a balanced budget and 

how you managed this debt. 

 

Mr. Premier, that's the part that a lot of people are starting to 

have problems with because we've got a province suffering 

under excessive taxation; we've got a province suffering from 

excessive unemployment; we've got a province suffering from 

excessive numbers of people on social services.  Our 

agriculture, sir, is under attack.  Our health care system is 

under attack.  Our education system is under attack. 

 

And I say to you, sir, the way that you are managing this 

particular negotiation for those political purposes a couple of 

years hence is absolutely reprehensible.  Because you know 

full well, you know full well that that particular project is not 

going to go bankrupt next week or next month.  And you know 

full well that you don't want to take the chance to clean up the 

arbitration process and open up that negotiation in a public way 

with everything else, because, sir, it gets in the road of the 

other agenda. 

 

(2015) 

 

And the proof is manyfold, Mr. Premier.  It's the speech in New 

York that says one thing and it's the speech in Harris that says 

another.  It's how you run around this province saying one 

thing while here and saying something else somewhere else. 



2628 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

And, sir, if the credit rating of this province is at risk, it's 

because of the way you have tried to manipulate the political 

process.  It is truly because of the way you have tried to 

manipulate that process.  And that is the reason that people, and 

co-op members by the thousands who have tabled their names 

in this Legislative Assembly, are starting to smell a rat.  And 

they say, why should we have to be part of that political 

process?  Why is it that we co-op members, affiliates of FCL, 

have to be part of that political process so that the member 

from Riversdale can come riding in hence in two years and get 

re-elected as Premier of this province because he's managing 

the debt.  And he drags us through the knot-hole as part of that. 

 

And that's why the solutions offered tonight aren't acceptable, 

because what it does is it cleans it up in a step-by-step way that 

fixes the financial problem but doesn't address the Premier's 

political problem which was a whole lot of promises made in 

the fall of 1991.  Do you remember axe the tax?  Do you 

remember how I can live on 4.5 billion?  Do you remember 

how there is going to be more for health and education and 

social services and policing?  That all I got to do is clean up 50 

or $100 million of waste and mismanagement and then it is all 

going to be better.  Do you remember that, folks? 

 

Well a lot of FCL-affiliated members are starting to think.  And 

they're saying, we didn't make those promises in the fall of '91.  

We didn't make them and we shouldn't be part of the process of 

covering the tracks of the member from Riversdale who wanted 

to be Premier because he could make those promises in the face 

of a $14.5 billion deficit; $14.5 billion deficit that he 

mentioned in the leader's debate in the fall of 1991.  Now $16 

billion -- it has grown by a billion and a half. 

 

Well I can tell you, Mr. Premier, that if you keep dragging 

Saskatchewan people through the process to cover your tracks 

on your political promises to what you are going to do for the 

province of Saskatchewan in the fall of 1991, and position 

yourself as the saviour of the debt in the fall of 1995, then this 

province is misused badly.  And I think, sir, that is why you 

reject any option that would do the negotiation process both 

step by step in a public venue and solve the problem.  Because 

I believe it's solvable. 

 

And I'll say one other thing to you, Mr. Premier.  I don't believe 

the federal government feel that this Act applies to them.  And 

I think if you ask them very carefully they will say the decision 

on FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) totally exempts them from 

these legislated solutions that you are talking about here.  

Because that is what has been imparted to me, and that you 

can't hold them because of the FCC decision that was recently 

brought down. 

 

And I say to you, sir, if that is the case and you have a flawed 

piece of legislation because of it, then I think the step-by-step 

process would be a lot more meaningful to Saskatchewan 

people because they could follow through that process and 

understand it 

very clearly.  The decisions of arbitrators are well understood 

to the average taxpayer in this province, and how that arbitrator 

came to that decision would be well understood.  And the other 

issues then I suggest to you, sir, will be addressed in a 

reasonable way. 

 

And I would hope that the taxpayer of Canada, that the new 

Prime Minister of Canada, whether it be Ms. Campbell or 

whoever comes after Ms. Campbell, would truly want to be 

part of this process of solving the equation, whether it be 

Liberal or Conservative, and I'm almost sure it won't be New 

Democrat.  Matter of fact as my colleague says, I'm a hundred 

per cent sure it won't be a New Democrat federal government. 

 

But whichever it is wants to be part of solving this particular 

process, not put in a place of confrontation.  And I am told that 

the FCC agreement, sir, means that they are not binding to 

anything that you do. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, I've 

got a specific topic I want to talk to you about tonight, but I've 

got a few other highlights of some other subjects we'll just 

touch on first. 

 

I was listening the other day when the member from 

Kindersley was asking some questions, Mr. Premier, about 

patronage.  And I'm not going to touch too long on it other 

than, will you stand to your feet, Mr. Premier, and say that you 

kept your promise to the people of Saskatchewan at election 

time, and you said, I do not believe in political patronage and 

there would not be any.  Can you put that on the record just in 

that way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I have, and I repeat it 

again tonight.  I have kept the promise. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Premier, can you really say after the 30 

or 40 names that was written out to you, like the people that 

you know that are NDP supporters -- and I'm not saying there's 

anything wrong with that -- that you put them in high profile 

places, how can you say that you've appointed these people . . . 

there was 30 or 40 names given to you. How can you stand at 

your feet as Premier of this House under oath and say I kept my 

promise and didn't appoint members that are political 

patronage.  Now how can you say that?  How can you possibly, 

within yourself, say that to the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan?  Because it's plain.  As you said tonight, why 

don't we read.  You kept talking to the member from Arm 

River.  Why don't you read the Bill?  On Bill 90, why don't you 

understand it? 

 

Everybody can understand what you've done.  You have named 

many people to jobs, and they're political patronage.  And 

nobody said there was anything wrong with it.  But what was 

wrong with it, Mr. Premier, that you said you wouldn't do it.  

And you keep coming back . . . You said the other day, talking 

to the member from Kindersley, you said well you people done 

this and you started naming names that we've done.  We never 

said we wouldn't do it.  But how can you honestly under oath 

stand up like you 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2629 

do, so sanctimoniously, and say that I kept my promise and I 

didn't do it?  How can you, Mr. Premier, do that?  When you 

did do it.  Names are names. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, this 

reminds me of the kind of debate that says:  yes you did it, no I 

didn't, yes you did, no you didn't.  Because, Mr. Member, I do 

not accept the . . .  you say 40 or 50 names.  I don't want to 

debate this over again. 

 

And I don't mean to be disrespectful of the member of 

Kindersley's . . . I don't want to be disrespectful to the member 

of Kindersley, but I do want to say this.  Clearly this gentleman 

did not even know who or what he was talking about.  Chris 

Banman he referred to as a male, until somebody on this side 

said it was a female.  And then he said, well he's an MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) -- never was an MLA.  

Oh well it didn't matter.  I mean that's what I'm getting at. 

 

The 40 names that you mentioned, most of which either are not 

relevant or not applicable . . . And you see again, if you're 

making the argument that you shouldn't put a defeated . . . I'll 

use a defeated MLA -- NDP or PC -- on a board of directors, 

say of Power Corporation or SaskTel, you can make that 

argument.  I'm not making that argument in your instance. 

 

When I went through the list -- and I can do it again -- of 

Andrew, Berntson, Birkbeck, Currie, Dirks, Domotor, Dutchak, 

Embury, Katzman, Morin, Parker, Rousseau, and on and on it 

goes, I'm not talking about people who come in once or twice a 

month for a day or two and sit on a Power Corporation board of 

directors.  I'm talking about people earning $80,000, $90,000 a 

year -- a year -- in the permanent civil service with absolutely 

not one twit, jot or tiddle of experience in public service at all.  

That is, that is political patronage. 

 

So when you ask me, have I honoured it?  I say in essence yes I 

have.  I have honoured it.  If you say there have been some 

NDP faithful appointed to boards of commissions of Crowns 

and agencies, I agree there have been.  Is that patronage?  Not 

by my definition it isn't.  My definition of patronage is this list 

of people, this list of people, the hon. member from Moosomin, 

Bob Andrew, $97,000 a year. 

 

I say to the hon. member from Moosomin, how about the 

appointment that you gave to Mr. Graham Taylor for Hong 

Kong -- $97,000.  How do you like them potatoes?  Now that is 

patronage -- $97,000. 

 

And this person . . . And by the way, this sounds contradictory 

but I enjoyed Graham Taylor in this House.  I thought he 

contributed to public debate and I enjoyed him as a person and 

I enjoyed debating with him.  I took my whoppings as many 

times as I gave some, if I ever did give any.  That's not the 

issue.  Whether I disagree on the policy, that's not the issue. 

 

I think, with the greatest respect for Graham Taylor, his 

capacity to be a trade commissioner in Hong Kong in the light 

of his previous work experience, of which there was none, 

means that he got the job for one 

reason only -- political pull, pure and simple.  That is wrong, 

and that's what we're not doing. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Premier, I've really never debated you 

very much until about 1982 and you're not the same debater as 

you were then; you were honourable then.  You would stand up 

and say the facts. 

 

Now I'm going to ask you one straightforward question.  Was 

George Hill a political appointment under the Progressive 

Conservatives or not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Was George Hill a political 

appointment under the Progressive Conservatives?  The answer 

is maybe, maybe not.  That's not my beef with George Hill.  

No, it's not my beef with George Hill. 

 

My beef's with George Hill . . . I'll withdraw George Hill.  My 

beef's with the Power Corporation and more particularly the 

minister in charge where the policies that fueled the Power 

Corporation at that time -- Rafferty-Alameda, and the like -- I 

thought and believed then, and still believe, that those were 

wrong. 

 

It so happens, for whatever it's worth, that George Hill and I 

actually went to law school together.  And I think I know him 

probably as well, if not better, than you do, sir.  I remember 

him and Bill Lawton and myself used to be young politicians of 

a certain quality and nature.  I don't want to be admitting too 

much.  On campus I knew him very well and have a high 

regard for him.  But the reality is the policies were wrong. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Premier, you're the greatest person I've 

ever known with such a skill to skate around questions and 

skate around facts. 

 

You're guilty of political patronage and you know you are.  The 

public know you are.  They know you've broken . . . We're not 

going to go on with this much longer except we know that 

George Hill was hired by the Progressive Conservative 

government and when you people won the election in 1991 he 

was fired.  And who took his place?  Did another Progressive 

Conservative take his place or did Jack Messer buy a 

Progressive Conservative membership lately?  Who was Jack 

Messer? 

 

Now I've been through, because these questions that the 

member from Kindersley was asking about the Public Service 

Commission, who was hired, is my critic position, but I've been 

away so much that that's why he named that list.  I've been 

through that 30 to 40 names very carefully and every last one 

of those people, whether he made a mistake or not on which 

one was an MLA and didn't know whether the first name of 

Chris was a lady's name or a man's name -- that can easily be -- 

you're just playing games with the public.  You know that Jack 

Messer was an absolutely political appointment and so was 

Ching and so was the other 30 or 40. 

 

So I'm not going to keep on on that because we know 



2630 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

that you have broken your promise. You intend to break your 

promise because you shouldn't have made it.  You made it to 

get elected, Mr. Premier, and I'm very disappointed in you, 

because you made many promises to get elected in 1991.  You 

were at Outlook, speaking while the election was on, and you 

made promises like this: that you would lower taxes -- in fact, 

you were taped -- and you would improve the '91 GRIP; and 

you would go to Ottawa and get money for farmers. 

 

There was five things you said.  You would create jobs.  You 

would improve health care.  You said it.  And then the first 

question asked from somebody from the 200 people that were 

there at Outlook that night was, Mr. Premier . . . well at that 

time you weren't the premier.  You were addressed and said, 

you've always said that the Tories' essential services are too 

high; what would you do about it?  And your promise was, yes, 

they're too high, but costs are rising, and my promise would be 

to hold or lower.  And you broke every one of those promises 

because those five essential services, which takes in SaskTel, 

SaskPower, SaskEnergy, SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance), every one of them is raised one to three times.  You 

broke those promises. 

 

We'll leave it there but you done it and I want it on the record 

between you and I that you did it.  And you may have had a 

reason to have to do it.  You always stand up in this House, and 

every one of you ministers, and including yourself, you keep 

talking about the Tory deficit we left you in 1991 and you keep 

talking about this balanced budget, about this balanced budget 

in 1982 that we took over from you. 

 

And I ask the page here just to give this to the Premier, please 

-- a page, please.  The Premier might have seen this before 

because I've made a vow here about a month ago that every 

time I speak in Estimates or a Bill, that I would give this here 

to every minister, and I think he's seen it before.  But you got 

the minister of Finance a year ago saying the total debt in 1982 

was $3.5 billion.  Our figure says it's about 5 billion, but we'll 

use your 3.5. 

 

(2030) 

 

Now I just want it on the record, Mr. Premier, that how do you 

call a 3.5 a balanced budget and no debt, as you told the people 

in 1982?  And we took over 3.5 billion by your own admission, 

by your minister of Finance, in Appropriation Bill in June 1, 

1992 . . . or June 30.  And it took me four hours to get it out of 

him, but he finally did.  Now that's not being fair with the 

people.  You take your 3.5 billion and see what . . . that kind of 

destroys your argument that we created the whole $15 billion. 

 

Mr. Premier, the question I'm going to ask you now is by going 

to Bill 90.  Now those others were just comments.  You can 

respond if you want when you get up.  But on Bill 90, I heard 

my colleagues talk about Bill 90 and the contract that's being 

broke.  And you said many times in this House, Mr. Premier, 

that in question period and tonight I heard you say it, that 

things have changed.  What things changed, Mr. Premier?  

What things changed that brought this Bill about, Bill 90?  Just 

tell us in your own words to me directly what's changed that 

caused it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well the first, biggest change was the 

election in October of 1991 of a government dedicated to bring 

fiscal propriety and sensibility to the province of 

Saskatchewan.  I don't quite know whether the hon. member 

from Arm River is quite ready to accept that first thing that's 

changed.  But believe me, member from Arm River, it has 

changed.  There is a government now charged with the 

responsibility of restoration of fiscal responsibility. 

 

I might also say, while I'm on my feet, parenthetically speaking 

about these wild statements about broken promises, I said 4.5 

billion.  You know something?  We actually are below 4.5 

billion.  If you take a look at page 35 of the budget, and you 

can go to Standard and Poor's and you can go to Moody's, who 

have assessed our budget in detail, they'll verify these figures.  

Our operating expenditures for '93-94, our operating 

expenditures for '93-94, Mr. Member, are just slightly over $4 

billion; our revenue is $4.6 billion.  We have an operating 

surplus of 551 million -- $551 million surplus for '93-94. 

 

You know why we have a $296 million deficit projected?  

Because we have to pay $847 million interest payments alone 

this year on the debt which you people left behind.  You see 

my point is, if it hadn't been this mess, this horrible mess from 

which you will never politically recover, nor should you, we 

would have had a $500 million balanced budget surplus.  

Forgetting about a surplus, we would have had $500 million for 

other activities. And that is what is stated right here.  So we 

have listed within our operation. 

 

Now coming back to specifically Bill 90, the other thing that 

has changed is . . . not changed, but has been said over and 

over again on the various rating agencies which you people 

ignored, is Standard and Poor's. And I'll read this to the hon. 

member. 

 

Standard and Poor's simply says this:  The ratings reflect . . . 

referring to our rating, our credit rating just a few weeks ago, 

Standard and Poor's of New York.  The ratings . . . They 

maintained it by the way, the first time that's happened in about 

8 years.  Under your administration they knocked us down, I 

think, 9 times, maybe 7 times . . . 7 times it was.  They 

maintained our ratings and they say this: 

 

 The ratings reflect the government's strong, demonstrated 

commitment to deficit reduction (now note these words in 

terms of Bill 90) and more rigorous management of its off 

budget (off budget) loans and investments. 

 

Now what we're talking about in terms of off loans, budgets, 

and investments is NewGrade, is Weyerhaeuser, is Crown Life, 

is Saskferco, is the $3.9 billion that Ernst Young found to be 

dead weight.  That's what it is.  They say that our continued 

ratings will depend on how we manage the off budget loans 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2631 

and investments. 

 

Now on this particular off budget loan and investment, we have 

an exposure, Mr. Member, I repeat again, of $600 million -- 

$600 million.  Does this not ring a bell somewhere?  Is it 600 

or 6 or 60 or 60 -- it's $600 million! -- $600 million that you 

encumbered the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  How 

dare you do this?  Six hundred million dollars . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . The member from Moosomin, and he says he 

is a responsible Member of the Legislative Assembly in this 

kind of a context, shame on you. 

 

Everybody in America is saying we have to do something with 

this, except these lonely band of 10 MLAs whose head is in the 

sand and simply say, what has changed?  Well I'll tell you 

what's changed, a government that's determined to stand up for 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, a government committed to 

honest and fair accounting, and that's a change that we're going 

to act on and pursue.  By golly, you can be sure of that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, you can stand 

here and holler all you want about the $600 million debt.  What 

about the 3.5 billion we took over from you in 1982?  You 

never want to talk about it -- $3.5 billion.  Now why don't you 

talk about that?  You don't want to talk about it.  Said here by 

your own minister of Finance. No, I'm not going to talk any 

more about it because you know right well you're trying to 

smokescreen me and get off about $600 million.  It's nothing; 

it's peanuts compared to 3.5 billion.  How many millions goes 

into 3.5 billion, my friend?  You think you're so smart sitting 

there talking about, we got this legacy from you people.  Well 

we took over a big one from you.  And how much of this here 

interest every day that comes from your 3.5 billion?  Our 

figures call it pretty near 5 billion, but your own minister of 

Finance said very clear that it was 3.5 billion. 

 

We'll get off that because you and I will get in . . . I don't think 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, 

you're getting louder; I'm getting louder; and I can hold a 

debate on you on this here debt in this province for ever and 

ever until you're not Premier any more. 

 

Now I want to ask you some questions that you have never 

made a stand on; you've never said where you stood. And that's 

pertaining to Bill 38, Bill 38.  We're going to talk about Bill 38, 

Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I heard awhile ago here when my colleague 

from Thunder Creek was asking questions and the member 

from Morse chirped in and he said right to the chairman, can 

you not keep them quiet over there?  Have you not got the 

decency to keep quiet?  I say, Mr. Chairman, have you not . . . 

has he not got the decency to keep quiet or can . . . While I ask 

questions, quit chirping from your seat, and you can chirp all 

you want after I ask the questions. 

Where do you stand on Bill 38 yourself?  Just tell us in your 

own words where do you stand because you've never said a 

comment publicly.  Maybe at your own conventions, but you've 

never said where you stand pertaining to Bill 38. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd be pleased to tell 

the hon. member where I stand on Bill 38.  But before I answer 

that question, I am saddened and distraught that the position of 

the Progressive Conservative Party is that the $600 million of 

the upgrader deal is, in the judgement of the Progressive 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, peanuts. 

 

I find this absolutely shocking that $600 million is categorized 

by the member from Moosomin, the member from Thunder 

Creek, and all of those in the official opposition, as peanuts.  I 

suspected that to be the case.  But when we go to explain this to 

the public of Saskatchewan, now and three years from now at 

election time, or whenever the election comes, we will note the 

fact that you view this as peanuts. 

 

You may view it as peanuts; I view it as $600 million that 

could have been used for schools, and for roads, and for 

hospitals, and tax breaks.  You may say that people in St. 

Walburg should be protesting as they are about taxes and I say 

that if we had that $600 million, which you refer to as peanuts, 

we could have done something for the people of Saskatchewan.  

But you, sir, say it is peanuts. 

 

Now that is what the Progressive Conservative caucus talks 

about -- peanuts.  Well it doesn't surprise me but I tell you that 

is going to be with the Progressive Conservative caucus, that 

phrase, for as long as I am leader and in politics of this 

province of Saskatchewan.  And we'll see which one of us is 

around longer.  I wish you a long, political life, my good friend 

from Arm River. 

 

The question on Bill 38 is very simply answered.  I support it 

as I did when I voted yes in second reading. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Premier, if we keep getting off Bill 38 

and going back in the other comments, it's going to take us a 

long time.  You know right well, Mr. Premier, you know right 

well that $600 million is a lot of money.  And you know that I 

said it's not . . . it's peanuts compared to 3.5 billion.  You know 

I said that and you just try to add it in for your own 

convenience.  And you know right well, and the Premier of this 

province better not keep on using that statement because I'm 

just going to say, like everything else he says, he takes it out of 

context. 

 

Because what I said: 600 million is peanuts compared to 3.5 

billion.  Did you go to school, Mr. Premier?  Because I think 

3.5 billion is a pretty big figure.  And we took that legacy over 

from you and that's all I said.  It's peanuts compared to what we 

took over from you and you try to play the games with it. 



2632 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

You and Bill 38, Mr. Premier, do you . . . How do you interpret 

the meaning of Bill 38.  What is it trying to do?  What do you . 

. . how do you interpret it?  What it really means and what it's 

trying to do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I interpret it just as the Minister of 

Justice has interpreted it on behalf of the government. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- And, Mr. Premier, that's how you've been 

escaping this for six months.  You won't say -- say in your own 

words -- what that is.  Because we know he said it in this 

House what it means.  He said it to . . . definitely to people 

outside the House.  Will you stand here as Premier of this 

province and say it very clearly, how do you interpret . . . 

Surely you know how you interpret the meaning of Bill 38. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I interpret the meaning of Bill 38 in 

the way that the Minister of Justice interprets the meaning of 

Bill 38.  Since the Minister of Justice speaks on behalf of the 

government of which I am currently the member and, for the 

time being in any event, the Leader of the Government, 

therefore the Minister of Justice is my Minister of Justice.  He 

speaks for me.  I accept his interpretation of Bill 38. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Then, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, can 

you tell this House how your Minister of Justice interprets this 

Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I will forward a copy 

of Hansard to the hon. member whenever we can uncover the 

appropriate day of the second-reading speech of the Minister of 

Justice to the member. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So what you're saying, Mr. Premier, that 

you're refusing to say to the . . . You're the Premier of this 

province.  You must be the main person instrumental to this 

Bill being before this House.  You're refusing to interpret in 

your own words what it means and what it'll do.  You're 

refusing to do it.  Is that what you're doing?  You're refusing, 

Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not refusing.  I've 

told the member where I stand on Bill 38 and I repeat again, I 

vote for it, I support it.  He asks me, what does it mean?  I say 

what the Minister of Justice says it means.  Why?  Because I 

believe in the parliamentary system of government.  I believe 

in the cabinet system of government, the solidarity that cabinet 

advances a Bill, defends it, ministers defend and explain it, 

members support or don't support it. 

 

I have a cabinet.  The Minister of Justice, he's explained what 

the Bill means.  It's our explanation; it's the government's 

explanation.  I endorse it.  This is not some sort of a debating 

club, you know, or society where 66 people have 66 different 

points of view.  This is a government Bill, it's a government 

policy, it's advanced by the government.  The government will 

stand or fall on it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Premier, we haven't even discussed it at 

all because you just said you refused to 

tell the people of Saskatchewan, tell this Assembly, how you 

interpret the meaning of Bill 38.  That isn't too much of a 

question . . . too hard a question. 

 

Maybe you don't understand the Bill.  Maybe you don't 

understand.  Maybe you haven't taken time to talk to your . . . 

Maybe you came in here like other members and you voted on 

second reading.  It hasn't passed.  The Bill's a long ways from 

passing.  It's got to have amendments.  It's got to be talked 

about in Committee of the Whole. 

 

And still you're saying here that you cannot say, as Premier of 

this province -- the person, the head man -- you can't tell us 

what you and your cabinet, how you and your cabinet . . . And 

you're the head of the Executive Council; you're the most 

important member on that side and you can't stand up and tell 

the province of Saskatchewan what the interpretation of Bill 38 

means and what it's intended to do. 

 

Now we'll be here all night if you don't answer that question, 

Mr. Premier, and another week besides. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, we can be here another 

week.  In fact I invite the hon. member to stay here next week 

or two weeks, three weeks, take your time.  And if you want I 

will simply take the second-reading speech of the Minister of 

Justice and read it and embrace it as my own.  If that's what 

you want me to do I'll do that and you can be satisfied on it.  

But I'm assuming that at a mature level you'll accept my words 

for the time being, that I embrace his words in Hansard, as 

recorded, as being the interpretation of the government of 

which I'm a member. 

 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, in your own 

words will you stand up and tell us what your interpretation of 

Bill 38 is and what's it meaning to be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, my interpretation is 

that of the Minister of Justice. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, will you stand 

to your feet and tell the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

how you interpret Bill 38 and its meaning, to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan?  Will you do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I suppose I'll continue 

to answer these questions the only way that I can answer them.  

And that is the Minister of Justice has explained the 

interpretation of the meaning of the Bill to the House, the 

government's interpretation.  I'm a member of the government.  

As a member of the government I do not have personal views, I 

have a government view, have a policy view.  I defend the 

government.  That's the way it works. 

 

If the public doesn't like it, we get defeated.  If you don't like it, 

you defeat the Bill.  You put amendments, some get accepted, 

some get rejected.  If you want an explanation of what the 

government policy is, the Minister of Justice has outlined my 

policy, my 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2633 

interpretation and the government's approach.  Full stop, 

period.  Take the next two months and ask me that question if 

you want, that's the answer. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, I'm ashamed of 

you, absolutely ashamed of you.  We've been here since 7 

o'clock tonight talking about, in Estimates . . . the leader of our 

party, the member from Thunder Creek, was questioning you 

continually about Bill 90.  Why didn't you tell him on Bill 90, I 

take the Minister of Justice's stand.  I don't talk about it.  You 

shouldn't be talking about anything.  You shouldn't be 

answering one question in Estimates then.  You should say, I 

take the stand of all my ministers. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, it's only a one-liner or two-liners that the 

Minister of Justice says outside this House and inside this 

House how he interprets Bill 38.  What's so terrible wrong with 

you repeating it?  Why can't you say that one little short 

sentence?  What are you afraid of, Mr. Premier? You don't 

want to be tied in with it?  Are you ashamed of Bill 38?  All 

you can say is, I say what the Minister of Justice says.  Why 

didn't you say that to the member from Thunder Creek?  I'm 

not going to answer or even talk about Bill 90.  I won't even 

talk about it because I take the same stand as the Minister of 

Justice did. 

 

Why are you ashamed to stand up here on behalf of your 

government and say, in one short sentence, this is the meaning 

of why Bill 38 is here and what it means.  There's only a 

one-liner that he uses.  You must know because he says it 

inside and outside the House every day.  And I can't get you to 

say it. 

 

And that's the reason why I got onto Bill 38 because you have 

never made a stand in this province.  The media has never got 

you to stand still for two seconds and get where you stand other 

than you say, I voted on second reading for it.  I voted for it.  

Voted on what?  What'd you vote for? 

 

Mr. Premier, what did you vote for when you stood and voted 

it, as Premier of this province, on Bill 38 the other night on 

second reading?  What did you stand and vote for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all, I don't want 

to get into the interesting discussion that I had with the Leader 

of the Opposition.  But it's not correct what the hon. member 

says because the Leader of the Opposition tonight offered some 

interesting options and observations on Bill 90.  He talked 

about the question of severance, he talked about the question 

about tabling of documents.  These are not second-reading 

matters or speeches.  These are specific questions which 

require a response, so there is a very big distinction here. 

 

But if the hon. member wants to know what to me is the 

loudest and most important word used in this legislature, it's 

one of two.  And that is when there's a matter for this House to 

resolve, the word is either yes or the word is no.  I voted yes for 

Bill 38.  As to the meaning of Bill 38, the Minister of Justice 

explains that to the legislature of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, all I can 

call you is a coward, an absolute coward that can't stand up to 

your feet . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Order.  I want to 

refer the member for Arm River to Beauchesne's and just 

remind him that the language used in the House should be 

temperate and worthy of the place in which it is spoken, and 

furthermore that language should not be inflammatory.  And I 

would ask him to exercise some restraint in the language that 

he uses. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, 

we know that the Minister of Justice has interpreted this Bill 

and it's been talked about all over, that is to protect the 

homosexuals and lesbian people of a place to have 

accommodation and protect them for a job.  Will you agree that 

that's the main part of that Bill, Mr. Premier?  Will you . . . 

when I put it in those context, will you agree with that 

statement?  That's the main issue of that Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, my answer has been as 

I have given it and I will give the hon. member if he wants -- 

but I don't think it'll help any -- I'll give him the entire 

second-reading speech of the Minister of Justice.  It's all in 

Hansard, and he knows what the answer is, and I can add 

nothing further to it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well I don't how I could possibly . . . I can't 

even comment because the comments that I would say about 

you wouldn't be allowed in this House.  And I don't mean curse 

words, either.  I just mean words like I said before.  I can't 

believe it.  I've known you for a long time, Mr. Premier.  I've 

known you since 1976 -- that soon be 20 years -- and I never 

thought the day would come that you would bring a Bill 

forward to this House, and you were scared, frightened to stand 

up and say what the meaning of the Bill was, in your words. 

 

That's your duty in Executive Council.  You're the head man.  

I'll ask you some questions pertaining . . . and it's not clause by 

clause or nothing like that so as it be permissible -- because we 

can talk about, just like we talked about . . . He laughs. 

 

The Premier, when he laughs I've always noticed, Mr. 

Chairman, when the Premier laughs like when he was talking 

to the member from Kindersley the other day, that's when he's 

starting to get upset.  He starts to get nervous.  Because if he 

wasn't nervous, and he wasn't upset, he would have stood up 

and told the people of Saskatchewan in his words what Bill 38 

means, and what it means to the 90-some per cent of the people 

that don't want it, and what it means to 3 or 4 per cent of the 

people that do.  He's afraid of those 40 . . . or 90-some per cent.  

He's frightened of them. 

 

He's frightened of the petitions and the coming in for a 

plebiscite that there's nearly 50,000 names now and there will 

be over 50,000 before the summer's over.  He knows quite that 

there'll be a plebiscite on this Bill.  Do you believe that this Bill 

will protect the lesbians 



2634 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

and homosexual society in the manner in which this Bill was 

intended?  Do you believe that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I do not have officials 

of the Department of Justice here with me to provide legal 

interpretation to what the meaning is of the Bill.  I understand 

it's not gone through clause by clause.  I suggest that the hon. 

member direct his questions to the Minister of Justice who, 

with his officials, will give him specific answers as to the 

clauses, appropriate clauses. 

 

But as for the policy of the government, and the direction of 

our government when it comes to Bill 38, I repeat what I said 

earlier.  I endorse what the Minister of Justice said, in what I 

thought was a very comprehensive and thorough address on 

this very important subject in second reading. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right then, we'll phrase the questions this 

way, Mr. Premier. Do you agree with your Minister of Justice, 

do you agree with him that this Bill will protect the gay society 

in the manner in which it was intended?  Do you agree with 

him on that?  That's a very simple question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I agree with whatever 

the Minister of Justice said, not with whatever the member 

from Arm River says the Minister of Justice says. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Premier, do you know what the Bill 

even stands for?  You must not know or you wouldn't be 

playing games like this.  You know right well that the members 

. . . the Minister of Justice and his lawyers, they've said that 

what this Bill is going to do, Mr. Premier . . . and you know 

that you can talk to any lawyer other than them, anyone. 

 

I haven't talked to one lawyer that agrees with the Minister of 

Justice and agrees with the Justice lawyers, that this Bill just 

will protect a place for these people to have accommodation 

and have a job.  They believe it opens the doors to marriages, 

adoptions, and teachers teaching your children. 

 

Do you believe, Mr. Premier, that I should be discriminated 

upon?  Why should I be discriminated upon, Minister. You talk 

about discrimination always and I know you believe that it 

shouldn't be discriminated.  Do you believe that I and 

thousands like me should be discriminated upon when you try 

to force this Bill on us? 

 

And do you believe that I should be, and my family and my 

friends' families, my constituents' families, and all the people 

of Saskatchewan, if they don't want lesbian, homosexual 

teachers teaching their kids in school, that that should be forced 

upon them, Mr. Premier? Do you believe that, Mr. Premier?  

What about my discrimination?  What about people 

discriminating against me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I understand that 

the hon. member from Arm River has an interpretation of the 

Bill, an interpretation which 

sounds rather peculiar and strange to my ears, but this is a 

matter which he is entitled to.  And I suspect that there may be 

lawyers with differing opinions about most legislation as we 

heard even on Bill 90 today. The very stimulating debate that I 

had with the Leader of the Opposition showed that there were 

differences of opinions in legality there.  The member is 

entitled to his. 

 

Justice department officials and the Department of Justice is 

providing the legislature with interpretations and 

second-reading explanations.  I stand corrected, it is in 

Committee of the Whole and those interpretations are being 

very fully answered as I believe by the Minister of Justice, as 

they should be, in Committee of the Whole.  And I think that's 

the proper area for them to be dealt with. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, do you believe, 

and all the thousands and thousands and thousands of people in 

this province of Saskatchewan, believe in the Scriptures?  That 

they say that this is absolutely, scripturally wrong what you're 

doing.  Are you against them?  Are you against what the Bible 

says?  But this is nothing you have to ask your Minister of 

Justice; it's a personal question to you.  Do you believe what 

the Bible says pertaining to homosexuals and lesbians?  Do you 

believe that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm definitely in 

your hands if you think that we now move into the field of 

consideration of theology and interpretation of theology.  I 

must say to the hon. member that I do believe the Bible.  I 

actually try to read the Bible from time to time.  I try to 

understand it and I'll go only that far.  But I cannot say that as a 

consequence of that that I am an expert in the interpretation of 

the Bible. 

 

We have many religious beliefs of course, Christian 

interpretations of the Bible.  The member may have some in 

some areas; other Christians for very good, valid reasons will 

have a different interpretation.  That is the one beauty of this 

country.  We're free to celebrate our religions the way we want 

to celebrate them and to honour the Bible and the dictates of 

the Bible the way we see fit. 

 

I'm no expert in this and I can't comment on the Bible.  I'm here 

to try to defend or explain the Estimates of the Department of 

the Executive Council and in that context the overall policy of 

the government.  And I can only say, speaking on the question 

of Bill 38, it is part of government policy and the Minister of 

Justice has articulated the position. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I accept your remarks, sir, and that's our 

right in this province, Mr. Premier, to interpret the Bible in 

which way we want to.  But the question I guess that arises that 

there is . . . We have 1 to 3 per cent of the population I 

understand are . . . And I don't know whether those figures are 

right or not, that come from the gay society, but we've already 

got 50,000 and that's seven and a half or 8 per cent of the 

people that have signed the plebiscite or signed a petition for a 

plebiscite.  So that's a pretty large group of people 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2635 

and there's . . . they haven't even been contacted.  I can't find 

anybody, any place in my riding that I talked to about this Bill, 

I haven't found anybody yet that says they're in favour of this 

Bill. 

 

So why are you discriminating against them in their beliefs?  

You're bringing this Bill into this House because a certain 

amount of people believe they're being discriminating upon.  

I've been an MLA for 15 years and I've never heard anybody 

come to my door and saying, here I can't get a place to sleep 

because I belong to the gay society, and I've been fired because 

I belong to the gay society. 

 

You know quite well, Mr. Premier, why this Bill's coming 

before this House.  Because it's open the door just like they did 

in Ontario.  It's soon going to be into our schools.  It's going to 

get into our Bible schools and we're going to be discriminated 

upon.  Why do these people, no matter how you and I interpret 

the Scriptures, how we interpret God's word in the Scriptures . . 

. You have your right, I have my right.  But God's word is very, 

very clear in that Bible.  And it's the same Bible for everybody.  

It's the same one.  You can read it and you can interpret it any 

way you want, but there's thousands and thousands of people 

that are interpreting that this is wrong, scripturally wrong.  

Why are you discriminating against those people that have such 

a strong belief and still you're backing the people, a small 

majority that are saying they're needing help from this 

government to be protected?  But you're going to discriminate 

against everybody else in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I know the hon. 

member feels very strongly about this issue.  And I can 

understand and see his passion in this.  And I think there is an 

admirable quality in the fact that a member would feel so 

strongly about a matter of any nature, but of this nature.  But I 

would say to the hon. member that there are, I think, seven 

provinces which have enacted legislation similar if not 

identical to Bill 38.  We're not alone.  And there is an 

experience of interpretation which is taking place there.  I don't 

think . . . And they're all provinces of all political stripes and 

ideology and with various interpretations of Scripture and the 

Bible.  I think we can watch from that experience.  We have 

watched from that experience and learned from it.  And I 

appreciate the hon. member's concern on this. 

 

Clearly the Minister of Justice has articulated the position of 

the government, which as I've indicated again, does not share 

that same interpretation or concern.  Even at that, the Minister 

of Justice I think has indicated that there will be amendments to 

the legislation once it goes through clause by clause.  I think 

that indicates very much an openness and a willingness to 

listen and to hear people's concerns. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Premier, I'm just going to ask a question 

or two more because I understand the member from Greystone 

wants to ask some questions.  And to accommodate her I'm 

going to ask my 

question . . . some questions later on this. 

 

But I'm just going to ask this one question:  Mr. Premier, I was 

talking to the Minister of Justice pertaining to this Bill before it 

was brought in, and that was in February.  And he said the 

same thing he did to me as he did to hundreds of people that he 

had met, Mr. Premier, that the minister has . . . I asked him: 

what's the intent of the Bill?  And he said it's . . . Well like I 

said before, it's to . . . all it is, very simple.  He said, if you 

would take the politics out of it and just think about all it is, it's 

just a place for these people to sleep, guaranteed a job and a 

place to sleep, and that's all there is to it.  And I said, what 

about what I've heard from many lawyers and concerns about it 

opening up the door for marriages?  And he informed me, as he 

informed in this House in second reading, informed dozens of 

pastors, and I said maybe hundreds of people . . . He met a 

whole group from Caronport Bible school and he promised 

them that this government will never, never, never allow 

marriages.  Now what will you do, Mr. Premier, if this Bill . . . 

and it's going to likely pass in its entirety the way it is.  I hope 

there's some good amendments comes in that will safeguard 

these concerns, but if there's not and it passes in this way and 

the Minister of Justice has only put it in Hansard that this 

government will never allow same-sex marriages -- will never 

allow it -- what would you do if it went to court and a judge 

turned that decision around?  What would you do if it did allow 

marriage?  What would you do?  What would be your answer 

to something like that as Premier of this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think it's best 

that I not answer a hypothetical question for obvious reasons.  

If the situation does arise, we'll then have to figure how why 

and how and what responses, if any, need to be taken. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, I'll tell you if 

you're calling that a hypothetical question when that's the 

whole problem in Saskatchewan, the whole problem out there . 

. . No matter who you talk to out there, soon as you're talking 

about Bill 38, well I can't stand it if it means same-sex 

marriages.  And you say well it's a hypothetical question. 

 

Now you're just been playing games with me all night here.  

We've been going half an hour or more here, and you don't 

want to touch it.  I can see you don't want to touch it, and I can 

understand why you don't want to touch it because you're 

scared of this Bill, and you want to be able to say afterward 

you were on both sides of the fence.  You're going to quietly in 

here vote for it but you won't say. 

 

You won't get away with that, Mr. Premier, and somehow or 

other somebody's got to stand up in this government and say 

how you're going to handle the situation that your Minister of 

Justice has promised to hundreds and hundreds of people -- 

how you're going to handle it to assure the people that this 

government will never allow same-sex marriages through this 

Bill.  How are you going to assure people that, Mr. Premier?  

Are you confident that this Bill will 



2636 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

protect that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I repeat again, the 

Minister of Justice has given an interpretation on this particular 

issue to the member and to the House.  The member can accept 

it or reject it, but that's an interpretation which my officials in 

Justice say, and they speak on behalf of the government. 

 

He now asks me to speculate about some potential future 

decision down the road, hypothetically that might or might not 

occur.  And I simply say that I can't foresee -- as I said with 

respect to our debate, the exciting debate that I had with the 

Leader of the Opposition on Bill 90 -- I don't want to worry 

about issues based on hope or eventuality or predictability.  

There's a certain amount of that but in government you try to 

deal with facts and work on a factual basis, and I think this Bill 

has done so to the best of its ability. 

 

The Minister of Justice has explained the words for the 

members of the House and for the member of Arm River. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, would you 

give your commitment, as Premier of this province, if and 

when this Bill passes in its entirety, would you do as you are 

going to do in Bill 90, not use it until you need it?  Will you 

hold the Bill for a few months until the plebiscite is in, and we . 

. . or till the petitions are all in, and they have the vote, and the 

people of Saskatchewan speak. 

 

If the 60 or 70, 80, 90 per cent of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan vote no on a plebiscite, do you agree with your 

Minister of Justice that we should ignore it, and do it anyway, 

or would you let the people of Saskatchewan speak? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, again the member's 

question is hypothetical because it's based on a set of 

assumptions.  He says what if 60, 70 per cent vote in a certain 

way.  And the question is hypothetical from top to bottom.  It 

assumes that there's going to be a plebiscite.  It assumes a 

result.  And it assumes a response to that.  And I just simply 

don't want to deal in that.  I'll deal with the situation if and 

when it arises. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Premier, all you're doing is what the 

Premier of Ontario did, Bob Rae, just sneak around it, and then 

it comes in, and people said oh, nothing to worry about, and 

now the worries are there.  It snuck into the school system.  It's 

bothering everybody.  It's going to court with the marriages.  

And it's the same Bill as here.  These things are happening. 

 

You should be, as a responsible Premier, you shouldn't be 

calling hypothetical.  You should be able to stand in your seat 

and answer this.  All I can say to you, Mr. Premier, as a 

Christian, and as we do for all people in government, always 

have, we just ask that people listening tonight will pray that 

you will read those scriptures and interpret them in a right and 

proper manner, and do what's right for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

Maybe that's what you need.  You always say, if we believe in 

prayer.  Well I do believe in prayer and I believe God can 

direct you in the right way -- to do what's right for the people in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Premier, I 

have some questions for you about your staff and some other 

related questions about the process that has gone on in your 

government for the past 19 months, regarding dismissal of staff 

within the government as a whole. 

 

My first question is regarding one Tom Brook.  I have a copy 

of the contract you provided during last year's Estimates for the 

services of Mr. Brook.  And at that time you were paying Mr. 

Brook $5,000 a month for very vaguely defined personal 

services, according to the contract.  That contract was amended 

. . . as amended, pardon me, was to expire on August 31, 1992.  

Can you tell me if Mr. Brook is currently providing services to 

you or to your government?  And if so, tell me exactly what he 

does. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Brook in his 

capacity provides, amongst other responsibilities, research 

support to the chief of staff and the chief of staff's people with 

respect to a whole host of public policy issues, 

communication-related issues; also provides a liaison function 

between the Premier, the Executive Council, the cabinet, and 

government MLAs with respect to public policy issues and 

communications. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Premier, 

Mr. Brook owns a consulting company whose business is 

primarily polling.  I ask if Mr. Brook, employed by you, does 

conduct any polling. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- No. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Does Mr. Brook use the 

facilities of the Premier's office and/or the government caucus 

offices at the present time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- In performance of his duties he will 

have an office in the Executive Council chamber.  I'm not sure.  

It's probably in the building somewhere. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  Can you assure 

us then that any of the long-distance phone lines of the caucus 

office or in your office as well is ever used to conduct any kind 

of political polling whatsoever? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the question is 

twofold and not on the target.  The question that the member 

asks is, does he do polling.  The answer is, he does not do 

polling -- doesn't do it for us; doesn't do it for Executive 

Council.  That is what I'm responsible for.  And I don't believe 

he does it for caucus either but if he does, that's a different 

situation, a different vote.  So all I'm answering for is 

Executive Council right now and the answer that I've given you 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2637 

is the answer I've given you. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Am I to understand then, Mr. Premier, that 

Mr. Brook does not do any kind of polling for any part of the 

government at the current time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I've said to the 

member, unless I'm misinformed on this, my advice is that 

there is no polling done by Mr. Brook for Executive Council. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier, I have 

just one last question regarding Mr. Brook.  Can you advise me 

what Mr. Brook's role was in the provincial New Democratic 

Party organization during the past several years, and what the 

reason was for the provincial NDP severing their employment 

relationship with him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well actually, I can't; but even if I 

could, I wouldn't, since I'm not here to answer expenditures for 

the NDP.  And if I am, then you'd better start answering 

expenditures about the Liberal Party and what your 

expenditures are and what some of your executive members are 

saying about your expenditures.  I am here to answer about the 

expenditures of the Executive Council. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well, Mr. Premier, I was asking about 

someone who is being paid by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

some $5,000 per month.  And I was not asking specifically 

about the New Democratic Party but rather the circumstances 

under which he was employed and the circumstances under 

which he left, and perhaps some of the implications for the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan and the monies that they spend 

employing him. 

 

I'd like to ask you some questions regarding some former 

employees in your department, Mr. Don McMillan and Ms. 

Janis Rathwell.  Could you please advise me for what period of 

time these two individuals worked for your office, what their 

specific roles were, what their remuneration was, and to whom 

they reported? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, the officials are 

providing me with some of the very detailed question that the 

hon. member wants answered, and we can provide this perhaps 

even in writing to her a little later. 

 

With respect to Don McMillan, his general duties were at the 

very beginning of the transition, assisting us in transition in 

Executive Council and then after that was more or less under 

control, moving into other agencies as required in transition.  

For example, he was for a while with the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation.  He is no longer with the 

Executive Council or for that matter I think, government, is the 

case.  And as to contracts and pay, we can provide that once we 

have that information. 

 

With respect to Ms. Rathwell, she was involved in Executive 

Council for an early period and now works 

in the Department of Labour as ADM, assistant deputy minister 

to the deputy minister of Labour.  She has been with the civil 

service for a number of years.  She's been with the civil service 

for a great number of years. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Premier, 

could you confirm for us that in the months following your 

election as Premier, that Mr. McMillan and Ms. Rathwell held 

a series of meetings with permanent heads in every department 

of government to discuss lists of employees who they thought 

should be submitted to some political evaluation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I do not have 

knowledge of that and I cannot confirm that, but I have no 

doubt that Ms. Rathwell and Mr. McMillan would on transition 

get evaluation of employees.  That would only be proper and 

prudent for any incoming government to do.  And again not to 

politicize it, especially in the context of what had been going 

on in the nine and half years previously. 

 

(2115) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  Were you 

personally advised of the operations that were being carried out 

by Mr. McMillan and Ms. Rathwell?  And if you indeed were, 

how did you handle that knowledge? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- When the hon. member says, was I 

personally involved, this is a question which is virtually 

impossible to answer, or personally advise.  I have officials 

who advise me, which officials in some combination hereof are 

here. 

 

How do you handle . . . I mean when you ask, how do you 

handle the information, I mean, how do you handle 

information?  It's information which is processed to a premier 

or to a minister to cabinet, and you take decisions based on the 

information which is given or not given to you and you make 

the decisions based on the issue that's before you at the time. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  I'll become more 

explicit.  On March 18 of this year, several hundred civil 

servants, many of them career civil servants with decades of 

service, were discharged by your government.  And now in the 

call for Estimates to departments last fall, you advised 

departments that certain cuts would indeed be required, and 

that's understandable when one is trying to downsize 

government. 

 

Initially those cuts were fairly vague, but nevertheless 

departments were required to submit, as part of the process, 

names of staff whose positions could be cut in this year's 

budget.  Now those names were submitted to your deputy 

minister, who is sitting to your left this evening. 

 

A strange thing happened to those lists, Mr. Premier, between 

the time that they were submitted to your deputy minister on 

Monday, March 15, and when those lists became public 

through the budget on Thursday of March 18.  The funny thing 

that happened 



2638 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

is the lists were changed.  Now names went on and names 

came off, and to many's surprise, some of the names that went 

on the list to be dismissed were also the names that were part of 

the McMillan-Rathwell undertaking that I asked you about 

earlier. 

 

Mr. Premier, I am asking you this evening if you would prepare 

for me . . . if you would be prepared to present to me in writing 

a table of the original lists of employees and positions that were 

provided to your deputy minister by government departments 

in the week prior to this week's budget. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well the answer to that is no, I will 

not.  I will not allow you to go on a political witch-hunt which 

is what you want to do.  You want the names of civil servants 

so that you can go after them, and I'm not going to allow that.  

That's exactly your objective. 

 

Two hundred and eighty-one employees, 281 employees 

received job abolition notices; 159 were unionized, 122 were 

out of scope; 40 CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees) 

and labour service employees, bumps managed internally by 

the affected departments; 45 non-permanent employees and 

employees on initial probation without bumping rights 

affected; 61 employees retired; 99 exercise in-scope bumping 

rights; 5 elected lay off and placement on re-employment list; 

31 elected to resign and receive severance; 6 on definite leave 

who may bump upon return from leave; 19 redeployed 

elsewhere within government; 30 yet to render a decision -- 30 

out of 281. 

 

So I'm sorry, I'm not providing the names for you to be able to 

go through the politics of it.  We want to professionalize and 

keep the civil service as professional as we can. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well, Mr. Premier, there are a lot of people 

who do understand the word purge all right, but they don't 

associate it with me. 

 

I would like to go to your personnel report, number one, and I 

appreciate what was sent over to me earlier this evening.  The 

total expenditures for personnel in your department, Mr. 

Premier, make up $3.6 million out of your total budget of $6.5 

million, which is half of your entire department budget.  And 

there is no other department in government that comes even 

close to this percentage in terms of personnel costs as a 

percentage of total budget. 

 

Would you please explain to the House, and in turn, the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan, what exactly your department's 

personnel does do for $3.6 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I think the member was out of the 

House when I explained this in a very vigorous exchange that I 

had with my good friend, the member from Kindersley, 

yesterday. 

 

You see, what the former 

administration did was this:  when they had . . . well my former 

good friend, the member from Kindersley.  What the former 

administration did, as the special auditor's report identified, is 

they had people in Executive Council located in other 

departments and paid by the departments.  And the result was, 

in global terms, a relatively small size and numerical amount 

allocated to the Executive Council. 

 

Now when the auditor uncovered that and said look, this is the 

wrong thing to do, you should make it accountable, we took the 

auditor's words and we terminated that policy and we then had 

everybody come in who we wanted to come in under the 

Executive Council. 

 

Now the result is that there's a bump-up in terms of numbers, 

allowing you to make the argument that the percentages have 

increased.  It's true.  But if you total in the total numbers of all 

the departmental people, the actual numbers are down, both in 

body count and in dollar count.  So what we're doing is 

following the Provincial Auditor's report and saving taxpayers 

money at the same time.  I would have thought you would have 

endorsed that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Premier, I am delighted to have an 

opportunity to ask you some questions this evening.  It's not a 

question of whether I'll endorse or not.  I've spent considerable 

time endorsing some of the moves of your government in 

trying to provide some, I think, valuable criticism which is not 

usually received with I think much generosity. 

 

Whereas the total budget for the department has decreased 

from $6.43 million last year to 6.53 . . . or pardon me, 6.543 to 

6.531 millions of dollars this year, the cost for personnel has 

indeed increased.  And that represents an average annual salary 

for a hundred people on your staff of $44,000.  The Bureau of 

Statistics report for May 1993 reports that the average weekly 

earnings of workers in this province is $474.40 as of January of 

this year.  That totals $24,670 annually.  Could you please 

explain to me and to the 290,000 people in the Saskatchewan 

workforce what exactly it is your staff does that rewards them 

with almost twice the average salary of the average worker in 

the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well yes I'll be pleased to do it if the 

hon. member would be kind enough to explain to me and to the 

290,000 working people whose average salary in Saskatchewan 

is as she says, why it is the people in her staff get paid more 

than the average pay?  Why is it? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I would be delighted to respond, Mr. 

Premier, because the people in my staff do not.  My office is 

provided with $54,000 annually.  And I have a secretary; I have 

two other people in my office, and their annual salary does not 

exceed the $25,000 a year.  As you can see, three into 55,000, 

which is . . . I would say the gentleman to your left as an 

employee of yours earns two and a half times what my entire 

office gets. 

 

Mr. Premier, I note that you have 15 staff currently seconded to 

your department from other departments, 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2639 

and six of your staff are seconded to other departments.  Are 

there written agreements in place for each of these 21 

secondments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The answer is yes to the question.  

Before I let the hon. member from Greystone slip away too 

easily about the amount of pay for her staff . . . Well, I'll let her 

slip away too easily.  The answer is yes, there are contracts. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  How long have 

these secondments been in place, and I do request  . . . I don't 

expect for you to perhaps have this this evening, but I would 

request that you send over a list of the employees who are 

represented by these figures, what their originating department 

is, what their title and job description in their originating 

department is, and what their title and job description in your 

department is.  Of course I would very much appreciate 

knowing what the commencement date is of these secondments 

and the date that they are intended to end. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, if the hon. member 

will accept my undertaking, we will get something in writing 

over to her in this regard.  I might add that I'm advised by my 

officials this is a process which has been approved by the 

Provincial Auditor, but we will give you the details in writing. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I appreciate that, Mr. Premier. As you are 

well aware and you'd mentioned earlier that there were many 

concerns raised by the people of the province, not just the 

Provincial Auditor, and I'm sure yourself and myself, about the 

way people seem to find themselves throughout government 

and we didn't really know where they were originating from or 

from where they were being paid.  So I think it would be of 

great value to have that information. 

 

Regarding the four reclassifications in your department, sir, I'd 

like the names of the four employees, a copy, please, of their 

job description before their reclassification, a copy of their job 

description after the reclassification, and their monthly salary 

both before and after their position was reclassified to a higher 

level.  I don't expect you to have that at your fingertips, by the 

way. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- We undertake to provide that as the 

member requests. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  This is notes regarding the 

vehicle report, which is, I think . . . I'm trying to find it exactly.  

As I read this answer, you have a total of 11 leased vehicles, 

but I'm just requiring some detail from you, please, if you 

wouldn't mind.  Are these vehicles all owned by SPMC and 

then leased to your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Yes, they are. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Could you provide me with 

the names and classifications of the employees to whom these 

vehicles are assigned, along with the cost of operating these 

vehicles, including mileage 

charges paid for each of these vehicles, as well as the number 

of kilometres travelled. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- We can provide that information too. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Regarding advertising and 

communications, the information you had sent over earlier 

tonight, I note that your department paid a total of $5,647 to the 

firm of Phoenix Advertising Group Inc. for four projects.  Can 

you tell me if your department still uses Phoenix Advertising 

Group for advertising needs, and have you since June 4 of this 

year altered or cancelled any contracts for work that were in 

place with Phoenix Group prior to that date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I'm told that there are no contracts in 

place for about a year with that particular advertising agency.  

In any event, we can also mail over to the member the 

brand-new and very good advertising guidelines which allow 

low-bid, open-tender approaches to advertising. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  I really would in fact . . . I'm 

questioning, sir, does that in fact then include all government 

departments and agencies?  Your policy would cover 

everything. Is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Yes it does. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  What I'm really getting at here 

specifically is that I want to know if any of your departments or 

agencies have since June 4 of this year altered or cancelled any 

contracts for work that were in place with the Phoenix Group 

prior to that date. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- This is the responsibility of the 

Department of the Provincial Secretary which is the centralized 

one area of responsibility.  I cannot answer with definite 

certainty in this area, but I think there may have been some 

changes in the relationships there.  But I don't know that for 

sure. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Do I understand then that 

what you will be able to do is to provide me with this 

information at some future date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I'll have to check with the Provincial 

Secretary on that.  I just don't know. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I know, Mr. Premier, that you have 

considerable experience in this House.  And one of the things I 

did was to look of course historically in Hansard, the kinds of 

questions that you've asked and issues that you've raised.  And 

I do know that it's been of a very wide scope in the past during 

Executive Council when you have questioned premiers in the 

past, one of the reasons that I felt that it would perhaps provide 

me with an opportunity to cover a fairly broad range of areas. 

 

Some of what I'll be talking about now will still of course very 

much be under your purview, but I hope you will entertain 

some questions in a couple of other areas as well. 



2640 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

In media services, and I quote its purpose -- this is subvote 

EX03, and I quote: 

 

 Acts as the central communications and information agency 

for the Government and prepares and distributes news 

releases and summaries.  It also operates the radio and 

television facilities for news conferences and coordinates and 

advises on the preparation of news releases and summaries. 

 

What is the policy regarding the use of the radio room and the 

broadcast facilities in the Legislative Building? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The policy has been for years, not our 

policy but I guess we just follow it, that it's used by the Leader 

of the Opposition and by the members of the Executive 

Council. 

 

(2130) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I understand then that . . . I guess one of 

the things . . . I was under the impression, when I entered the 

Legislative Building I had been told that it would have been 

appropriate for me to have use of this facility when it wasn't 

being used by yourself, your cabinet, or the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

When I attempted to book the facilities on behalf of a group, 

and that group of course was at the legislature this week, the 

hemophilia society, in order to use this room for a news 

conference on June 16, I was told that it was not going to be 

available to me because it was going to be used only by cabinet 

ministers or the Leader of the Official Opposition. 

 

And I really would just like you to offer me an opinion on this 

please.  Would you agree that this facility would have been in 

order for the use of this particular group coming to the 

legislature, given their set of circumstances, the long history 

that they've had in communicating with members of both sides 

of this House, and that perhaps it would have been appropriate 

for me to be able to provide that service to them through you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I'm sure, Mr. Chairman, that any 

member can make many causes for use of the so-called radio 

room.  The fact of the matter is that the Executive Council and 

its various statements by virtue of government, use the room a 

lot.  And it is intended to be that, primarily an Executive 

Council room.  In fact it only arose that the Leader of the 

Opposition would use it in the latter years, latter years being 

the last four, five, or six years.  Before that time it was straight 

Executive Council. 

 

I have to tell you when I was leader of the opposition almost all 

of my press conferences were held right there at the back where 

the current members' lounge is.  Now I know you don't have a 

lounge but there is adequate space around in the building which 

are used to make political points or make your points on any 

issue. 

The issue then becomes where do you stop, where do you draw 

the line?  You open up the radio room and then the Executive 

Council moves to another area in order to guarantee access and 

space. 

 

And I think that there's a reason that can be used here.  But 

when you frame it in the question that you do, in the context of 

the group that you do, I can only give you the response that the 

definition of where you begin to open it up and where you don't 

begin to open it up, I think becomes very fuzzy, very grey. 

 

So there has been a wide opening up as it is, and if one is 

calling for an even wider opening up, I don't know.  I'd have to 

consider that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  I actually hope 

you do, primarily because I keep reminding people that we're 

only tenants in this building and they're the landlords.  Perhaps 

we should keep that in mind because when we checked on . . . 

for the time that was being requested, that room was not being 

used.  And I think that the people of Saskatchewan perhaps 

should have access to their room. 

 

I am quite interested in a memo that I received, dated January 

6, 1993.  And it was from the assistant to the House Leader to 

the House strategy committee.  This came into my possession 

and I was particularly interested in page 3 of this memo.  And I 

will quote from it.  It's under the heading called, "The Liberal 

factor."  The fifth paragraph states, and I'll quote directly: 

 

 I would suggest that a staff person be assigned from the 

House business office to monitor all press statements, public 

appearances, legislative questions, written and oral, and 

speeches by the independent member from Saskatoon 

Greystone.  This will ensure that the House Leader's 

committee will be in a position to respond to any significant 

changes in her behaviour, activities, or criticisms. 

 

Mr. Premier, I do have some questions regarding this memo.  

My first question is: could I possibly be provided with the 

name of that staff member who is assigned to monitor my 

activities, and the amount that that individual is being paid by 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan? 

 

I thought it would be a very nice gesture on my part if I could 

just send next door my entire schedule of events at which I'll be 

speaking, and I could send, of course, a lot of copies of my 

speeches so that their work would be made much simpler. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well I do say to the hon. member, 

with the greatest of respect, don't overstate your importance.  

You know, none of us are watching you and your scheduling.  

And we frankly don't much care about what your scheduling is. 

 

The memorandum really indicates, in the preparation of House 

business, what it is the government should be ready and 

anticipating, which is a very logical, 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2641 

normal function.  You know, what are the opposition going to 

do on the various Bills, question period issues.  What will you 

do as the Leader of the Liberal Party on this issue or that issue?  

Should ministers be ready? 

 

We come in every day with briefing books that thick, by the 

way, trying to predict what you're going to ask; not only you, 

but the Conservative Party.  Yes, we do.  I walked in with a 

briefing book that thick and I've got to tell you, this is day 77 or 

78 and not once has the House Leader's committee predicted 

accurately what either you or the Conservatives would lead off 

with or, for that matter, carry out during the day.  That's all that 

is.  It has nothing to do with monitoring any function of what 

the Leader of the Liberal Party says or doesn't say, you know.  

So if you want to mail us your agenda, by the way, fair enough.  

I don't mind taking a look at it.  But we're not paying anybody 

to look at you or your positions on any basis specifically. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I can take it, Mr. Premier, then, that you 

wouldn't be at all concerned if I read the entire memo and made 

it public knowledge.  I guess I find it most interesting, your 

response. 

 

I guess my sense is I happen to agree with you.  I think that this 

individual's time can probably be spent and the taxpayers' 

money on far more pressing importance, matters of far more 

pressing importance to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I indicated earlier that I really did look forward to the 

opportunity to ask you some questions tonight about the entire 

government.  And I've spent some time, the short time that I've 

been here, trying to look over history because I think history is 

a great teacher.  And I want you to know that in preparing for 

some of the Estimates, and in particular this one, I did review 

your past record both in government and in opposition.  I did 

this to read not only what you said but also the way that you 

said it.  And I'm looking forward to your comments, which will 

be on record for all to read. 

 

Now I hope you will take this in the manner in which it's being 

stated but Philip Snowden's comments will be particularly 

relevant, perhaps, tonight, because he said, and I quote him: "It 

would be desirable if every government, when it comes to 

power, should have its old speeches burned."  End of quote. 

 

Now I am pleased that in the past you took a very broad and 

sweeping approach to these particular Estimates and, based on 

that precedent, I am going to be comfortable in asking you 

some questions about some other departments.  My questions 

to you are on several topics.  My first is health.  Mr. Premier, I 

want to read to you a short quotation from Hansard.  This is 

the quote. 

 

 If you are going to concentrate regions of health care in some 

regions of rural Saskatchewan, it stands to logic that even the 

Minister of Finance can understand that in that 

regionalization a whole whack of rural hospitals are going to 

be 

closed.  Make no mistake about it -- closed.  I tell the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I tell the rural 

communities of Saskatchewan, beware.  I tell the rural 

community leaders and the hospital board leaders right 

now what this government has in store in phase two of its 

unprecedented attack on medicare. 

 

Now the speaker then goes on about how this scheme is termed 

half-baked and concocted.  But it is not so much the content of 

the speech that may surprise you, Mr. Premier, but the speaker.  

And those comments were made by you, the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale.  And yes those hospitals did get 

whacked.  Not by the government being criticized in the 

passage I just read to you, but by you who was at that time on 

the attack of the previous administration. 

 

So I guess the starting point for my questions is fairly simple as 

I clearly agree that it appears that the scheme is concocted and 

to many people in rural Saskatchewan feels very half-baked 

because they don't feel that they have the specifics to 

understand what's going on. 

 

Would you please comment on your statement.  And I would 

appreciate it if you could do so without using the words other 

guys, deficit, or that was then and this is now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well I have no doubt that the hon. 

member would appreciate if I did not refer back to history.  But 

I'll tell . . . It's okay for her of course to refer back to history 

because she's reciting history to me.  But not good enough for 

me. 

 

And by the way, I wanted to say this parenthetically since the 

rule was in question period that you didn't have to answer any 

brown-bag-envelope material that slipped out from your office 

as you portrayed the Senate.  None the less I have to answer 

this in the context of the brown bag to you.  But let's leave that 

as an aside. 

 

I want to tell the hon. member what I said then, I believed then, 

and I believe today about what was before us then, totally.  

What we have here before us is something brand-new -- 

something different, something positive, and something which 

is designed to save medicare and health care, something that 

the Liberal Party is not for.  Laurence Decore in Alberta is 

campaigning for user fees.  Laurence Decore believes that we 

need to go to user fees. 

 

You and your party introduced user fees in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  You introduced them in 1967 to 1971 as a 

mechanism to save, they felt, medicare.  I opposed user fees in 

'67-71 as I will oppose them when you advocate them again, as 

you will advocate them again come the next election. 

 

What we're proposing is a new philosophy for health care.  The 

hon. member smiles because there are two choices here that is 

open to the government and to the hon. member opposite.  You 

can allow the current system to remain the way it is, in which 

case the cost 



2642 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

of it will be so heavy that the whole process will collapse and 

with it the fundamentals of health care will be endangered.  

You can either do that . . . And by the way see the MRIs 

(magnetic resonance imaging) in Edmonton and in Calgary, 

and the Decores of the world, advocating user fees.  The 

Liberal approach.  You can either do that or in the alternative, 

you can go about working with the people to developing a new 

system where there are conversions, where there are new 

models of health care centres and wellness models, using 

district boards, not for regionalization, but district boards in the 

sense of making sure that there is empowerment of people. 

 

Now those men and women, when they were in power had no 

such plan.  I was speaking to the point.  I'm sure I don't know 

the exact quotation, but I'm sure it was to the Elmer Schwartz 

report at the time, is the issue that was before us.  That was a 

straight, bang on, closure scenario, with no wellness, no 

prevention, no nothing else attached to it.  We opposed it.  

Health care opposed it and ultimately the government never 

proceeded with it.  There's a big difference. 

 

And to me, I think the approach that we're taking is the right 

one.  It's the one which involves people empowerment.  It's 

going to be painful.  It's not easy, and there are people who 

oppose it, there's no doubt about it.  You and your party 

opposed this when we introduced medicare in 1962.  The 

Liberals and the Conservatives had 8,000 people, Keep Our 

Doctors -- KOD -- that infamous point in history.  There'll be 

those who oppose it.  I understand that. 

 

But we think it's a change which is worthwhile and it's a 

change which is substantially different, and substantially 

important in the context of what we're trying to do, which is to 

save our health care system in the face of growing costs, in the 

face of advanced and differing medical technology. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Premier, 

I'm going to take this opportunity to inform you of some things, 

and this is probably one of the reasons why there are so many 

people who no longer have trust in what you say.  And that is 

that what you say too often is filled with falsehoods.  And I 

shall tell you why, sir. 

 

You had all the different members who were nominated 

candidates in Saskatoon in the 1991 election, being interviewed 

by the Star-Phoenix.  And when it came to their responses on 

health care, not one of them had the courage to respond to say 

what they would do.  There was one person running as a 

nominated candidate in Saskatoon who indicated precisely 

what I would and would not do in health care.  And I'm the one 

person on record who indicated that research shows that user 

fees do not work, Mr. Premier.  That the research in fact points 

out that user fees are not the way to go. 

 

And I am on record, unlike the people in your caucus from 

Saskatoon, in saying precisely what in fact the Liberal Party 

would do.  The premier, Ross Thatcher, really did believe that 

there was a disservice done by 

the CCF-NDP (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New 

Democratic Party) when they taught people in the province that 

health care was free.  There's no such thing as free health care.  

And in part, part of what you're attempting to deal with now, 

sir, is the fall out of people being taught that it costs nothing. 

 

I happen to believe in the wellness model.  As a party we 

articulated what it is we needed to do.  I have asked on many 

occasions in this legislature, why would you not take the 

opportunity to do what was done in the past.  Medicare didn't 

just happen.  It unfolded.  I was born in the first health region 

ever developed in Saskatchewan, ever put forward in 

Saskatchewan, the Swift Current health region.  And it 

unfolded.  Those health regions were generalized across the 

province after some were tried on a pilot project basis. 

 

And that's what I've asked in this legislature, is to give people 

of the province of Saskatchewan an opportunity, because they 

are willing to participate in the change, they understand that 

health care has to change but they want to be participants in the 

process.  And you have the gall to say this evening, to use the 

words empowerment, empowerment of the people. 

 

Well that's precisely what we're wanting to talking about, that I 

want to talk with you about tonight.  Because last year in your 

health White Paper, Mr. Premier, you argued that you wanted 

to create health care districts, a health care district Act that 

would allow for greater community involvement.  And then 

what you did in your Act was to have a minister given the 

power to create boards arbitrarily. 

 

Under your health plan that you've put onstream, you are the 

one that has set the targets, determined the funding and made 

all of the important decisions affecting health care.  So where is 

the empowerment of the people in all of this?  Where are the 

local people supposed to have influence and to have input in 

such a system? 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. 

member started off her portion of Estimates by giving a 

quotation about old speeches should be burned.  I hope that she 

takes that to heart for herself.  On August 22, 1990, in the 

Regina Leader-Post, the hon. member, the Leader of the 

Liberal Party said the following, quote:  I'm not going to tell 

everybody in Saskatchewan they deserve to have their own 

hospitals.  End quote.  And she admits it today. 

 

She went on to say, quote, October 1, 1991, Prince Albert 

Daily Herald: Haverstock indicated one way to cut costs 

would be to eliminate the construction of new hospitals in 

smaller communities, replacing them with referral centres and 

clinics.  End quote.  Did you say that? 

 

October 2, 1991, Star-Phoenix, quote, Haverstock:  health 

premiums based on income would be implemented by a Liberal 

government.  End quote.  Did you say that and still support that 

or is this 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2643 

something you're going to burn? 

 

How about the May 13, 1992, Star-Phoenix.  This was the 

discussion we had I think last year during Estimates.  Quote:  

although Haverstock said she doesn't agree with deterrent fees 

former premier Thatcher introduced, she credited him with at 

least recognizing that the health care system needed fixing.  

End quote.  Some fixing job the Liberals did from '67 to '71.  

By the way, there are many of these around. 

 

So I think there's going to be lots of bonfires around.  Maybe 

I'm going to have to have a few bonfires, but I think the 

member from Greystone's going to have a pretty big fire too 

and the fire about her health care position. 

 

She asks about empowerment, where is it specifically?  The 

empowerment is there.  The legislation, as the member full 

well knows, contemplates elections of the health care districts 

which, by the way, many people now want to enter into and are 

accepting with a lot of interest and enthusiasm.  And at the 

same time, what happens with the question she says about the 

figures because local people are saying to us we want to know 

what the rough parameters of the guidelines are. 

 

A lot of the criticism was, and still is, we're not getting enough 

information from the Department of Health.  We'd like to know 

specifically what a wellness centre means, what the level of 

funding is going to be, what the bed ratio percentage is going to 

be with respect to funding -- all of those figures.  That's what 

the Department of Health endeavoured to do.  They're not 

chisels in stone.  They can be changed and they will be 

changed as we develop and embark upon the new role of 

partnership. 

 

Now what confuses me about the member is she either supports 

the partnership and says so, and actively says so and votes and 

works with us to achieve it, or she says that not everybody in 

Saskatchewan deserved to have their own hospitals, end quote, 

meaning that they should be closed down.  Now maybe it's 

possible that both can be adopted.  Not in our scenario.  We'd 

like to think that there can be conversions, but you cannot have 

it, with the greatest of respect, all ways. 

 

You can't have it where you're saying on the one hand, I'm 

going to tell the people of Saskatchewan like it is.  And I 

remember during the debate in the leadership . . . leadership 

debate on television, exactly that was your position.  Your were 

very front up, you should be closing down rural Saskatchewan 

hospitals.  And it's quoted here and there are many other quotes 

which are about. 

 

In fact, on September 27, 1991, what caused the hon. member 

to . . . and today to change a little bit is this, during the 

campaign.  I have here the Leader-Post, September 27, 1991.  

Headline says, health care statement was politically stupid -- 

federal Liberal official. 

The president of the federal Liberal association says Lynda 

Haverstock's pronouncement on health care was, "the most 

politically stupid thing I ever heard."  Dwight Strain 

admitted he was only going by what he heard on the radio, 

but that was all it took for him to launch an all out attack 

on the Liberal leader.  Strain said that talk about too many 

rural hospitals falls in the same category as the federal 

Tories dismantling of rural Canada through actions like 

post office closures. 

 

On Wednesday, Haverstock accused the government of 

building hospitals as a form of constituency patronage.  

She said a Liberal government would halt hospital 

construction projects and use small town hospitals for 

basic emergency treatment and recuperative and palliative 

care.  The Battlefords' Strain, who is also director of the 

Liberal's provincial executive in The Battlefords and a 

candidate, said the only good thing about her plan is that it 

won't come to pass because she won't win.  He said her 

pronouncement reduced her chances of winning to city 

seats only. 

 

Now I'm not here to try to debate or to embarrass you.  I am 

here to make the point that . . . No, really, because, to the 

member of Greystone, every time I say something, you know, 

you do it in such a condescending way and I don't know what 

to do.  I keep on prefacing my remarks by saying I don't mean 

it, I'm sorry, that's the way I speak. 

 

What's difficult is getting a consistent line from the Liberal 

Party on anything -- on anything from you.  You argued, for 

example, that there should be no more rural hospitals.  Your 

federal Liberal president said that was politically stupid.  

Today I don't know whether you're still on that position or on 

something else.  I don't think anybody in Saskatchewan does.  

My guess is that it's typical Liberal.  They'll promise you a 

BMW in the driveway and medicare at the same time if you'll 

elect us.  That's my guess.  Pardon me? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What about a Lexus? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Or a Lexus even and medicare at the 

same time.  That's gone, long gone -- that's gone.  So you 

know, this is the problem that I have in answering on the 

Estimates, the question.  Because if the position is, look, we 

need to revise and revamp and reorganize, if that's your 

position, then we're all ears as to how we can better do it.  I tell 

you that very genuinely.  Because we are venturing into 

unchartered territory ourselves. 

 

If, however, it is this kind of an opposition game, we're all for 

it but there's a different and better way to do it and are walking 

both sides of the street, then it's straight, old-style, old-time 

politics. 

 

You see, it's like the position on Bill 38 that the member of 

Arm River and I had the debate -- I'm all for it in principle but 

the words are no good, so therefore I can't vote for it.  So you 

get those who are 



2644 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

for the provision and those who are against the provision.  I'm 

all for negotiating a better deal but I'm not for this particular 

Bill on Bill 90.  You know, one step forward, one step back. 

 

The hemophiliac situation, which you brought to the attention 

of the public.  Now this is a very sad situation. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I brought it up two months ago . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- That's right.  And you brought it up 

two months ago.  The Conservatives brought it up two months 

ago. 

 

But I, by the way, will level the same criticism to you in this 

regard too.  And I will.  And I will for a very simple reason.  

Because I think this is graphic and it's on a question of health 

care.  I'll tell you why. 

 

This tragic situation which begs for resolution, being resolved 

the way it is being resolved on a province-by-province basis, in 

effect means that in health care, in health care, depending upon 

the fiscal capacity of the province involved, some Canadians 

get benefits and others don't.  Surely to goodness, in building a 

country, what we need is a national policy on this AIDS 

(acquired immune deficiency syndrome) hemophiliac situation 

-- a national policy which involves the federal government. 

 

Now I'm not being political.  In its wisdom, the former 

government said it had to be a federal responsibility and 

entered into that agreement in 1991.  Now some provinces have 

said they're undertaking the full responsibility of this.  This is a 

principle which, no matter how meritorious in this 

circumstance, if adopted in health care matters across the piece 

leads to a patchwork-quilt health care system.  So I use this as 

an example, another example, of the, yes, I support a national 

health care system -- which is what I'm sure you would say -- 

but there's got to be special attention for this particular group or 

this particular cause. 

 

And this is an old game in politics; it's the oldest political game 

in the business.  It's the oldest political game because, when 

you're in opposition, what you want to try to do -- I'm sure this 

is what the Liberal Party's manual to you is -- is don't pick up 

any of the hot potatoes, and agree with everybody on 

everything.  Well it's very, very difficult for government to 

respond to those kinds of questions and comments in these 

circumstances. 

 

So I say to the hon. member here that, if the question is 

empowerment and the nature and the direction of the 

empowerment, and she supports that in principle . . . and by the 

way, I'd like to ask my Acting House Leader, how did the 

Leader of the Liberal Party vote on the health districts Bill?  

Do we know?  Can you remember?  Well all right.  The record 

will show whether you voted for it or against it.  But I mean, if 

you voted for it, that's agreement in . . . Did you vote for it?  

Did you vote for it? Pardon me? 

An Hon. Member: -- I'll let you know when you sit down. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well anyway the hon. member will 

not say whether she voted for it or against it, but it doesn't 

matter.  If she voted for it, then it's a vote in second reading in 

principle in support, and we would very much welcome her 

suggestions, her positive suggestions. 

 

But what I would like her to do is to try to put to an end to the 

game which takes place, which is the game which says, I am 

for the health districts in principle but this is what I am against.  

Which, of course, picks up the operation of those that are for 

and those that are against.  And that, I think, is the oldest 

political game in the history of the books. 

 

So, what I want to say to the hon. member from Greystone and 

to the members of the House here, is that what is important to 

understand is that we are here embarked, we believe, in this 

health care reform on an exciting -- it's challenging and it's 

difficult, I grant the Hon. Leader of the Liberal Party that -- a 

reform. 

 

All kinds of health care specialists are watching us with 

admiration and cheering us on in hoping that we can achieve 

this without too much disruption.  That it'll be disruptive is, I 

think, inevitable.  All change is. 

 

I come back to my 1962 experience about change in the way in 

which medicare was conducted -- that was disruptive.  But the 

issue is a change which is worthwhile for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And if it's change that is 

worthwhile for the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 

then we should all be onside. 

 

You should be onside.  You should be giving us specific ideas 

as to how we improve the issue of empowerment; how do we 

improve the issue of the resolution of the various dichotomies.  

And the hon. member opposite will know, for example, that 

beds and technology have changed very, very dramatically. 

 

Three years ago . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon me?  

No record of a vote for the Bill.  So there's no . . . The member 

was not present for the standing vote on this Bill in second 

reading.  And if in this context . . . You know, I'd like her to tell 

us whether she's for it or against it. 

 

And if she gives me and the House the classic Liberal position, 

I am for it in principle but this is what's wrong with it, then I'll 

know that you're fooling, you're joshing, you're pulling my leg.  

You're really not for it.  You want to follow the Alberta Liberal 

style which is the style . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . no, no, 

the Alberta style of user fees for the core doctor, core health 

care services which are very, very dynamic. 

 

I would really suggest to the Liberal Party what is most 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2645 

important for the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan, given their 

very bad history in health care reform in this province, I would 

suggest to the leader and the member from Greystone, with the 

greatest of respect, that what she should do is have a very clear, 

precise position on the fundamental principles of health care in 

the 1990s and stick to it.  Don't worry about what federal 

Liberal officials might say.  Don't worry about the attacks 

because believe me, I've got them within my party and outside 

the party a lot.  But you got to do what is right.  You got to 

continue on and do what you think is right and that's the new 

politics.  And I really think that the hon. member opposite, with 

the greatest respect . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order.  Before the committee rises 

and reports, I just want to remind the Premier that he should 

not refer to the presence or absence of members or specific 

members for votes or otherwise. 

 

It now being 10 o'clock, the committee will rise, report 

progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:03 p.m. 

 

 


