




















































Hansard: March 17, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 391 

 March 17, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a 

petition here to present on behalf of diabetics: 

 

 To the Hon. Legislature Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

Legislature Assembled: 

 

 The Petition of the undersigned citizens of the Province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 That Diabetics have recently been singled out by the 

Government's Drug Plan as being unique by virtue of the fact 

that they must now pay virtually the full cost for insulin, 

syringes, and needles and; 

 

 That these costs, imposed without consultation, are an undue 

and unfair burden on this unique sector of our society and; 

 

 That Diabetics must bear huge costs associated with their 

medication, treatment and sheer survival which is without 

comparison to other diseases and; 

 

 That this unfair and regressive initiative is totally contrary to 

the principles of medicare namely universality, accessibility 

and comprehensiveness and; 

 

 That this measure is in direct contradiction to the 

government's stated objectives of implementing a wellness 

model. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

Government to reverse its decision to single out Diabetics in 

the drug plan by asking them to pay the costs of their 

medication and that your Honourable Assembly withhold 

consent from any government proposal to which will have 

the effect of discriminating against Diabetics compared to 

others whose use of drugs to sustain life is mandatory. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitioners are from Gull Lake area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have some 

petitions and I will read the prayer. 

 

 To the Hon. the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

Legislature Assembled: 

 

 The petition of the undersigned citizens of the Province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

That the government plans to close hospital facilities with ten 

beds or less or less average daily census; 

 

 That the government has already contradicted other promises 

made to seniors by raising several taxes, cancelling the 

Senior Heritage Fund, increasing the drug prescription plan, 

and has made many other harmful decisions that have caused 

undue hardship to Saskatchewan senior citizens; 

 

 and that the decision to close these hospital facilities is being 

made without consultation with boards, families, and 

communities. 

 

 Therefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Honourable 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the government's 

decision to close hospital facilities with ten beds or less, 

which will seriously reduce the emergency health care 

required in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are mostly in the west-central 

part of the province.  I could name Wilkie, Landis, Unity, 

Kerrobert, Macklin, and a few others, Mr. Speaker, and they 

certainly cross the whole spectrum of the political scene.  

These are not all . . . 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a number of 

petitions as well that I'd like to present this afternoon.  They 

deal with the gross revenue insurance program and how the 

government has made changes in that program that have 

rendered it ineffective. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  If the member has petitions to table, 

he should table them.  And I just want to remind members that 

it's been established fact that you only read the prayer and not 

the preambles to the petition.  That has been established by 

previous Speakers and I just want to remind members. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I therefore would like 

to present this petition this afternoon with respect to the GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) program.  They come from 

primarily the western part of the province -- Unity, Senlac, 

Salvador areas of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have 

petitions to present on behalf of Saskatchewan people today.  

They deal with the health sector, and it's one that's been 

previously read into the record so I won't go through the 

preamble. 

 

These people, Mr. Speaker, are all up and down the west side 

of our province, towns like Wilkie, Handel, Tramping Lake, 

Unity, Landis.  As I said, Mr. Speaker, all over the west side of 

this province.  I so petition. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have  



392 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1993 

petitioners here from Wilkie, Scott, Unity, Fox Valley, and 

Golden Prairie.  These petitioners are asking that the . . . they 

humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased 

to cause the government to reverse its decision to single out 

diabetics in the drug plan.  And that's what these petitioners 

have to present today. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Today, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to join my 

colleagues and present petitions with respect to the drug plan.  

These people are from south-western Saskatchewan, Tompkins 

and Gull Lake area, and I'll simply read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

Government to reverse its decision to single out Diabetics in 

the drug plan by asking them to pay the costs of their 

medication and that your Honourable Assembly withhold 

consent from any government proposal to which will have 

the effect of discriminating against Diabetics compared to 

others whose use of drugs to sustain life is mandatory. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have as well a 

petition concerning health care concerns from the Fox Valley, 

Liebenthal, and Golden Prairie communities of my 

constituency.  And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to reverse the 

government's decision to close hospital facilities with 10 beds 

or less which will seriously reduce the emergency health care 

required in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7), they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to reverse 

the government's decision to close hospital facilities. 

 

And 

 

 Of Aldersgate College of the city of Moose Jaw, in the 

province of Saskatchewan, praying for an Act to amend its 

Act of Incorporation; and of Bethany Bible Institute of the 

town of Hepburn in the province of Saskatchewan, praying 

for an Act to incorporate Bethany Bible Institute, and to 

amend an Act to incorporate Mennonite Brethren Church of 

Saskatchewan. 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 

The Deputy Clerk: -- Mr. Swenson, chair of the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts, presents the third report of the 

committee which is hereby tabled and filed as sessional paper 

no. 73. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

only going to say a few words on behalf of my role as chairman 

of this report. 

 

This report took some time to finish in it's entirety.  I would 

like to thank all the members of the committee.  Many of the 

government members worked very diligently at putting 

together the report.  I'd like to thank the Provincial Auditor and 

his staff, the comptroller, those people that were able to help us 

contribute to putting it together. 

 

I think sometimes, Mr. Speaker, that because this report is 

obviously almost two years behind, that sometimes it's difficult 

to deal with issues that are that far behind, and I think one 

should applaud the government for making moves to speed the 

process up. 

 

I think our committee has put some things in this report that in 

the future will mean that taxpayers in this province will be able 

to view the Public Accounts of this province in a way that they 

can understand better, that they can understand the workings of 

government in a more cohesive fashion. 

 

And certainly there's areas that we touched upon, thinking 

about the Crown corporations and in the future how they will 

report themselves.  They are issues that didn't pertain to that 

particular year.  But I think it was important that the committee 

be allowed to explore many options in reviewing its material. 

 

And once again, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say on behalf 

of myself as chairman to those that worked so hard to put this 

report together, that it's been a pleasure to work with them on 

this report. 

 

I move, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 That the third report of the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts now be concurred in. 

 

It's seconded by the member from Regina Victoria. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

associate myself with the remarks of the Leader of the 

Opposition in bringing forward this report and just to add a few 

additional comments if I might. 

 

One, this report being tabled at this point means that the 

committee is essentially up to date in the matters that have been 

referred to it by the Legislative Assembly.  I think that the 

committee deserves to be commended for having done the 

work to bring us up 



March 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 393 

to date and we look forward to dealing with the new auditor's 

report when it comes forward in April. 

 

I think that's a significant improvement that we're now up to 

date in consideration of auditor's reports. 

 

Secondly, the committee spent some considerable time dealing 

with the question of its mandate, operating principles, and 

guidelines.  And I think that it's fair to say that the committee 

functions as well as any committee in Canada, or any Public 

Accounts Committee functions. 

 

I think it's fair to say that there are disagreements on the 

committee and that the members of the committee have 

disagreements on issues of policy.  But having said that, the 

committee does function relatively well, and again as well as 

any committee in the country. 

 

One of the significant issues that confronted the committee and 

that the chairman talked about was the question of 

accountability for Crown corporations.  One of the 

recommendations that the auditor made to us was that the 

Legislative Assembly should be presented with a budget or a 

financial plan for all of the Crown corporations, in fact for all 

100-plus government entities which receive public funds, and 

that those financial plans then also be discussed by the 

Legislative Assembly at the same time that the Legislative 

Assembly now does the budget and the estimates for the 

government departments. 

 

We agreed as a committee that the concept of a financial plan 

has merit and needs further review.  We also felt though that 

the concept needed further discussion or needed further review.  

Even the auditor in his own words stated that the level of detail 

that would be presented in the financial plan is something that 

would have to be judiciously discussed, assessed, and the 

committee agreed with that, that although the concept has 

merit, that a lot of review needs to take place. 

 

And therefore the committee made the recommendation in the 

report to the Legislative Assembly, and hopefully the 

government will follow through on this, that this question of a 

financial plan be discussed by the Provincial Auditor in 

conjunction with the Crown Investments Corporation, the 

Minister of Finance, and also to seek the opinion of the 

Institute of Chartered Accountants of Saskatchewan and the 

provincial audit committee. 

 

We think that such a report and those discussions will help 

move us forward in the area of Crown corporation 

accountability.  That was a significant issue; it's an exciting 

proposal.  It's also a new proposal, Mr. Speaker.  It's not 

something that's been raised before by the Provincial Auditor.  

It's not something that's been raised before by the government 

as to Crown corporation accountability, and we look forward to 

dealing with the issue. 

 

I also might mention that it's not one of the standards or 

principles of the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants 

whose standard and principles we 

normally follow or hope to follow in the presentation of Public 

Accounts, but it's a new undertaking, not one that's been 

discussed by them; nevertheless we feel comfortable in looking 

at this issue further. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think all in all, the improvements that have been 

made in the last year of public accountability are significant.  A 

great distance has been covered in a short period of time.  I 

think it's fair to say that, as in the case of the financial plan, that 

more needs to be done to improve accountability and that 

standards and principles will always evolve and the committee 

and the Legislative Assembly will always have challenges 

before it in terms of trying to achieve the bottom line, and that 

is accountability of this Assembly and the government to the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan as to how their dollars are spent. 

 

I also want to thank the auditor and the Clerk's office for their 

participation in the committee, and the comptroller's office, and 

also those previous committee members, Mr. Speaker, who 

have left the committee but have made their contribution. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I don't know if this falls within the rule of 

anticipation and whether I'm letting the cat out of the bag, but I 

anticipate that there will be further changes on the committee, 

one of which may implicate the present chair of the committee.  

And I don't know if I'm telling any secrets, Mr. Speaker, but 

certainly I think the chair has come into a situation for the last 

year and a half as chair of the committee under very difficult 

circumstances and trying circumstances without any experience 

in the committee and I must say that he has performed his job 

well and is a credit to the committee, and we should thank him 

for it. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- And that concludes my remarks, Mr. 

Speaker.  Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that 

I shall on Friday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Economic Development in 

Saskatchewan's attempt to attract Piper Aircraft to our 

province: (1) how many consultants were hired to help attract 

Piper; (2) which firms were involved; (3) what are the names 

of their principals; (4) how much money was paid to these 

consultants; (5) was Owen Mitchell, the former acting 

president of SEDCO, involved; (6) how much did Mr. 

Mitchell charge in expenses for travel, lodging, 

entertainment, communications, while involved in the 

project? 

 

Thank you. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 



394 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1993 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, and members of the Assembly, it gives me a great 

deal of pleasure to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, in your 

gallery, Mr. William N. Witting, the Consul-General of the 

United States responsible for Alberta, Manitoba, 

Saskatchewan, and the Northwest Territories. 

 

Mr. Witting is a career official in the foreign service of the 

United States with at least 17 years experience, both abroad 

and at the State Department in Washington.  He spent the 

1990-91 academic year pursuing national security studies at the 

Canadian National Defence college in Kingston. 

 

In previous experience he's been posted in Cairo, Egypt; 

Damascus, Syria; reporting on a variety of matters of concern 

to his home country -- macro-economic and energy 

developments among other things.  He has a master's degree, a 

Bachelor of Arts degree in international studies from Johns 

Hopkins, and speaks French and Arabic. 

 

It was my pleasure to meet with him this morning to discuss a 

number of matters of mutual concern.  I found him in the short 

time that we were together both insightful and very courteous. 

 

And on behalf of all the members of the legislature I'd like you 

to welcome our guest today, Mr. Witting. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I would just like to join with the 

Premier on this side of the House and welcome Mr. Witting to 

our legislature.  I want to particularly welcome him here on St. 

Patrick's day because an awful lot of us, with some Irish 

background, know that we have a lot of friends in the United 

States.  I want to congratulate Mr. Witting and the people of 

the United States on the election of their new President and 

wish them very well. 

 

We are the largest trading partners in the world and we look 

forward to expansion of trade and more trade.  I know there are 

some serious deliberations with respect to the implementation 

of the North American Free Trade Agreement.  But all parties 

are looking seriously at it and I just want to tell you that we are 

very supportive of the kinds of things that we can do that are 

mutually beneficial between Canada and the United States. 

 

And I'd like to welcome you here, sir.  Good Luck. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  First of all, happy 

St. Patrick's day to you.  I was sort of expecting you dressed in 

green today, but that didn't arrive. 

 

Anyway, it's so very rare that I get to introduce guests from 

Meadow Lake because nobody seems to want to drive that far.  

But it gives me a great deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to 

introduce to you and through you to 

the Assembly some people who are responsible for the reason 

I'm here.  And I don't mean in this Assembly; I mean the reason 

I'm here on this earth.  I'd like to introduce to you my parents, 

Mr. Speaker -- John Sonntag, on the left -- if he'd stand, please 

-- and Dorothy Sonntag on the right.  And if you'd join with me 

in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- And with them, Mr. Speaker, is some 

long-time friends of our family as well, from Goodsoil, 

Saskatchewan, John and Erica Gurski.  If you'd stand too, 

please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 

Assembly, a couple that's seated in the west gallery, Greg and 

Kelly Mikolas from Melville, presently. 

 

I, a number of years ago, had the pleasure of teaching Greg.  

He comes from the community of Gerald and he attended 

school at Esterhazy High School.  He was also active in the 

1986 campaign, on my behalf. 

 

And so I'd like to wish them as well a happy St. Patrick's Day 

and welcome to Regina.  And I hope that your stay here has 

been fruitful.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Impact of Tax Increases and Lay-offs 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier.  Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Premier 

of our province confirmed the fact that his government has no 

plans, no analysis, and no idea, Mr. Speaker, of what 

tomorrow's tax grab will do to Saskatchewan's economy or the 

people that live here. 

 

And I must say, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier seemed to take 

great pride in that.  He didn't know the answers; he didn't care.  

He doesn't care what his tax grab will do to Saskatchewan's 

economy or the people that are in it.  I mean there it was.  We 

start up the rhetoric, we start up the blame thrower, we add a 

little humour and everything will be okay, thinks the Premier. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it's not okay.  Mr. Premier, it's not okay.  

There's some real effects out there in your massive tax grab is 

having on the real people of this province.  Business groups are 

saying that higher taxes mean certain death for the provincial 

economy.  The Saskatchewan Association of Taxpayers is 

saying raising taxes is like using kerosene to put out a house 

fire. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, my question is: don't you agree that 

Saskatchewan businesses, Saskatchewan farm 



March 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 395 

families, Saskatchewan families that are being taxed to death 

by your government, don't you agree that any further tax 

increases will put it -- to be very mild about it . . . would be 

slightly counter-productive?  Don't you agree, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 

for that question.  And I obviously agree that no government 

wishes to impose tax increases or, for that matter, have 

expenditure reductions. 

 

However I would say to the Hon. Leader of the Opposition that 

this is something he should have thought of, together with his 

colleague, the member from Estevan, instead of embarking on 

a nine-year binge of wild spending, bankrupting or almost 

bankrupting the province of Saskatchewan.  In fact in the 

words of Mr. Grant Hodgins, yes in the words of Mr. Grant 

Hodgins, he used that word exactly, the case when he was on 

this side of the House, saying that the province was on the 

verge of bankruptcy from the inside Treasury Board. 

 

Now what we have to deal is with this mess that you have left 

behind for us.  We have to deal with that.  That's our lot in life.  

I didn't create it.  The people of Saskatchewan didn't create it.  

And we're doing it in a sensible way with compassion, with 

stimulation where possible, with economic activity.  We're 

doing it in expenditures, we're doing it in reorganization of 

government. 

 

Unfortunately, given the huge profligacy and waste that is the 

legacy of your government, there will have to be some taxes.  

Those will be carried out compassionately, fairly, and 

competitively, and unlike you, sir, I do believe that the people 

of Saskatchewan and the economy is resilient enough to even -- 

as they prove in this election -- to outlast you and your doom 

and gloom. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Premier, all due respect, you're not in opposition any more.  

The political rhetoric that you used to throw out in this House 

when you sat on this side simply doesn't work any more.  

Simple fact is, Mr. Premier, that you have instituted tax grabs; 

you are going to institute more tax grabs; and real 

Saskatchewan people are saying they've had enough. 

 

The Saskatchewan taxpayers association says that your tax 

hikes are going to send more people out of the province, the 

very thing that you used to fight against, Mr. Premier.  The 

chamber of commerce is saying that raising taxes is not an 

effective way of bringing the deficit under control, and I quote. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, your answers would indicate that you don't 

care.  Mr. Premier, my question is:  in the absence of any 

studies, Mr. Premier, will you not agree with people like the 

chambers of commerce, that increasing taxes will do more 

harm than good.  In 

the absence, would you agree with that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, this is the same line of 

questioning that the hon. member endeavoured to discuss 

yesterday.  The answers which I gave him yesterday -- I might 

add unlike the answers that he gave us when he was on the 

treasury benches -- are the same today; they're consistent two 

days in a row.  And we have done the best studies that we can.  

We've taken into account the economic impacts. 

 

But I do say to the hon. member opposite:  the option that you 

would have us pursue, of course, is a deficit and a debt which is 

already out of control to such an extent, sir, that you would 

want to have, in effect, the bankers and the others of this world 

shut this province down, thanks to your actions.  And I'm 

saying to you that that simply is just not on. 

 

And I say to you and I say to your former leader:  it is simply, 

wildly incredible for you and your party, knowing the 

tremendous damage that you've inflicted on this province and I 

say on this country as a result of that nine years, to take the 

position that you have.  That is simply not credible.  Please, in 

order to gain some credibility, give us a sensible question based 

on the reality or, if you will, at least some sensible alternatives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Speaker, the Premier is asking for sensible 

questions.  The questions being put today to the Premier are the 

questions that people all over this province are asking each and 

every day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- An example, Mr. Speaker, a small-business 

man, city of Regina, today in the paper saying that his industry 

is absolutely worried sick.  And it was one of those industries, 

if the Premier cares to check into it, which he campaigned 

alongside of in 1991 saying that harmonization would hurt that 

particular industry in a big way. 

 

Well this small-business man in Regina is saying everybody in 

his industry is worried sick about what the Premier is going to 

do to him tomorrow. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, my question.  Do you understand what this 

gentleman is saying today, that he can't take another tax hit; his 

industry can't take another tax hit.  Do you care?  Or are you 

simply going to take a political shot at this small-business man 

in downtown Regina that's saying his whole industry is at risk 

because of you, sir.  Are you going to do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the question that the 

member puts to me is do I care.  The answer to that, simply put, 

is yes I very much care, as I'm sure the hon. 



396 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1993 

member opposite cares.  And that's why last year in the budget 

we provided a reduction for small-business people.  That is 

why in this budget, when it is read tomorrow, there will be, as 

best as we can, given our financial circumstances, further 

inducements for business. 

 

That is why we are adopting a responsible attitude.  That's why 

we're not going to have megabucks spent on megaprojects, 

because we can't do that.  For example, like Saskferco, as an 

example that the former premier would know all about; 

something which he now apparently doesn't feel quite as 

strongly about given his acceptance of a board of directors of a 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I really can't hear the Premier's 

answer and I wish the members would give him an opportunity 

to answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  If I may say 

so, I can understand why they don't want to listen to the 

answer.  I wouldn't want to either if I had nine years of record 

like that. 

 

And finally I would say, to close off my answer, in addition to 

all of these things we've done and we're attempting to do, we 

have above all a realistic attitude toward financing.  We are not 

going to adopt the attitude that the former premier did when he 

said in 1983 in New York, quote:  Saskatchewan has so much 

going for it that you can afford to mismanage it and still break 

even.  There's a change going around here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Premier stands 

in the House today and calls for a responsible attitude.  Well 

maybe, Mr. Premier, when you were campaigning in this 

province in the fall of 1991 and you said to Saskatchewan 

people 4.5 billion is enough, there will be no new taxes, maybe 

the responsible attitude, Mr. Premier, should have started then. 

 

Because you are doing exactly the opposite.  That's called 

betrayal, Mr. Premier, betrayal.  There was no responsible 

attitude at all. 

 

Now at the same time you said to Saskatchewan people, you 

said to Saskatchewan labour, that you were there to protect 

them.  The former administration had done some downsizing in 

government.  You said that was absolutely the wrong thing to 

do. 

 

Well surprise, surprise.  Today, Mr. Premier, you're about to 

slash government employees -- another betrayal of your own 

actions. 

 

Question:  Mr. Premier, this betrayal will also have effects on 

Saskatchewan people, on Saskatchewan's economy.  Perhaps 

you could hearken back to your opposition days and tell us 

what effect these firings will have on Saskatchewan people.  

Would you do that, Mr. Premier? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm assuming by that 

question that the Hon. Leader . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Please give him a chance to 

answer the question, all right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  I 

was going to say again to the hon. members opposite, I can 

only assume by that question that there's an underlying 

assumption by the official opposition, the Conservative Party 

of Saskatchewan, that there should be no attempt to try to 

rationalize or reorganize government services from the point of 

view of making it efficient.  And that is his position; it is not 

our position. 

 

He also asked me to hearken back to the campaign of 1991.  

Well I think of that campaign very, very often very favourably.  

I don't know whether the Leader of the Opposition thinks about 

that campaign very often very favourably.  But if he doesn't, 

perhaps he should think about this letter which his Minister of 

Finance wrote to me at the time that I asked him to give us 

what the true budget figures were, upon which we could make 

our promises. 

 

And Mr. Hepworth, who was the minister of Finance at that 

time, said as following on page 5 in the letter that he mailed to 

me, quote:  As you can see, there are numerous factors at play 

that must be taken into consideration.  On balance, however, I 

see no reason to alter our target of $265 million deficit for 

'91-92. 

 

That is what the minister of Finance in your government said, 

and that is what we predicated our statements on.  But as you 

know, that the moment we won the election and opened the 

books, it wasn't 265 . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order.  I want to ask the 

member from Wilkie to please come to order. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Now, Mr. Premier, what we're talking about here 

is the responsible attitude that you talked about. 

 

I remember very clearly, Mr. Premier, that you said downsizing 

of government was the wrong thing to do.  I remember the 

howls of derision from over on this side of the House when the 

former government was downsizing. 

 

I would say to you, Mr. Premier, that that's not the type of a 

responsible attitude that Saskatchewan people want to see.  I 

say that's betrayal.  Perhaps we can have just one question 

answered today, Mr. Premier, just one.  One question 

answered. 

 

Obviously these job cuts that you're going to announce today 

are budget driven.  There's no question about that.  Then why 

are you making this announcement, this budget announcement, 

today instead of tomorrow at the budget speech? 



March 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 397 

Is it because, Mr. Premier, like you said on CBC (Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation) radio this morning, that you feel 

that the conditioning of the public attitude is important.  Is that 

it, Mr. Premier?  Is that the responsible attitude -- the 

conditioning of the people today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the question, as I try to 

detect it from the speaker opposite, is why is an announcement 

being made today?  And my answer to that is so that the public 

and the Leader of the Opposition and the House will know the 

details, today and tomorrow, because the Minister of Finance 

will address in her speech the same aspects involved. 

 

I think that is only fair and proper and I think that a lot of 

people's jobs and occupations are at stake and they should 

know as best and as quickly as they can. 

 

I would close, Mr. Speaker, by saying -- I don't know how 

many times I've said it, but I repeat again -- this is what we 

campaigned on, this is what we campaigned on.  First things 

first, common sense financial management.  Secondly, new 

direction . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I can't hear the answers either.  

I've asked members to please come to order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I've never seen an 

opposition in the entire Commonwealth that is so allergic to a 

dose of truth as these people are.  Take the dose of truth. 

 

A little shot of truth and a little shot of reality is a hard thing 

for the Conservative Party of Saskatchewan to take, but I can 

tell you, you get used to it and you kind of get to like it. 

 

I'm saying take a look at our campaign promises and you'll see 

what we're doing is we've turned the corner and we are 

rebuilding this province along the lines of compassion, growth, 

and cooperation.  That's what we're doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, how 

do you know when the Premier of the province is using crass 

politics?  It's when he smiles and laughs at Saskatchewan 

taxpayers.  You know very well, Mr. Premier, that this is 

simply a feigned statement that the government is taking some 

hurt too, when you go chop the livelihoods of Saskatchewan 

workers away. 

 

Well, Mr. Premier, perhaps you can answer this question then.  

Maybe you can do this without a smile on your face.  How 

many cabinet ministers are getting axed tomorrow along with 

the hundreds of government workers that are being axed today?  

Can you tell Saskatchewan families, the ones that you stood on 

the steps out here and defended a couple of 

years ago, that you're going to chop some cabinet ministers 

along with the breadwinners in their families?  Are you going 

to do that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I hope I don't offend the 

hon. member for smiling, but I actually believe that my smile 

reflects not only my general belief that we're going in the right 

direction, but my belief that the people of Saskatchewan 

support us in the direction we're heading. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And when the hon. member says that 

when I got up and said to the people on the steps of the 

legislature that we're going to have fewer cabinet ministers, I 

remind the hon. member opposite, we did.  Your former leader 

had 25 or 26 cabinet ministers.  We are significantly and 

dramatically reduced.  Now as a result of the reorganization, 

after the session is completed, there will be appropriate action 

taken by this government in consequence of our actions in this 

regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier.  

Mr. Premier, we didn't get an answer.  How many is it going to 

be?  Is it going to be one, two, three, four, five?  How many of 

your ministers of the Crown are going to share the pain with 

Saskatchewan taxpayers tomorrow? 

 

You started with 10 and you bumped it to 18, Mr. Premier.  

And now you're saying to the Saskatchewan worker, to the 

government employees of this province, the people that make 

about $30,000 a year, that you can afford 18 cabinet ministers 

which cost nearly half a million bucks apiece.  That's what 

you're saying, Mr. Premier.  Do you think that's a fair trade-off 

for Saskatchewan taxpayers tomorrow, to keep all 18 of your 

cabinet ministers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, again I find this to be 

personally an incredible line of questioning coming from a 

party which I . . . was it 25 or 26, Mr. Leader of the 

Opposition?  How many did you have loaded up at high levels?  

At one time in your caucus you had everybody either a cabinet 

minister or a Legislative Secretary.  I think the only person 

who had no job was poor old Lorne McLaren, the MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) from Yorkton.  And I 

often wondered what he did to alienate the member from 

Estevan. 

 

And you've got the audacity to get up and talk to us about size 

of cabinet.  We've got one of the smallest cabinets in Canada.  

And I've said to the hon. member opposite, as I say to him 

again:  first things first; let's define the priorities and the 

objectives as reflected in the departments and do it thoughtfully 

and carefully and then adjust in accordance to that.  The 

session is 



398 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1993 

ongoing.  We'll work through this session and make the 

appropriate decisions.  And I can tell the hon. member, the 

people of Saskatchewan know for sure that our decision will be 

taken in their best interests and not what the member opposite 

suggests. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, in October of 1991 you said it was 

in the best interests of Saskatchewan people to have a total 

budget of $4.5 billion and no new taxes.  You said it was, sir, 

in the best interests of Saskatchewan people to have fewer 

cabinet ministers. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, you have an opportunity here.  You have a 

choice to make to show that you care; that you care enough to 

downsize your cabinet as you chop hundreds of jobs out of the 

public service.  You have a choice, Mr. Premier, where you can 

show some leadership.  Not at the end of the session to look 

after your buddies in the treasury benches, but to do it at the 

same time that you do hundreds of Saskatchewan families.  Mr. 

Premier, you're the one that made those choices a long time 

ago.  Live up to them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, again this is an 

absolutely incredible line of questioning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1992-93 fiscal year, operating expenditures for 

the government approximately were about $4.25 billion.  So 

that a $4.5 billion budget, roughly speaking, should be enough 

to run the government, barring unforeseen circumstances.  

Unfortunately it's not enough, 4.5 billion.  And the reason that 

it's not enough because of the debt built up by the members 

opposite. 

 

The $4.25 billion operating expenditures is eaten up by the 

$750 million in interest payments as a result of your debt each 

and every year, thus the deficit that we have got to tackle.  

That's the circumstance.  So don't say to me, we're not living up 

to our election promises -- we are.  We introduced a surplus 

budget of 225 million last year which would have been a 

surplus if it hadn't have been for the $15 billion scandal that 

you left behind for the people of Saskatchewan.  Shame on you 

for having done that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier:  well, Mr. Premier, it's interesting how you always 

drag up the former administration.  Well I can tell you, I can 

tell you, Mr. Speaker, that at least, at least, Mr. Speaker, the 

public service in this province knew where they stood with the 

former administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I'd like to quote from Hansard of April 22, 

1991; this is the member from Riversdale talking about the 

record of the former government as far as downsizing a 

government: 

What is equitable about your government's choice to cut . . . 

(jobs) . . . but at the same time your government has refused 

to cut one single . . . minister . . . 

 

Your words, Mr. Premier, Mr. Member from Riversdale, such a 

short time ago.  Mr. Premier, what is equitable about your 

government's choice to cut jobs but at the same time you, sir, 

refuse to even remove one of them -- the very ones that you 

were over swearing in at Government House this morning -- 

you refuse to remove even one.  Why is that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I've already indicated to 

the hon. member with respect to the budget reorganization and 

how we propose to handle the government reorganization as an 

ongoing continuum, including a consideration of a number of 

issues, size of the legislature, and so forth.  So I say to the hon. 

member, stay tuned as further things unfold. 

 

But I also want to say to the hon. member that what I said then 

is absolutely true and fulfilled by me today because we have 

reduced the number of cabinet ministers from the size that you 

had.  We reduced . . . Oh yes, you people, you people had 25 or 

26 cabinet ministers, you had 13 or 14 legislative secretaries, 

everybody was on the public dole except poor old Mr. Lorne 

McLaren.  You're doggone right we reduced it, and we did it 

responsibly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I say 

to you and I say to this House that it's absolutely a disgrace and 

a shame that a Premier of this province that such a short time 

ago would stand in this House and make this type of 

pronouncement now says, now says that he is not betraying 

Saskatchewan government workers, Saskatchewan families. 

 

You had concern then, Mr. Premier, because you wanted to win 

an election.  You had concern then because you wanted to be 

the Premier of this province.  And I say to you, Mr. Premier, 

it's just like your studies on the economy and taxes.  It's a 

charade and you don't care.  And today you are willing to fire 

hundreds of Saskatchewan workers, and it's one more big 

charade, and you don't care.  Prove it, Mr. Speaker, to those 

people today.  One last chance today, Mr. Premier.  Tell people 

that you're going to at least dismiss one of your 18-member 

cabinet for Saskatchewan voters today.  Do that, sir.  Show 

you've got the courage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 

opposite persists in his line of questioning which of course is 

his right to do.  The answer which I've given, I've given 

through the entire question period here, which I believe is a 

logical and a correct answer -- the comparison of records, what 

we have done by way of reduction, what we are doing by way 

of reduction, what we will be doing by way 



March 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 399 

of reduction. 

 

The hon. member can use any kind of words to characterize 

that.  All I can tell you is that the actions of the members 

opposite spoke a heck of a lot louder and more effectively than 

their deeds.  Our actions, in terms of trying to get control of 

this deficit, regenerate the economy and get the province of 

Saskatchewan turned around to a brighter day, speak louder 

than his words do too. 

 

And I say to the hon. member opposite, he's got one of two 

choices.  You know, if I were to give any free advice to the 

Leader of the Opposition and Conservative Party, it would be 

to say this.  It would be to say this.  The first thing you could 

do is finally admit to the people of Saskatchewan what you did 

from 1982 to 1991-92.  Admit it, apologize, wipe the slate 

clean, and then you would have credibility in not only your 

criticism but your positions.  And unless and until you do that, 

Mr. Leader of the Opposition, I'm afraid to say I do not accept 

anything with legitimacy of your questioning in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 38 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

questions 85 and 86 put by members, I would request they be 

converted to motions for returns (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motions for Returns (debatable). 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 3 -- An Act 

respecting Health Districts be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for the 

opportunity to rise and join in the debate on a very, very 

significant Bill, a Bill that is very . . . in significant ways going 

to alter the landscape of Saskatchewan, and not necessarily, 

Mr. Speaker, to the betterment or to the wellness of the people 

of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It's interesting to note, I'm sure, that the viewers and those 

people who will be reading Hansard, the strategy on the part of 

the government in terms of doing some of their darker deeds as 

it were in the middle of the night, in the cloak, in the cloak of 

the hoopla that has been established with the upcoming budget.  

What have we witnessed this afternoon, Mr. Speaker? 

 

We have witnessed a Bill which many of the members opposite 

would rather that it go away.  And now we have the Minister of 

Justice introducing The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

Amendment Act right at the time when it is probably going to 

escape notice, probably going to escape as much scrutiny as 

possible. 

 

And then secondly, Mr. Speaker, we find that the government, 

half an hour before the House started, saw fit to inform us that 

we would be resuming debate on The Health Districts Act on 

the second readings in the adjourned debates on that.  So, Mr. 

Speaker, I find that kind of interesting that this would be a 

strategy that members opposite are adopting. 

 

However, to proceed directly, Mr. Speaker, into the debate at 

hand, and I know that you were wondering when I was going to 

get to it, I will now share some thoughts with you that I have 

and the opposition members have on this Bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in preparation for the few remarks that I 

have, I took the time to read Hansard and check up on some of 

the remarks made by the Minister of Health in her second 

reading speech.  And I want to try to start off with something 

positive.  I notice that the first thing positive that came out 

during her remarks happened in the second last paragraph of 

her remarks where she states, first of all, that health reform is a 

means to achieve our goal.  I'll come back to that. 

 

Then she continues on and says, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 We need a system that is more coordinated and integrated to 

deal with the problems that I've indicated to you, and a 

system that is capable of providing a broad range of 

comprehensive services within a district. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, on the face of it I would say to Madam 

Minister that I agree, and I think any reasonable thinking man 

and woman in this province would agree that those are 

admirable goals that we're going to have to have a look at if we 

are going to continue to deliver a top-notch health system in 

this province.  So we have no particular problem with that 

statement. 

 

We are apprehensive however, Mr. Speaker, about the 

statement that I introduced here first of all, that is that when 

she, the Minister of Health, says health reform is a means to 

achieve our goal.  Mr. Speaker, that causes me concern.  Our 

goal, I would interpret, is the goal of the 



400 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1993 

Minister of Health, is the goal of the Premier, is the goal of the 

government, but, Mr. Speaker, more importantly is the goal of 

the Minister of Finance.  And that is where my concern is. 

 

I don't think that that plural pronoun of "our" goal is inclusive 

of the citizens of this province.  Therein lies our greatest 

apprehension -- the motivation.  What motivates these people 

to do what they are doing?  And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, 

that when the people of this province -- and they are in great 

numbers -- begin to question the motives of the government, 

then the government hopefully will be able to reassess some of 

the means to that end that they have, which I submit to you, 

Mr. Speaker, and to the people of this province, has very little 

to do with wellness.  It has very little to do with changing over 

the model of Saskatchewan from the sickness model to the 

wellness model, but rather, Mr. Speaker, to reduce the funding 

of the Government of Saskatchewan so that the Government of 

Saskatchewan can come in with a little bit better balanced 

books. 

 

And I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the people of this 

province that the pain that is going to be inflicted upon 

communities and many of the residents and citizens of this 

province is going to go for naught.  Because I don't think that at 

the end of the day, from what I've seen in the programs and in 

the plans of this minister, are going to do that.  I don't think that 

we are going to find that there are going to be cost savings. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, when I take a view of what this plan is 

all about I find that there are too many of the initiatives 

proposed by this minister, proposed by the Minister of Finance, 

too many of the initiatives that are counter-productive -- 

counter-productive.  They're not going to save money; they are 

going to cost money. 

 

And during the course of my remarks I want to bring that to 

their attention, that if they are going to continue on this goal, 

that they listen to the people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I couldn't help but notice also in their 

remarks -- and I'm looking at Hansard of March 10, page 243 

and so on -- I couldn't help but notice how the Minister of 

Health began her remarks.  And she goes back, as the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) are tending to do, to the good old days 

of Tommy Douglas, 30 years ago. 

 

She begins by saying, some 30 years ago, Mr. Speaker, our 

province showed leadership through Tommy Douglas to 

establish the medicare system.  But then she goes on, Mr. 

Speaker, and tries to rationalize what this government is 

proposing to do to the current health care system. 

 

And it's recognized by everyone that we do have a very 

valuable health care system that is probably in need . . . is in 

need of a continual updating to make sure that it will continue 

to survive in a form that is going to give qualitative health for 

the people -- qualitative, affordable health to the people of the 

province. 

But then they try to rationalize and cloud the issue and still stay 

in touch with Tommy where she continues to say: 

 

 Tommy Douglas recognized that this was only the first step 

in terms of medicare because more recently he pointed to the 

need to revamp and reorganize the entire health care system. 

 

And I think people should be cognitive of the fact that the 

minister now is trying to rationalize this major, major 

restructuring and perhaps gutting much of the work that 

Tommy Douglas did.  And she's trying to rationalize it by 

quoting Tommy Douglas or suggesting that Tommy Douglas 

had a two-tier kind of an approach to the health care system.  

First you set it up; then you try to destroy it by revamping it.  

Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that that is something that people 

will be able to look through. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, in her remarks, the Minister of Health also 

indicated that in Saskatchewan we chose a developmental and a 

consultative process.  We tabled a vision paper, she says.  A 

vision paper, I would suggest to you, clouded with many 

cataracts and diseases and so on, that diabetics are going to be 

having to suffer as a result of some of the de-insuring of insulin 

and so on, among other things that she has already done. 

 

But she says that we are a consultative process, and I want to 

pick up a little bit on that.  Did she consult with the 

optometrists?  Did she consult with the diabetics?  Did she 

consult with the chiropractors?  Did she consult with the hard, 

grass roots level people?  And I'm going to suggest to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that she did not.  Although in her remarks further on 

she does indicate that she actually had meetings, Mr. Speaker, 

where she says: I have personally attended meetings at 

Langenburg, Shaunavon, and Neilburg. 

 

Well whoop-de-do, Mr. Speaker.  This is a huge province with 

many, many folks and she has, she admits, consulted with three 

of those particular communities.  I know, Mr. Speaker; I was in 

Eastend at one of her so-called consultative meetings where she 

was not, but rather sent her bureaucrats to deliver the message.  

She was not there.  The people of Eastend said to the member 

from Shaunavon, please get us a meeting with the Minister of 

Health.  The minister of . . . from Shaunavon committed 

himself and said, certainly, certainly by the end of two weeks 

the Minister of Health will be here. 

 

Two weeks later in question period I asked the Minister of 

Health, did you consult, did you acknowledge the fact that 

these people wanted to speak to you, that they wanted to talk to 

you personally?  And she said no, not yet.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

this was in spring and here we are . . . or in fall, pardon me, and 

here are almost six, seven months later and she still has not 

kept the word of the member from Shaunavon.  So the 

consultative process I am very much in doubt about. 



March 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 401 

Mr. Speaker, the other point that I want to bring out on some of 

the concerns that I have picked up from her remarks are that 

she says: 

 

 For the first time in the history of Saskatchewan what we will 

have are boards that will have flexibility within global 

funding. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is something that has to be raised; that 

is something that has to be picked up.  We will have the 

"boards that will have flexibility within global funding".  In 

other words, Mr. Speaker, what we're seeing here is that she's 

saying the boards will get a global amount of money.  The 

Saskatoon Health Board, the Regina Health Board, the west 

central, the P.A. (Prince Albert), those that have been 

established and others that are going to be established will have 

a certain amount of money, a finite amount of money. 

 

And I stress again, Mr. Speaker, that finite amount of money is 

going to be less than it was last year.  It's going to be less than 

it was the year before because, in actual terms, Mr. -- not only 

in actual terms; in budgetary terms the money is going to be 

reduced. 

 

So we're going to have a board now that's going to have less 

money, less money available.  So the boards are going to 

obviously have to make decisions.  If we have less money 

available, that's obviously going to mean that we will be able to 

render fewer services. 

 

Assuming though, that with the amalgamation and so on that 

there will be some cost savings, there's going to be less money; 

there will have to be fewer services; we're going to have to cut 

back on something.  What are the cut-backs going to be? 

 

And therein lies the dilemma, Mr. Speaker, as far as the 

offloading of responsibility and the offloading of actual 

funding, which I will be getting into in a little bit. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that we are . . . it's 

unfortunate that we are called upon today to debate the 

principle of this Bill because this Bill clearly has no basis to be 

in this legislature, this principle that we're talking about.  In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, the central principle of this Bill, in my 

opinion, is simply an extension of the principle of the entire 

NDP government's political agenda. 

 

In my heart I think and I feel that this is the motivational 

driving force for what this Minister of Health is doing because 

of the orders that she has received from the Minister of Finance 

and from the Premier. 

 

So the NDP government's political agenda, I am going to try to 

show -- and I already have I believe -- this agenda is based, 

unfortunately -- and I say this not with any kind of glee -- I 

think this agenda is based on unfairness.  I think it is based on 

misinformation.  It is based on hardship and blame -- blame as 

we see in every question period whenever a question is asked.  

It's always blame the other guys, blame somebody. 

So, Mr. Speaker, that is what this is about.  This government 

proves it is prepared to go to almost any lengths to avoid taking 

the responsibility for public policy in this province. 

 

So instead, this Bill reflects the NDP government's desire to 

shift responsibility everywhere, everywhere, except upon itself.  

And in this case, it's shifting responsibility onto the centralized 

health boards that I was talking about a little while ago.  In 

other words, everyone else is to blame except the NDP 

government itself. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have here an article from the Star-Phoenix 

of March 4, 1993, where some of the people in the province are 

responding about the "Proposed health legislation too late, 

RMs claim." 

 

And one particular quote is from a Richard Anderson who is 

the mayor of Kerrobert.  He claims that not only is it too late, 

but: 

 

 "We've had no direction at all on how to do this . . ." 

 

 "It's tough.  They (in other words the government) should 

have had some framework on how to do this a long time 

ago." 

 

I've had also some people from the Melfort area have told me 

that yes, the government has handed a ball, but they haven't 

told us any rules and they haven't told us where we're supposed 

to go with this ball.  There's a sense of uncertainty, a sense of 

lack of direction. 

 

Now I know the Minister of Health chastises me when I say 

that because at one point she says we're accusing them of being 

heavy-handed, the next time we say, well you got to give us 

more direction.  But the heavy-handedness, Mr. Speaker, 

comes in with the bigger framework -- the bigger framework 

where these people, these boards and so on, are being forced, 

are being hamstrung to operate under.  And within the 

framework, within the parameters of that, they are being told, 

oh yes, you can do what you want; you have the freedom to 

make your own decisions.  You have the freedom now of either 

raising your taxes or closing this facility or doing away with 

that service. 

 

That's the type of operation under which many of these folks 

are now having to operate and it's unfair, Mr. Speaker.  It's 

unfair to these folks.  They're not very keen on getting on with 

it. 

 

Now I could talk a lot about a particular clause in the Bill that 

says that there must be 8 elected, 10 elected, and 6 non-elected 

and so on, the numbers of the make-up of the board so that the 

government can still ultimately keep control of the board. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it's coming to my attention now that these 

boards are having a great deal of difficulty getting people who 

are willing to let their name stand on this board -- not that 

they're not motivated to be private citizens that volunteer.  The 

volunteers within 



402 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1993 

this province is extremely strong.  It's well-founded; it's 

deep-rooted.  But the problem that these folks are having is that 

they realize that they will be the front men.  They will be the 

axe for the Minister of Health, so that the Minister of Health 

can say, well I didn't do that; I had no hand in that; that was not 

my decision. 

 

And I know that the same member that I quoted before is also 

saying something in this article.  I make the statement in this 

article, Mr. Speaker, where it says: 

 

 Neudorf said these unpalatable choices make it difficult for 

the government to recruit board members. 

 

I was told that.  And then the article continues: 

 

 Anderson agreed, saying he wouldn't touch the job with a 

10-foot pole. 

 

Now this is a member, the mayor of Kerrobert, who recognizes 

the extreme stress that a position like that is going to have 

when you have to be the axe man for the Minister of Health 

and the Minister of Finance and the Premier of this province. 

 

And it goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 And neither would Cliff Wright, chair of the Saskatoon 

Health Board. 

 

Now I don't take any pleasure in raising in this legislature the 

names of men, and women for that matter, who have done a 

tremendous service for this province over the many, many 

years.  But it just seems to me when people of this stature are 

saying: 

 

 "Who is going to run?" asked Wright, who said he definitely 

doesn't intend to run for a board position. 

 

 "There's no opportunity to raise money.  You're caught 

between the electors and the funding agency (the provincial 

government).  I can't see it being a pleasant job." 

 

I can't see it being a pleasant job.  Mr. Speaker, I would suggest 

to you that that is probably a mild understatement.  Because I 

think that underscores one of the fundamental flaws that we 

have in this entire business of the health reform. 

 

Because what it's doing, Mr. Speaker, it's the greatest, in my 

opinion, one of the greatest divide-and-conquer strategies of 

our lifetimes, Mr. Speaker.  And it is literally tearing our 

communities apart.  Not just urban/rural.  We're all familiar 

with the urban/rural split in the last election.  It was a big issue. 

 

But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, I believe now that perhaps 

in addition to that, it's where rural communities are looking 

across at each other.  They're looking across at each other over 

their shoulders.  Because they're all concerned which 

community is going to gobble up the other community.  And 

that is a fact, Mr. Speaker. 

We have the Minister of Health sowing great anticipation in the 

larger communities that they will have their hospitals expanded 

and offer more services.  But the smaller surrounding 

communities, Mr. Speaker, are in despair that their facilities 

will be closed or savaged. 

 

We have a Premier, Mr. Speaker, running around the province 

telling people that this legislation is necessary because the 

people have too much access to health.  They have too much 

access to health care.  That it is the people's fault, Mr. Speaker; 

that they want too much; that they are expecting too much. 

 

And we have the Minister of Health chastising the former 

government for not being in touch enough . . . pardon me, for 

not being tough enough on the people.  We were spending too 

much money.  Yet she was the very same person, Mr. Speaker, 

that I remember very well in this same building here, chastising 

us strenuously for a meagre 4 per cent increase in Health; that 

we were destroying the health care system, the sacred health 

care system; we were destroying it by a 4 per cent increase in 

spending. 

 

And that is why, Mr. Speaker, she is on record now of having 

said, we will spend more on health.  The Premier said, we will 

spend more on health. The Premier said, we'll spend more on 

education and we'll do it with no increase in taxes.  We'll do it 

by remaining within our $4.5 billion budget. 

 

Those were the promises made, Mr. Speaker, by the folks 

opposite while they were so desperately seeking the highest 

office in the land, the Premier and the government of this 

province. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the people see all of this and 

they can hear the Premier telling them that they are 

responsible; that their diabetic mother is responsible; that their 

handicapped child is responsible; or that their aged sister is 

responsible. 

 

And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that they hear this.  And it 

hurts them, Mr. Speaker.  It has to hurt them.  And ultimately, 

Mr. Speaker, that type of an attack over a prolonged period of 

time as we have experienced, it's wearing the people down.  It's 

wearing the people down. 

 

And I go into my constituency on weekends and during the 

summer months and so on and they say to me, something has to 

be be done.  But what?  What can we do?  And they are almost 

on their knees right now, Mr. Speaker, they're almost literally 

on their knees, saying, should we give up?  Perhaps it's time to 

give up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I submit to you and I submit to the members 

opposite that what is happening here is that this government is 

taking out hope of our people, they're taking out the hope.  We 

are, I am convinced, and I think the last little while has 

confirmed this -- I am convinced that the government is 

determined to drive the people into such a state of despair that 



March 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 403 

there's no longer any fight left in them.  And I don't think, Mr. 

Speaker, that we can stand for that.  We cannot stand for that. 

 

(1515) 

 

When the budget is handed down tomorrow, if the Minister of 

Finance and the Premier are betting on the fact that they have 

knocked the people down often enough and far enough that 

they will not stand up to this government . . . 

 

But I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, and I submit to the Minister 

of Health and I submit to the Minister of Finance that they are 

not banking or betting on the resiliency of the people of 

Saskatchewan, that they will not stay down. And I submit to 

you that they will stand up, and I submit to you that they will 

fight. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health and the Premier talk 

a good deal about cooperation, but they sow division.  They 

talk a lot about consultation, but I submit to you that their 

actions are more of those of a bully -- my way or no way.  

They talk about building, but I submit to you they are 

destroyers. 

 

They impose restraint, Mr. Speaker, but at the same time are 

awash in patronage and cronyism.  They speak, Mr. Speaker, of 

the future, but are living in the past.  They print pamphlets 

about policy, but practice only blame.  They speak of 

commitment, and break every promise made to the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government was won on deception and now 

feeds on despair.  And the people are being asked, Mr. Speaker, 

to bear the burden of these betrayals through legislation. 

 

And I submit to you also, Mr. Speaker, that we cannot stand by 

and watch while the people of Saskatchewan continue to be 

hoodwinked by the Premier.  Indeed, Mr. Speaker, I feel and I 

see that we are being presented a forced conspiracy, a forced 

conspiracy which has the potential of destroying our health 

care system that has been so fondly a major building block, as 

it were, of members opposite. 

 

And I say conspiracy, Mr. Speaker, because many groups in 

our society have been unwittingly or in many cases forcibly 

caused to join in this campaign of pain as it relates to the health 

care.  And today I ask all people to examine carefully the 

health care agenda of this government.  Let's look at it in an 

objective way with a thoughtful approach and you will see, 

undoubtedly, the fallacies of many of their statements just 

jumping out at you. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, to this point the government has succeeded 

in a very important political objective for the NDP Party, and 

that objective has been to keep the public debate extremely 

narrow, very focused, and extremely confused.  That I believe 

has been an objective, an objective that they've done very well 

in -- to focus attention on one aspect of their strategy so that the 

real facts can remain hidden. 

The focus that I'm talking about is the issue of centralization.  

The whole health care debate thus far, in my opinion, has been 

centred on that one issue, and that it has been extremely 

uncritical focus, in my opinion.  And many people have taken it 

on faith, Mr. Speaker, that massive centralization will result in 

cost savings; massive centralization at first blush seems to 

indicate that there should be large cost savings. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and I say to the Minister of 

Health, prove it.  Prove it.  I've asked that question in question 

period: prove it.  There has been no answer forthcoming. 

 

The Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, has not produced one 

shred of documentary evidence to support that claim.  She 

throws out numbers about the annual costs of hospitals, and in 

the same statements, Mr. Speaker, in the same statements, 

absolutely promises that the same amount of funding will be 

available afterwards.  The same amount of funding will be 

available. 

 

Now I ask you, does that make sense?  How is that reducing 

costs?  Moreover, Mr. Speaker, the real facts are not being 

fairly reported nor debated as they relate to this Bill and the 

whole health care agenda of this government. 

 

I'm told, Mr. Speaker, that 80 per cent of hospital spending -- 

80 per cent of all hospital spending -- is expended on the seven 

hospitals in the major cities.  Eighty per cent goes to seven 

hospitals.  Now if that's an accurate figure, Mr. Speaker, it is 

absurd to suggest that large-scale closures of rural hospitals 

will save anything, even if the minister was not forthright when 

she promised continued funding.  Eighty per cent is in the 

urban already, so where's your cost saving if you're talking 

about the remaining 20 per cent, and only saving a portion of 

that. 

 

I'm also told that it costs many multiples less to treat a patient 

in a rural hospital than it does to treat the same patient in 

Regina or in Saskatoon.  And if that's true, where's the cost 

saving? 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, let's look at what happened to the VON 

(Victorian Order of Nurses) here in Regina, and you know that 

this government is not saving money.  We all recall about a 

week ago, maybe two weeks ago by now, what happened in 

Regina with the VON. 

 

This Bill will give legal life to Regina's centralized health 

board which is the NDP basis for the destruction of one of our 

oldest, most respected, and most financially efficient health 

care institutions in Saskatchewan, which is the Victorian Order 

of Nurses. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the VON brings in almost 200,000 -- I 

believe it's between 150 and $175,000 -- a year of its own 

money to the table, year in, year out.  That $175,000, Mr. 

Speaker, does not come from the taxpayer.  It does not come 

from the taxpayer, Mr. Speaker.  That is out of the 

volunteerism of the people of Saskatchewan.  The volunteer 

money of $175,000, I am told is now not going to be available 

to the 



404 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1993 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Where is the cost saving in doing away with the VON?  

Important services, for example, that the VON was able to 

provide, like foot service -- foot care.  The general population 

is hoodwinked when they hear it only as being foot care.  It's 

trivialized but many times when we mention this, by members 

of the NDP it's trivialized, and it's unfortunate that it has to be 

stooped to that. 

 

Because the fact is, Mr. Speaker, that seniors who are denied 

access to foot care lose their mobility and end up losing a large 

part of their quality of life.  And the VON did a good job of 

providing that service.  The seniors then would more rapidly 

deteriorate and become a larger burden on the health care 

system for big dollars, not just a few that it takes to provide for 

proper foot care. 

 

So what does this government do, Mr. Speaker?  What does it 

do?  It simply nationalizes the VON, nationalizes the VON; 

replaces their volunteer money with tax money.  Is that saving 

the taxpayer money, Mr. Speaker?  Is that rationalizing health 

care services?  Is that the direction that this enlightened 

Minister of Health is taking us through this massive 

restructuring of the health care system of Saskatchewan? 

 

That does not save money.  It is counter-productive, as many of 

your initiatives are.  And it's up to this opposition here to make 

sure that we point that out to you -- not as eloquently as the 

VON can do themselves; not as eloquently as the folks from 

the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre and the people that access 

that service -- but we must continue to keep trying to show you 

folks that not all of the things, in fact preciously few of the 

things, that you are doing are going to be productive in the long 

run. 

 

You save at one spot and cost the taxpayer money -- more 

money -- in some other areas.  So nationalizing services, Mr. 

Speaker, I submit to you and to the people of Saskatchewan 

that are provided by volunteer agencies, is the most foolhardy, 

costly, and socially irresponsible action that any government 

could contemplate. 

 

They have been proven time and again to save money by 

reducing the need for more expensive services and more 

expensive treatments. 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government pulled these services 

out of medicare.  They removed these services from health 

insurance, simply de-insured them.  And now we are told it will 

be centralized boards that will carry the blame for these 

financially costly choices.  Why would you want to do that? 

 

The same thing that has happened for example, the decision 

time for VON in Regina.  Well in Regina decision time for the 

VON apparently is too late.  Volunteerism, 

counter-productivity. 

 

We have here on Friday, February 26, in the 

Star-Phoenix again, a headline that says: "1,000 respond to free 

eye exam offer".  Mr. Speaker, another one of those de-insured 

services that this government, that this Minister of Health, on 

orders from the Minister of Finance, decided that these were no 

longer going to be insured.  So they were de-insured.  A 

counter-productive action taken by the government hoping to 

save money, hoping to save money. 

 

Chiropractors -- hoping to save money.  And yet, Mr. Speaker, 

we know full well that the people now who are being denied 

this access, this entry into the health system through the 

chiropractic services, many times if that would have been 

accessible, the treatment could have been done at a low cost, 

very effective, low technology.  As the petitions that we 

continue to enter into this House continue to impress upon 

members of the government, if this would have been continued 

there would be no need in many cases -- certainly not 

exclusively but in many cases -- no need for the more costly 

physiotherapists route. 

 

Or the ophthalmologist route when it comes to chiropractors.  

And you compound that situation by de-insuring insulin where 

we know, we know that ultimately the diabetics are going to 

suffer some chronic eye disease.  If they're not going to get 

proper treatment, if they are going to be dissuaded from using 

optometrists to make sure that they're on top of their eye 

condition, the members opposite are trying to tell us that this is 

a productive way of saving money.  It is not, Mr. Speaker, I 

submit to you.  It is counter-productive. 

 

And even the optometrists in this newspaper article that I was 

referring to a moment ago, took it upon themselves to give free 

eye examinations -- "1,000 responded to free eye exam offer" 

-- 1,000.  This was during the Vision Awareness Week.  The 

need is there, Mr. Speaker, the need is there. 

 

(1530) 

 

Many people, the optometrist says: 

 

 . . . simply don't have the money for eye care. 

 

I'm quoting here.  This Dr. Cydney Hayes continues: 

 

 She said many eye conditions, such as cataracts and 

glaucoma, develop insidiously. 

 

Without the people knowing about it, without them knowing 

that they've contracted this disease and that it's going to just 

continually get worse in their system. 

 

So why would we use a system ostensibly to save money, full 

well knowing in the long run it's going to cost more money, it's 

going to be counter-productive -- counter-productive, which 

seems to be a theme that this government is following, not only 

in health care. 

 

I can give you oodles of examples in the agricultural field 

where programs are being cut and slashed, trying to save 

money and at the same time being 



March 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 405 

counter-productive. 

 

And the same thing we will experience tomorrow when the 

budget is handed down, when we find out that departments are 

being slashed, cut, amalgamated, reduced -- people being fired, 

laid off.  Everybody except of course cabinet ministers.  

They've been able to convince the Premier that they want to 

keep their jobs at $500,000, more or less, per cabinet minister. 

Counter-productive, Mr. Speaker, counter-productive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in spite of this, the Minister of Health has 

removed these services from Health.  They've removed them 

for sometimes very costly and foolish, financially ineffective 

choices.  And I wonder sometimes, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP 

members have any idea of the grief and the pain that they are 

causing, and ironically, not saving any money in the process. 

 

It is not enough that a diabetic is driven to threaten cabinet 

ministers over the loss of his insulin coverage, yet they keep 

the steamroller moving, rolling over people that are becoming 

desperate. 

 

And I say to the business community, Mr. Speaker, be careful 

before you buy into this fallacy that the government is saving 

money.  It's not saving money through centralization and 

nationalization. 

 

I submit to you however, Mr. Speaker, and to the folks 

opposite, regionalization can work, it can work if properly 

approached.  I remind the Minister of Health, and the Minister 

of Finance, the Premier, that it was the previous administration 

that began this process.  The difference I believe was that it 

was started in a sensitive and a developmental way. 

 

It was not accepted by members opposite who continued to 

hoot and to holler and to chastise us for daring to reduce some 

of the funding, reduce some of the ways in which services were 

being delivered.  However I remind you that fundamental to 

our process was one of sensitivity.  I remind you that first of all 

what we did, as an example, is that integrated facilities were 

being put into place, integrated facilities.  Home care funding 

was increased.  And in fact I'm proud to say that home care 

funding was by far the biggest increase in the health budget -- 

10 per cent each year. 

 

Now I know that even 10 per cent was probably -- not only 

probably -- even 10 per cent was not enough because of the 

need that was there.  But we did extend as far as possible a 10 

per cent increase, while the rest of the Department of Health 

was somewhere between 3 and 4 per cent. 

 

And the government members opposite, in opposition at the 

time, railed against us for having the audacity to do this, and 

promised that when elected they would spend more on health 

and education.  The Premier knew that there was a $14.2 

billion deficit at the time.  He said that, he said that in the 

leaders' debate.  He knew that.  He said that $4.5 billion was 

enough -- any government should be able to operate within 

those parameters.  He knew that.  He knew that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we established integrated facilities, we 

increased home care funding, and we encouraged volunteer 

services.  We encouraged volunteer services, Mr. Speaker -- we 

did not nationalize them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, communities were given the space and the 

confidence to work out their own arrangements without 

government threats and intimidation.  Indeed the first regional 

board that this minister opened was started under the previous 

administration -- by the initiatives, I might add, by the 

initiatives of the community themselves, not big government, 

not Big Brother in Regina breathing down their shoulders, 

breathing down their necks.  There was no blackmail, there was 

no threat.  They were not told that if you don't do this, we'll 

chop your funding for basic services.  They were not told this. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this government has grander schemes -- 

schemes that cost money, that centralize control.  More 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, more importantly, schemes that do 

not address the underlying problems facing the system. 

 

I'm going to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the minister publicly 

admits that she does not even know what the problems are, yet 

she is in the process . . . busily destroying community services 

and people in the name of solving those problems that she has 

not yet identified. 

 

Now I know she's probably wondering what I'm talking about, 

but I say that because she admits she does not know what the 

problems because she clearly . . . she would not be appointing 

expensive study teams to find out what the problems are if she 

already had identified them and knew what they were. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill should not in fact be 

passed because the minister herself, by her statements and by 

her actions, the minister herself concedes that she does not 

have the information needed to be making the decisions that 

she is making right now.  She says, for an example, that she is 

in the process of consulting with municipalities about how to 

fund this Bill.  Well, Mr. Speaker, if the minister is still 

consulting about such a basic, important issue, clearly the Bill 

is not ready for passage. 

 

She said that she is consulting, or she has consulted, about what 

will happen to 800 severely handicapped children under this 

regime that this Bill imposes.  Mr. Speaker, I say to you that if 

she did not know what was going to happen to 800 

handicapped kids, if she did not know that anything was going 

to happen to them, then clearly, clearly, we can question what 

this piece of legislation is doing before the Assembly.  It's a 

convenient way, Mr. Speaker, for the minister, as she did in 

question period when I asked her about it in question period, 

it's an attempt by the government to wash its hands of 

responsibility.  It's an offloading of responsibility, and as 

before and as we will prove in subsequent debates, it's 

offloading of funding as well onto the property taxpayers. 



406 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1993 

She says that she is consulting and has even commissioned a 

study to find the answers about what will happen to 

Whitespruce under the system that this Bill proposes.  Mr. 

Speaker, if the minister does not have the answer about 

Whitespruce, then what in the world is she doing presenting 

this type of legislation before this legislature?  I ask you. 

 

The minister says she's consulting with specialists to determine 

the effects of this Bill on the supply of health care specialists in 

the province, Mr. Speaker.  And I say, if the minister does not 

know what will happen to our critical health care specialists 

under this Bill, then what is this Bill doing before the 

Assembly? 

 

The minister says that she's consulting about the good sisters in 

Moose Jaw, that the Leader of the Opposition is very familiar 

with.  If she's consulting with the good sisters in Moose Jaw to 

see how they can be accommodated under the centralization of 

this Bill -- if she's consulting, well what is this Bill doing 

before us now?  Mr. Speaker, should not the minister have 

answers before she proposes laws to control the various people 

of this province? 

 

The minister said she was consulting with the lab technologists 

and private lab companies, including lobbyists like former 

NDP minister, Elwood Cowley.  I don't think we can forget 

that.  But would it not have made sense, Mr. Speaker, for the 

minister to at least finish consultations with her own NDP 

lobbyists before she presents legislation of this type to this 

legislature? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister says she's consulting almost 

everyone everywhere on every aspect of this Bill and its 

consequences.  She's spending tax dollars on committees, 

commissions, task forces, and studies to try to answer all the 

questions that this very Bill raises. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that this is an open admission that 

this Bill is premature.  You're not ready for this Bill.  You're 

not ready.  In your big haste to be seen as being in charge, as 

being in control, of showing the people of this province that 

you know what you're doing, I say this Bill is premature.  She's 

trying to solve problems that she cannot identify.  She has not 

identified problems and she's trying to solve them. 

 

So I would say that it would be a good step forward if the 

Premier would say to the Minister of Health, hold it.  Let's 

backtrack, let's check this thing.  And I would also say at the 

same time to the Leader of the NDP, I would also say to the 

Minister of Finance who are regulating this entire situation, I 

say to them: don't try to take refuge in some excuse about the 

deficit.  That would be shameful duplicity I would suggest to 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The fact is that there is no evidence these measures are 

contributing anything toward reducing the deficit, and in fact 

you have taken the province from a 265 million deficit to 

nearly a billion dollar deficit in every budget that you bring 

down.  These measures are not 

taken to address the deficit, and there's every reason to believe 

they will in fact increase the deficit, not reduce it.  That's the 

point that I've been trying to make. 

 

Now if you want to address the problem with funding of health 

care . . . And that is a major problem; we know that within 

health care and education we probably are spending in excess 

of 80 per cent of the budget.  But then let's address the funding 

problem in health care honestly.  And I suggest to the Premier 

that he take seriously the suggestion of the opposition which 

we made last session. 

 

I say to the Premier: assign an all-party committee of this 

Assembly to go to the people and genuinely consult with them 

about the entire health care system.  They've got all kinds of 

ideas about how to address the situation.  Those ideas may 

range from privatizing parts of the health care to 

province-wide, mass buying programs.  And I'm sure that they 

would run the gamut of the extremes and all shades of grey in 

the middle.  So, Mr. Premier, if you wish to tap the creativity of 

the people, it would help tremendously. 

 

But your minister insists in hiding the process, hiding the 

process.  Oh, I know, I know that the minister has admitted that 

she has attended three town meetings where the public was 

invited to attend.  I know that the Department of Health has 

attended innumerable public meetings.  But always that buffer 

of bureaucrats delivering the message.  Always the bureaucrats 

delivering the message.  But those meetings, Mr. Speaker, are 

restricted to discussing the centralization scheme and they are 

meetings where people are told what will happen, not where 

they are consulted about what will happen. 

 

Again we come back to that whole scenario that I described 

before.  Oh yes, people, you can say, you can determine your 

direction, but within these parameters, but within this global 

budget.  And that is called consultation?  That is called grass 

roots, ability of people to determine their own direction, their 

own wants?  That's where this process is flawed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The public meetings, the public meetings of the Minister of 

Health, I submit to you, are a joke.  The people that walk away 

from these meetings -- and I've been to them, I've witnessed it 

-- the people walk away completely disheartened.  They're 

confused.  Like I said before, one fellow told me, I was given 

the ball but I don't know what to do with it. 

 

(1545) 

 

And they know that they've had no impact and that the real 

decisions are being made behind closed doors; they're being 

made in secret.  The minister holds secret meetings with 

interest groups, I'll grant her that.  I think she has met with a lot 

of the groups -- not all of them, not all of them.  The 

chiropractors will attest to that.  And then she makes threats 

and she makes deals.  And we will have more of that in 

evidence and proof of that coming out.  But the general 



March 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 407 

public, Mr. Speaker, the people cannot see behind those doors. 

 

And then we have the Minister of Finance now who professes 

to be the minister of federal elections.  The member from 

Regina North East instructed, personally instructed officials 

meeting with the chiropractors to tell those health care 

providers that they would either accept partial deinsurance or 

they would be kicked out of medicare completely. 

 

That was the message, Mr. Speaker, delivered by the Minister 

of Finance's officials.  That's the consultative process that we 

have been talking about, Mr. Speaker.  In any language, Mr. 

Speaker, I would suggest to you that that is anything except 

consultation. 

 

Where are the facts, Mr. Speaker, that support the NDP leader's 

health care program, that support this shady piece of 

legislation?  Where are the facts?  The Minister of Health tells 

us that she is just now getting studies in place to collect the 

facts.  I've gone through that already.  Well then, what do you 

think you're doing? 

 

The hypocrisy of the entire thing, Mr. Speaker, is just simply 

breathtaking.  The most solemn commitment of the NDP in 

winning the last election was not to get rid of harmonization; it 

was to protect the health care system -- to protect the health 

care system.  And the Leader of the NDP says he never made 

any such promises. 

 

So let's take him back, Mr. Speaker, to some of the major news 

stories at a major news conference during the election itself.  

And the press gallery, Mr. Speaker, will remember this news 

conference. 

 

The NDP leader at the time claimed that he had a leaked 

cabinet document.  He stated that this document was a plan to 

increase fees on the drug plan.  He had a leaked document that 

said here is proof that those evil Tories are prepared to increase 

fees on the drug plan, remove medical services from coverage, 

and so on.  Mr. Speaker, the NDP leader then stated loudly and 

aggressively that his document was proof positive that the PCs 

(Progressive Conservative) were going to destroy medicare.  

Imagine that -- increasing the cost of the drug plan. 

 

If you want to protect medicare, he told the people, if you want 

to stop this terrible agenda of increased fees on the drug plan, 

an attack on the very basis of medicare itself, then vote for me.  

Vote for me, he said.  We will protect medicare. 

 

Well anybody who can remember back to October of '91 

during the provincial election campaign will recall that we as 

PCs had one heck of a time on our hands explaining that.  Yes, 

Mr. Speaker, it was one of the option plans that the folks in 

Finance had come up with.  But no, I can tell you, it had not 

been considered by cabinet and it was not something that 

represented PC policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the NDP loudly 

proclaimed, loudly proclaimed to the people of this province 

that none of these things, if he was elected, would happen.  He 

would not do any of those things.  That to save medicare the 

people of Saskatchewan had to vote NDP. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker?  The people believed him.  

The people believed the NDP, that the NDP would hold 

medicare as sacred. 

 

In fact, he went further, Mr. Speaker.  He said, the now 

Minister of Health said, we will spend more on health.  We will 

spend more on health, more on education.  We will not increase 

taxes.  And do you know what, Mr. Speaker?  The people 

believed. 

 

That's why the people across the way were elected.  That's why 

you were elected, I say to you members across the way.  You 

were elected because the now Premier said 4.5 billion is 

enough.  We will not have to raise taxes for two years, said the 

member from Regina, the Labour critic now.  We will not raise 

any taxes for two years.  We will do away with the hamburger 

tax.  There will be no harmonization because there will not be 

any need for it. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, they said that if we can do away, 

and we will, we will do away with waste and mismanagement, 

and that will bring us all the money that we need to run this 

government.  In fact he said if anybody can't live under $4.5 

billion budget, they don't deserve to be in government.  What's 

your budget now, I ask members opposite?  What's your . . .  

Do you wonder why people are upset?  They were upset with 

us and we paid the price; we got booted out. 

 

You people got elected on deception.  You said you would do 

all of these things for the people of Saskatchewan.  And what 

have you done?  What have you done in your first 16 months in 

office?  I ask members across the way, what are you going to 

do to this province tomorrow?  What are you going to do?  

What pain and what suffering are you going to inflict upon the 

people tomorrow? 

 

They were not expecting that of you because you got elected on 

that fundamental premise that the people looked at your 

agenda, the people looked at what you were promising, and 

then they looked at us.  And I'm the first one to admit they 

didn't like us.  They didn't like us.  They told us that in no 

uncertain terms.  There's a little group left over here to attest to 

that. 

 

And I know the member from Athabasca smiles and so on.  But 

the fact is that if the people had to do this over again, if they 

would have known, if they would have known, what would 

have happened then? 

 

The member from Athabasca says he remembers it in 1982.  So 

we have a little bit of empathy there.  We both understand each 

other from that point of view. 

 

But this is the key issue that . . . one of the key issues, Mr. 

Speaker, that I want to bring forward, that the people of this 

province were not expecting this attack 



408 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1993 

on the medicare system.  Were they expecting rationalization?  

Were they expecting an increase in efficiencies?  Of course 

they were, and they have a right to.  And I don't think that that 

is what we would be objecting to. 

 

But when a bunch of folks get elected on a promise that they 

full well knew what they were getting into just to get elected, 

that's where the betrayal comes in, Mr. Speaker.  That is where 

the disappointment of the people of Saskatchewan come in. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the saving of medicare could only be 

accomplished if you voted NDP.  That's what I would want to 

remind the people of this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the NDP has been in government 

for 18 months.  And all the things that he publicly renounced, 

he is now embracing.  And no, Mr. Speaker, I don't think under 

any circumstances we can let him get off the hook by saying 

that he made no promises. 

 

I don't think it's being honest with the people of Saskatchewan 

when every question period he resorts to holding up his little 

two-page, three-page pamphlet, so-called the NDP Bible during 

the election.  I don't think that is sufficient.  I don't think, Mr. 

Speaker, that tells the whole story to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Because he did make promises.  One of the most basic, 

fundamental, specific was to oppose and not to implement the 

proposals for increased drug plan fees, chiropractic fees, 

optometry, and so on.  And that, Mr. Speaker, as I have 

indicated already, is a matter of public record.  That's why the 

hypocrisy of the situation breathes through this place.  And I 

don't think it's any wonder why the citizenry of this province 

are throwing up their hands in disgust. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is not good enough for the government to blame 

the deficit, to blame the debt for their broken faith with the 

people of Saskatchewan.  Every question period, every 

question period, Mr. Speaker, that deal at all with anything of 

the finances of this province, both the Minister of Health and 

the Premier of this province light up the blame thrower and 

they blame everybody except themselves.  They're still 

reluctant, perhaps incapable of accepting the responsibility of 

government and the faith that the people of this province put 

into them when they gave them such a resounding victory in 

October of '91. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a question that could be asked, how does the NDP 

seek political justification for this Bill, for its health care 

agenda?  In every speech, Mr. Speaker, in every engagement, 

in every corner, in every corner of this besieged province the 

members of the government are sounding and mouthing one 

phrase.  It is a phrase that's been tested by pollsters and 

subjected to the most minute investigation of focus groups, and 

it is hoped to be the salvation of this government adrift -- a 

government, Mr. Speaker, in literal disarray. 

And that slogan, that motto is: we have no choice.  We have no 

choice, is the inspirational rallying cry of the NDP.  Give me a 

break, the Premier trumpets at every opportunity.  We have no 

choice. We have no choice, Mr. Speaker.  We must dismantle 

basic health care and we have to pass this legislation.  We have 

no choice, says the member for Riversdale. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I submit to you, to the people of this 

province, and implore the members opposite, the government, 

that that is simply not true.  There are choices.  There are 

choices, and they are being made cognizantly on a daily basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm going to deal with those choices in a moment.  

But let me first of all say how deeply hurtful this campaign of 

despair has been and is, for our people.  They have largely 

come to accept the prognostications by the government and 

spread far and near by the media.  The people are actually 

beginning to believe that there is no choice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that belief has been entrenched by the Premier's 

betrayal and sustained by his unrelenting preaching of doom 

and gloom.  He had to do that, he had to do that.  First of all 

you fire up the deficit and you preach doom and gloom long 

enough, loud enough, often enough, first of all you begin to 

believe it, he begins to believe it, and the people of the 

province begin to believe it. 

 

And certainly the minister who used to be called the minister of 

Community Services believed it in Melfort, and was roundly 

and thoroughly chastised by the citizens of Melfort for costing 

them a golden opportunity for a big hotel chain to come in and 

create jobs and economic spin-off in her community.  But she 

chose the same path of spreading gloom and doom. 

 

Knock the people down hard enough, often enough, low 

enough, and they will not have the resiliency to rebound and to 

object against what you are going to be subjecting them to, 

have in the past, and undoubtedly will again tomorrow. 

 

(1600) 

 

This strategy, Mr. Speaker, I submit to you, of the NDP leader 

is clear.  And sadly it appears to be having a significant success 

in misleading the people.  The strategy is undoubtedly to drive 

the people to such a state of hopelessness, such a state of 

despair, that there is no fight left in them, no fight left to 

oppose the Bill and to stop this threat to their health care 

system, unless they've got the wherewithal in their own hip . . . 

national pockets to foot the bill. 

 

And so beaten, Mr. Speaker, and oppressed by this purveyor of 

pain, the people do start to wonder if there is any point in 

resistance.  After all, after all, Mr. Speaker, the government had 

no choice.  The government had no choice.  But, Mr. Speaker, I 

say to you that there is hope and it can spring proudly and with 

optimism from these halls, from the stores, from the farms, 

from the factories, and from the homes throughout this grand 

province of ours. 



March 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 409 

I proclaim, Mr. Speaker, that the excuse, that the excuse of no 

choice is simply a black falsehood that we can and that we 

must defeat, and the campaign to defeat the monster of despair 

must begin in earnest.  Because if we do not defeat the 

desperation the government hopes to impose on us through 

Bills such as this, there will be precious little left for us.  We 

will be left with even less than what this government has 

already created in the name of the structures proposed by this 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has created an unfair, a multi-tiered health care 

system without regard to the consequences for our families.  

And, Mr. Speaker, they in truth have also not had regard for the 

financial cost of their choices. 

 

And I say that again because that has been an integral part of 

the comments that I'm making this afternoon.  They are mostly 

counter-productive.  The Premier continually rests on the 

deficit of his justification for this Bill and all other actions.  

And in her remarks introducing this Bill, the minister stated 

that the financial situation of the province is their main reason 

behind this legislation. 

 

It seems, Mr. Speaker, it seems that we have 18 ministers of 

Finance and no Minister of Health in this government, Mr. 

Speaker.  They smile.  They smile, Mr. Speaker.  But what I'm 

asking now in a most serious way, where is the advocate for the 

health care system on the government side?  What happened, 

Mr. Speaker, to the basic, fundamental concept that a minister 

must be an advocate for his or her portfolio, not its executioner, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have 18 ministers of Finance, and it seems, no Minister of 

Health.  Because the Minister of Health not only jumps when 

the Minister of Finance and the Premier says something, but 

asks how high?  History will record, Mr. Speaker, that fact 

solemnly; that under this NDP government there was no voice 

from the NDP benches speaking in favour of the health care 

system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a few days ago it was absolutely incredible to 

hear the Minister of Health in question period chastising the 

opposition for not having the courage to implement the Murray 

Commission report.  Remember that, members opposite -- the 

cheering you did when she chastised us for that?  And she said 

that we just put the Murray Commission into the trash can.  

And that was absolutely incredible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A report, Mr. Speaker, that she reviled and opposed and bitterly 

condemned. 

 

Today she says you should have implemented that report; you 

should not have put it in the trash can.  And I remember so 

distinctly when she reviled Mr. McLeod as minister of Health 

about the Murray Commission report.  And then she says that 

there would be no need for this Bill had we taken those steps 

and had we taken those measures.  What hypocrisy.  What 

politicization for the convenience of the 

moment. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that the previous government did not 

need this kind of legislation.  We were allowing communities 

to develop together, to work at their own pace to come up with 

creative alternatives.  And there was, Mr. Speaker, I submit to 

you enormous progress being made, maybe not as rapidly as 

we would have liked. 

 

And in the face of that progress, Mr. Speaker, the now Minister 

of Health charged that the people were being forced.  

Remember her days in opposition here, the Minister of Health 

charged that the people were being forced to choose between 

drugs and groceries.  Remember that?  And at one point, she 

even claimed that the health care restructuring that we were 

doing was responsible for the death of a heart patient.  We all 

remember that.  The theatrics and the depths to which that 

minister would go in her days of opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of that venom, all of that vitriol, all of that 

hate, all of that hostility, and here, here today, she presents a 

Draconian Bill and condemns the previous government for not 

having implemented such legislation much sooner. 

 

And what does she say today, Mr. Speaker?  She says she has 

no choice.  Now the deficit is the real issue, not the health and 

welfare of the people of this province. 

 

But I say, Mr. Speaker, regardless, even in her self-accepted 

role as a junior Finance minister, this Bill and the plan she 

attaches to this Bill will cost the taxpayer a great deal more 

money, not less.  It will not achieve the objectives set for us. 

 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, you will see the NDP deficit balloon 

again and again in spite of their attack on the well-being of the 

average person in this province.  It will cost more.  And more 

importantly perhaps, Mr. Speaker, it will be a grossly unfair 

program.  A grossly unfair program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

How has the health care system become unfair, Mr. Speaker, 

would be a good question. 

 

Well I'll give you a few examples.  I know members opposite 

don't think along that line, but I'll tell you: respiratory patients 

are treated differently in this system than someone with a cold.  

Think about that.  Respiratory patients are being treated 

differently than someone with a cold. 

 

Diabetics are treated differently than someone with a sprained 

ankle.  Just think about that. 

 

People with back pain are treated differently than someone 

with a headache.  You think about that, the reality of that.  And 

certainly rural people are being treated differently than urban 

people. 

 

The NDP health plan is demonstrably unfair.  These NDP 

measures, Mr. Speaker, as I have said again and again, are 

going to cost more, not less. 



410 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1993 

A chiropractor is less expensive than a back surgeon.  An 

optometrist is cheaper than an ophthalmologist.  Treating 

children at the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre is less costly 

than treating them in an acute care bed.  And that's the route 

that the Minister of Health was prepared to go until the 

representatives of the 800 handicapped children of this 

province stood up and protested loudly and vocally, and 

effectively, I might add. 

 

Providing insulin, I suggest to members opposite, is less costly 

than treating shock or supporting a patient in a coma.  The 

VON is at least 150 to $175,000 less costly to the taxpayer than 

the nationalized system that you folks have set up now.  And 

this litany can go on and on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NDP health Bill will cost more, not less.  The whole Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, is built on falsehoods. 

 

While the NDP -- and I would suggest the Liberals -- say that 

yes, we need to close rural hospitals to save money, as I have 

pointed out to you, Mr. Speaker, 80 per cent of the hospital 

budget is spent on seven hospitals in the major cities.  It's less 

expensive, Mr. Speaker, to treat a patient in a rural hospital 

than it is in Regina or Saskatoon.  The care available to people 

in the cities will deteriorate as rural people come in, expanding 

waiting-lists.  No one wins.  People are hurting and it would 

seem from actions of members opposite that the NDP don't 

seem to care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, essential care is being drawn . . . withdrawn, 

pardon me.  Essential care is being withdrawn by this 

government through this Bill.  For example, the reason we have 

more nursing home beds than other provinces is because we 

have more old people who need the help.  It's a known fact, Mr. 

Speaker, that we have a higher percentage of senior citizens in 

this province than in any other province in Canada.  But the 

NDP Minister of Health does not tell you that, does not tell you 

that we have more elderly per capita and that we have huge 

waiting-lists of elderly people in need of special care homes . . . 

special care beds, pardon me.  There's never, it seems, enough 

of them.  And the NDP know well about that from their sojourn 

in government in the 1970s. 

 

In the latter half of the 1970s, for a six-year period of time 

there was a complete moratorium on special care beds.  And 

that's one of the reasons why I was elected in 1986.  The people 

did not want to have a repeat of this attack on the elderly 

people in our province.  People recognize that seniors in our 

province are valuable, that even though they may be in the 

golden years of their life, they still are valuable, that they have 

a lot to contribute.  Never mind the fact that after going through 

65 to 85 years of life, they have earned, they have earned this 

respect from the people of this province. So . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Will the member take a question? 

The Speaker: -- The member may proceed. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I recognize the 

age-old trick of a member getting up to destroy the thoughtful 

intent that people were listening to my speech.  And certainly I 

would suggest to the hon. member that . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member did not want to 

take a question, therefore the member must continue with his 

speech. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Although I did not allow the member to ask the question, I was 

prepared to give him an answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, time after time in question period we asked the 

members of the cabinet of this government salient questions, 

thought-provoking questions, and we are looking for answers, 

Mr. Speaker, and never do we get an answer.  And members 

opposite have the audacity to get up and ask questions when 

they're not even prepared to answer questions.  It seems ironic, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But certainly I look forward to the member from Regina North 

West getting up in this debate and enlightening us as to some 

of the reasons why they are doing what they are doing with this 

particular Bill and trying to justify it.  I challenge, Mr. Speaker, 

all members across the way to please don't sit on your 

backsides, don't sit on your hands when you have the 

opportunity to participate in debate. 

 

This small opposition of 10 members here is becoming 

renowned for its ability to hold up the . . . literally hold up the 

activities within this legislature by our debate.  And members 

opposite think that by sitting back, refusing to debate, that they 

will wear us out, that we will not be able to fulfil the functions 

of an opposition.  And it's unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1615) 

 

So I challenge members opposite, please participate; show that 

you have the conviction of your beliefs; that indeed and in fact, 

which I doubt, you fully support your Minister of Health and 

Minister of Finance in this attack upon the health care system 

of our province.  It's not well thought out.  I've gone through 

many, many specific examples of what is wrong with this Bill, 

that this Bill is in fact untimely, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill has 

not been well thought through; that there has been virtually no 

grass roots consultation. 

 

The minister says she's been in three communities in the 

province.  That is not communication, that's not dialogue, that's 

not consultation.  And when she admits that she's got so many 

committees running through the province trying to find out 

what the problem is, trying to find out what the problems are, 

that why have a Bill before the House that addresses the 

problems that she cannot identify.  I've said that previously, 

Mr. Speaker, but I reiterate. 

 

Home care beds in the '70s, Mr. Speaker, was part of 



March 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 411 

the litany of what the people in this province objected to after 

the NDP had been in for 11 years.  They objected to that, Mr. 

Speaker, because they felt that seniors . . . with home care beds 

for seniors were something that was desperately needed, 

special care home beds.  So to justify this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP government tells you only that we have more 

special care beds per capita, that we do not need them.  And 

again, Mr. Speaker, that is going to be counter-productive in 

the long run.  It's going to counter-productive in the long run. 

 

And the NDP does not tell you the reason why we have more 

small hospitals than most other jurisdiction is because we have 

more small towns and we have larger distances.  This province 

is unique.  And I don't think, with greatest respect, Mr. 

Speaker, that we can compare ourselves on an equal footing 

with provinces like Ontario where you have huge groups, 

conglomerates of population.  Over short distances it makes 

sense to have more larger, centralized hospitals than it does in 

Saskatchewan.  And you people don't seem to realize that we 

are a unique province with a small population base, long 

distances involved, many, many miles of highways, and that 

therefore this translates into a higher per capita need. 

 

The same thing as a per capita of road distances for example; 

we have more roads per capita, more miles of road per capita 

than any other province as well.  Is that why the Minister of 

Highways now is going to close down many of our highways, 

shut them down because we've got too many miles of it and 

can't afford it?  That kind of reasoning, members opposite, does 

not make sense. 

 

The reason, Mr. Speaker, the reason we used to cover insulin 

and oxygen is because people needed those kinds of things to 

stay alive.  Now what you're doing in the interests of economy 

is you're charging people for the air that they breathe, for the 

insulin that they need to stay alive.  And they're going to cut 

back -- you know that -- and there's the concomitant diseases 

and so on that are a result of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people, because of actions like that, are hurting.  

They're hurting.  And I'm coming to the conclusion that the 

NDP don't seem to care because they've got 18 Finance 

ministers on their benches.  They have no advocate for Health.  

And that is the responsibility of the Minister of Health, not to 

chorus in union with the Minister of Finance that we have to 

save money -- that's not her job.  Her job is to be an advocate 

for the ministry for which she took an oath. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we're finding out is that we are going to, 

and we do, have a multi-tiered health care system because of 

this Bill.  Not only do people, different people get different 

treatment, as I have just gone through a few minutes ago, 

different people are still going to get different kinds of 

treatment when we come to the wealthy. 

 

Those folks across the way are fond of talking about the 

wealth.  They don't know how to create wealth, but they can 

recognize it when someone else has it. 

But what happens in this kind of a system, Mr. Speaker.?  We 

find out that the wealthy will still get the treatment that they 

want, in spite of these people, by going to the States.  They can 

afford to do that. 

 

But what about the middle class, Mr. Speaker, and the poor?  

The middle class and the poor are on waiting-lists for even the 

most basic procedures.  And the Premier of this province stands 

before the people and moans, we have no choice, we have no 

choice. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, on the face of it, as I've already pointed out, 

the Minister of Health says that these changes are not budget 

driven but are intended to improve wellness.  Well if that's the 

case, Mr. Speaker, then the deficit should have no bearing on 

the issue.  Clearly, clearly with the tremendous increase in cost 

to the taxpayer that these changes represent, the government is 

not in fact making them to address the deficit. 

 

Now why are they doing it?  To break the will of the people, 

and as that will is eroded, Mr. Speaker, as that will is broken, 

the Premier stands and says, now is the time for more tax 

increases.  Tomorrow is the time for more tax increases.  I have 

no choice.  I have no choice. 

 

That is what this Bill is all about, Mr. Speaker, not health care 

-- tax increases, tax increases, offloading to the property tax. 

 

But the Premier does have choices, Mr. Speaker.  He does.  He 

could opt for the least expensive forms of medical care, as I've 

outlined.  But instead he attacks them. 

 

He could, Mr. Speaker, go . . . he could choose to go to full 

harmonization, but instead he makes selective concessions for 

the few and major tax increases for the many. 

 

He could choose, Mr. Speaker, to sell shares in SaskEnergy.  

But instead, he chooses to borrow hundreds of millions for the 

new pipeline that are needed and by borrowing, reduces the 

resources available for health care. 

 

He could choose, Mr. Speaker, to cut spending dramatically on 

government administration.  But instead he spends $100,000 a 

month on flying his cabinet ministers around and then chooses 

to eliminate coverage for diabetics. 

 

He could choose to keep his election promise of a small 

cabinet, of a war cabinet of 10, with no expansion to 18 -- and 

he promised us that.  He said there would be no expansion in 

cabinet until the government could afford them.  So what are 

we to read into this, Mr. Speaker?  That somehow now the 

government is in a position to afford 18 cabinet ministers -- 18 

cabinet ministers that the taxpayer of this province is going to 

have to pay for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he could choose to eliminate . . . or not to 



412 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1993 

eliminate, but rather to reduce all government salaries by 4 per 

cent -- that would be a possibility.  But instead he chooses to 

reduce the incomes of all families even further by more tax 

increases and particularly the property tax increases this Bill 

will generate. 

 

He could choose to get rid of his little policy units that he has 

running around under every minister in every department.  But 

instead he advertises for more associate deputy ministers, toy 

ministers, and spends on salaries rather than on eye 

examinations. 

 

He could choose to cut out the layer of middle management -- 

and that'll be interesting tomorrow -- all the executive directors 

of this and that.  But instead he chooses to stop covering 

chiropractic patients. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he could choose to close down redundant 

advocacy units in various branches and departments, including 

the Department of Health.  But instead he hires on a new social 

policy adviser, a new social policy adviser in his own office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he could choose to keep his election promises 

about patronage and nepotism.  But instead we find the sons 

and daughters of NDP cabinet ministers who are getting plum 

patronage appointments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he has choices.  He has plenty of choices.  It's just 

that he's making, Mr. Speaker, all the wrong choices.  And this 

Bill is the height of bad choices that this Premier is making.  

Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of concern.  There is a lot of concern 

about these bad choices and the effect that it's going to have on 

people.  The bad choices that he is making is evident as one 

travels around this province. 

 

Because in spite of the concerted effort to bring the people of 

this province to their knees, they are rising up and they are 

saying to me and they are saying to members of our caucus, we 

don't like what's happening.  We think we know where the 

government is going.  We are suspicious of their motives.  We 

don't trust them.  We don't trust them.  They have betrayed that 

trust too often and we think we know what the ulterior motive 

behind this health reform is. 

 

And they are telling me, and that's why I have repeated a 

number of times what they are telling me.  This afternoon I've 

repeated a number of times already.  Fundamentally they are 

convinced that the ulterior motive of this government is simply 

to do a massive offloading, an offloading, number one, of 

responsibility, and number two, of funding. 

 

The offloading of responsibility.  That is why Mr. Anderson 

and Mr. Wright are saying, we're not going to touch the elected 

portion of those health care boards with a 10-foot pole.  They 

want nothing to do with that because it's going to be pitting one 

community after another, against another.  And the people that 

are going to be on this board are going to have to be the 

messenger.  They are going to be the executioners of the 

wishes of this minister. 

Because there won't be funding.  There won't be the money.  

They know that.  And they are going to be forced into a 

position of making the painful choices on behalf of the 

Minister of Health and the Premier of this province.  They 

recognize that. 

 

That is why I think you're going to have trouble getting enough 

elected members on those boards.  And we can go into the 

composition of the boards, Mr. Speaker, but we can do that at 

some other time. 

 

There's a very, very suspicious element involved in those 

boards as well, where the government will want to indirectly 

control and maintain control over those boards.  So there's a lot 

of suspicion by the people about the motives.  Now it's not only 

the motives of the offloading of responsibility, but also the 

offloading of financing.  And SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) and SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) see through 

that, and they have a lot of concern about that, Mr. Speaker.  

They have a lot of concern about that. 

 

In fact I'm holding in my hand now a press release from 

SUMA, Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, and 

the headline on this particular press release is: health care 

funding through the property tax base must end.  You see, Mr. 

Speaker, this organization saw through the plan of the Minister 

of Finance when she instructed the Minister of Health to do 

this.  They see through that.  It's an offloading, where SUMA 

basically says, and I quote, in this press release of March 4 -- 

and I'll read this part because we have to give you some credit: 

 

SUMA is pleased that the new health district boards will not be 

funded out of the property tax base, an assurance we received 

from the Premier at our recent convention.  However the new 

Act does not address the existing hospital revenue tax which 

amounts to a 2 mill levy. 

 

(1630) 

 

They still have the concern, Mr. Speaker, that The Hospital 

Revenue Act is still there, and they suspect very, very much, 

the ultimate end to which this government is going to use that 

particular Act.  And consequently, Mr. Speaker, consequently, 

the release goes on: 

 

SUMA's membership has taken the position that health care is 

the responsibility of the province and therefore should be 

funded exclusively through provincial revenues. 

 

Who's saying that?  Not the opposition; this is SUMA.  All the 

urban municipalities of this province are combining together 

and sending a message to this government, Mr. Speaker.  And 

they go on, and the last quote on this particular release says: 

 

Premier Romanow made a commitment to remove health care 

funding from the property tax base.  That being the case, 

SUMA is calling on the province to 



March 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 413 

announce a date for the repeal of The Hospital Revenue Act 

which will result in the removal of hospital levies from the 

property tax base. 

 

That is their concern, that this is a roundabout way of the 

government simply abrogating their responsibilities, passing it 

off, sloughing it off, passing the buck, and ultimately allowing 

for the municipalities themselves to make up the difference for 

what the offloading this government is anticipating. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was SUMA.  I'll come back to that in a few 

minutes. 

 

As we know, last week the other major organization in this 

province, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities, better known as SARM, had their annual 

meeting March 9, 10, 11, and 12.  There was group 10, a 

number of resolutions under group 10, what they call, which is 

the Department of Health and resolutions affecting the 

Department of Health. 

 

Resolution no. 27, by a whole host of RMs (rural municipality) 

came forward with this one.  I'm going to read this one for the 

edification of all members present: 

 

Whereas real property like land and buildings is a poor 

measure of wealth and is now taxed too much and for too many 

purposes; 

 

and whereas multiple access to the property assessment base by 

different taxing authorities is fiscally irresponsible; 

 

and whereas the provincial government should reduce its 

dependency on the property assessment base for funding social 

programs; 

 

and whereas the provincial government is changing the health 

care program and promoting the formation of large health care 

districts which will amalgamate all health care services; 

 

and whereas the financing of the new plan has not been 

announced; 

 

Therefore be it resolved that the new regional health districts 

not be empowered to access the property assessment dates, 

either to tax levies or through grants in lieu of such levies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SARM is saying, we know what you guys want to 

do, we know your plan, and we're not prepared to accept it.  

There is a specific resolution now passed . . . Oh by the way, 

Mr. Speaker, this resolution passed.  It is the commendation 

now of SARM that you cease and desist. 

 

But there was another one brought forward.  Resolution No. 28, 

Mr. Speaker.  It's a very short one.  I will read that into the 

record: 

 

Whereas health costs in Saskatchewan are steadily escalating, 

therefore be it resolved that the revenue 

required for health services in the province of Saskatchewan be 

generated by lottery funds and/or user fees rather than taxation 

or levies on property. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to go into the rationale of why 

SARM would want to allow lottery funds and/or user fees to 

generate funds for health services.  That's another debate that is 

not germane to what we're talking about this afternoon. 

 

But be it noted explicitly that it does say, rather than taxation or 

levies on property.  People in this province are taxed out.  

Businesses are taxed out.  Property owners are taxed out.  And 

they fear, and I suspect, Mr. Speaker, rightfully so, that the 

motivation behind this health Bill and the funding of health is 

such that the government is using this as a strategy to offload 

health care services onto property tax owners. 

 

And that will generate more of the multi-tiered type of health 

services that I was talking about previously because there's a 

different tax base in this province that RMs and municipalities 

operate under.  Not everybody has an oil well in their 

jurisdiction, not everybody has a potash mine in their 

jurisdiction, or a Weyerhaeuser or a Saskferco or any of these 

other large revenue generating, tax paying industries and 

companies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So therefore if a hospital is needed or some other health care 

facilities or health care is needed, these would be able to quite 

readily generate the revenue necessary with their large tax 

base.  But the others, and I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, by far 

the majorities of our municipalities would not have that luxury, 

would not have that option, period. 

 

And so therefore I would suggest to you -- and many people 

that I'm talking to are suggesting to me -- that we will, in fact 

and indeed, have different levels of health care in different 

areas of the province.  And that is absolutely unacceptable to 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was another one -- resolution.  I won't read 

it, but it basically deals with another concern that SARM has 

and I've already alluded to it, and that is the option that the 

Minister of Health had -- not only an option; a right that she 

will be doing and taking -- and that is that she has the right now 

to appoint members to the board. 

 

The boards are not going to be entirely elected.  There will be 

appointments made by the minister, enough appointments I 

would suggest to you -- and this is a concern that SARM has, 

members of SARM have -- and that is that there will be enough 

members appointed so that the minister will maintain control.  

All you have to do is get a few of your own philosophically 

minded people that are the equivalent to your philosophical 

bent, and you'll have control of the board.  And this is a 

concern, Mr. Speaker, that many, many people are expressing 

to me as well. 

 

I'm going to summarize by bringing into perspective, by 

bringing into perspective where we see ourselves 



414 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1993 

today in this health reform adventure, and try to relate that to 

where people back in October of '91 were expecting to be at 

this time.  I've alluded to the promises made by the members 

opposite in their bid to become government, in their bid to be 

elected. 

 

And during that period of time, Mr. Speaker, I want to bring to 

the public's attention some of the promises that members 

opposite were making, some of the commitments that members 

opposite were making with the electorate of this province, 

saying if you put your trust in us, if you vote for us, this is what 

we promise, this is what we commit to.  And I think after I read 

a number of these commitments, it will become apparent to 

members of the public why there has been this utter betrayal of 

that trust that the people put in members opposite when they 

elected them. 

 

There was on the Harasen line on October 3, 1991 -- that seems 

to me that's about 17, 18 days before the election, 17,18 days 

before the election . . . This is a commitment made by the now 

Premier, the then aspiring premier in October 3, 1991, and I 

quote from the Harasen line, where the now Premier is quoted 

as saying:  We will not charge premiums or deterrent fees or 

utilization fees, as they are called, for a number of reasons.  

Basically the fundamental is they are not a fair way to finance 

the health care program.  End quote.  They are not a fair way to 

finance the health care program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The litany that I have gone through over the last while now 

when we talk about the chiropractic fees that have been put on, 

the optometric fees that have put on, the charge to insulin 

patients that have been put on, the charge to you people who 

need oxygen for survival -- am I wrong?  Are these not 

deterrent fees?  Are they not utilization fees?  Are they not 

premiums, in a sense?  A premium on health. 

 

And yet on the Harasen line, October 3, 1991, the Premier says, 

we will have none of those because that is not a fair way to 

finance the health care program.  Those were his exact words.  

How does that compute?  How does that relate to promises 

made and subsequent actions taken. 

 

In The Commonwealth, which is of course an NDP 

newspaper, March 1988.  The now Premier is quoted to saying 

this: 

 

New Democrats would continue the fight to restore social 

programs such as medicare, the dental program, the drug 

program, to their former place of leadership for Saskatchewan. 

 

That's what he said then. 

 

I wonder what's going to happen to the drug program.  I asked, 

I thought, a very leading question to the Minister of Health on 

that the other day.  I was not particularly reassured with her 

answer and I don't think the people of this province were 

reassured with her answer.  Is this the fairness that you espouse 

to?  Is this what the people have to look forward to in 

tomorrow's budget as it is handed down? 

From the Leader-Post, the Minister of Health, the now Minister 

of Health in April 19, '91 said this about us, about us because 

we were only giving a 4 per cent increase to the health 

program:  Why should the sick and elderly carry the burden for 

your incompetence?  Why should the sick and elderly carry the 

burden of your incompetence?  That's what she asked us.  

That's what she asked George McLeod as minister of Health. 

 

Members opposite, that's what the people of this province are 

asking you today.  That's what they're asking you because they 

had higher expectations.  You had promised them and they 

believed you, and you have betrayed them.  And I submit to 

you that when the budget is handed down tomorrow, we will 

see the ultimate betrayal. 

 

I hope I'm wrong.  And if I am wrong, Mr. Speaker, I want you 

to give me the freedom and the privilege of getting up and 

apologizing.  I will do that.  But the indications and the track 

record, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately is such that I don't think I'm 

going to have to get up to make that apology. 

 

But this is the stuff that you people were saying.  On 

September 30 in the Star-Phoenix, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Simard suggests the province is moving towards a 

fee-for-service system where quality health care will be only 

available to those that can afford it. 

 

Fee for service.  What do you call that when you go to a 

chiropractor and have to pay; go to an optometrist and have to 

pay? 

 

Again, in Hansard, August 21: 

 

 The opposition is going to fight these health care cut-backs 

and these changes to medicare.  It's going to fight the erosion 

of the principles of medicare.  I feel rather certain we'll be 

having a change of government next time round and then the 

public isn't going to have to worry about these problems. 

 

That was a commitment made by the now Minister of Health.  

These changes, they are going to not allow them.  They are 

going to change them.  And when you folks form government, 

nobody is going to have to worry about these kinds of 

problems. 

 

(1645) 

 

Another promise made by the now Minister of Health.  This 

one is on April 14, 1992: 

 

 As the party which pioneered universally accessible health 

care in this province, designed to respond to need, not ability 

to pay, we categorically reject the concept of health care 

deterrent fees. 

 

Again, the litany of what I have gone through, what is 



March 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 415 

that?  This is an interesting one.  Prince Albert Daily Herald, 

the Premier, the now Premier on January 31, '91 said that he, 

the Premier, said he doesn't believe health care costs in the 

province are sky-rocketing.  The cost of medicare is well 

within the budget -- well within the budget. 

 

I mean how can that be?  Time after time, whether you're in 

Harris or whether you're in Prince Albert or wherever you are, 

you say whatever is convenient at the moment.  Shouldn't these 

kinds of statements and promises come back to haunt you?  

The cost of medicare is well within the budget.  Well, Mr. 

Premier, I say to you, tell that to your Minister of Finance so 

she can relate that message back to the member in Regina here, 

the Minister of Health, that you're on a wrong bent. 

 

The Leader-Post, March 26, '91, this was just after we put in a 

budget, Mr. Speaker, and the Department of Health was 

increased by 4 per cent.  The spending for the Department of 

Health was increased by only 4 per cent, and I quote: NDP 

Health critic Louise Simard immediately accused the 

government of eroding the health care system by starving it of 

money.  End quote. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I certainly look forward to tomorrow the 

Minister of Finance saying to the people of Saskatchewan, 

we're going to give you a 5 per cent increase.  I don't think it's 

realistic, Mr. Speaker, but these are the kinds of statements that 

members opposite were making that got them elected.  That's 

the point. 

 

Again, Leader-Post '91: the Conservatives cut back on public 

health nurses, provided stingy increases for home care and 

slashed health programs.  That was the time, Mr. Speaker, 

where we came up with a 10 per cent increase for home care 

funding, a stingy increase, a stingy increase. 

 

We have the now Minister of Social Services, I think, I believe, 

Saskatoon Broadview who said:  the health situation in this 

province is out of control.  We have a drug plan where people 

are making decisions between groceries and prescription drugs.  

Too little, too late.  End quote. 

 

So you were going to be the protectors of medicare.  You were 

going to be the protectors of the drug plan. 

 

Now I agreed we came up with a $125 deductible drug plan.  

We came up with a 125 deductible.  We were chastised as 

destroying the drug plan.  What did you folks do last time 

around -- 300 per cent increase, 305 per cent increase? 

 

What is a per cent increase when you increase something from 

125 deductible to $380 deductible, and growing?  What's going 

to happen tomorrow?  What's going to happen tomorrow?  

That's a question that many, many people are asking 

themselves. 

 

We know . . . and I've heard of druggists now who are saying 

about the long line-ups and people buying prescription drugs 

trying to get as many ahead of the 

game just like the folks right now are lining up at the gas 

bowsers. 

 

Just like I heard the other day an advertisement from a furniture 

company saying, beat the budget, come and buy now.  Beat the 

budget because it's going to be what?  It's going to be 9 per 

cent, 10 per cent on the PST (provincial sales tax)?  Expanded 

base, all of these other wonderful things that you have in store 

for the people who trusted you when the member from Regina 

-- the toy minister of Finance at one time -- Churchill Downs, 

said: there will be no tax increases for two years if we form 

government. 

 

Folks, that's why you were elected.  Don't we have the right 

now to remind you about it?  I don't think we have to remind 

the people about it, because that's . . . they heard you, they 

listened to you, and they believed you.  And they said, that's the 

kind of government we want.  And they voted for you because 

they trusted you. 

 

Tomorrow we will see whether their trust was well founded.  

Because right now they don't believe it, from what they've seen 

so far.  They don't believe it.  I'm quoting now from the Moose 

Jaw Times-Herald, February 27, '89, and I quote:  Romanow 

said the Devine government has caused considerable harm to 

the finest health care system in Canada by destroying the 

prescription drug plan and the dental care program and not 

providing hospitals with adequate funds. 

 

I don't know whether the Premier was still in the 1970 

mentality, the super '70s when everything was gung-ho and 

there seemed to be no end to what we were able to do. 

 

One more quote, Mr. Speaker.  Health care and education have 

been underfunded . . . This comes from The Commonwealth 

again, Mr. Speaker:  health care and education have been 

underfunded and serious cuts have been made in these and 

other important services.  There has been increasing tax 

pressure on the business community, the home owner, and the 

farmer because of underfunding of municipal governments and 

school boards. 

 

We'll leave the school boards out of it right now. But municipal 

funding, Mr. Speaker, that is the concern; offloading -- 

offloading of responsibility.  It's not my fault; don't blame me.  

It's the local health board that made the decision.  It's the 

hospital board that made the decision, whatever the decision. 

 

But the people are now saying, protect us from the offloading 

where the municipalities, the property owner, is going to have 

to foot the bill through their property tax situation.  That's what 

they're concerned about.  They don't want to have to be forced 

into the corner where they have to raise their own funds to pay 

for their health care system. 

 

That is why, Mr. Speaker, that is why SUMA is saying, that 

being the case, SUMA is calling on the province to announce a 

date for the repeal of The Hospital 



416 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1993 

Revenue Act.  Because they see this as being an avenue 

whereby the government can actually access taxes on property 

on the property base.  They do not want that to happen. 

 

And that's where the Premier and the Minister of Health were 

kind of confused about the $43 million raised.  The Premier 

was saying that was raised through the property tax Act; the 

Minister of Health was saying that was raised by the hospital 

union Act.  Now we should get our story straight on which is 

which.  The two are totally different, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And because of the big concern that is being expressed both by 

SARM and by SUMA about this possibility of offloading on 

the property tax base, where the property taxpayer is already 

extended beyond what they can capably pay for, and because of 

the fear of the tremendous increase that they potentially are 

facing on this offloading and downloading, which seems to be 

the strategy of the government, they are saying that that 

revenue . . . hospital revenue Act has got to be taken out 

because that will prevent the government from doing 

something to the back door that they are afraid of doing 

through the front door.  Get rid of that Act.  Then at least if it's 

going to be done that way, come before us, be clean, upright, 

forthright, upfront, and do it by a Bill that is actually going to 

be called exactly what it is, and that is a further degradation of 

the property tax base of this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, because of that, I move: 

 

 That the Assembly move to a consideration of Bill 10, An 

Act to Protect Municipal Property Taxpayers in the Province 

of Saskatchewan through the repeal of The Hospital Revenue 

Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 4:54 p.m. until 5 p.m. 

 

The Speaker: -- It now being 5 o'clock, the vote on the 

superseding motion lapses and this House stands adjourned 

until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 

 


