




















































Hansard: June 21, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2715 

 June 21, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, I 

actually have some questions that I don't expect you to have the 

specific responses to this evening.  But if you could provide 

them to me in writing, I'd be appreciative. 

 

Could you please tell me the total expense incurred from 

expanding the cabinet from when it was 12 to 18 and then to its 

current 16.  And I ask that in your answer you detail for me the 

following specific expenditures: first, the number of additional 

ministerial assistants that were hired, including the names of 

those who were hired, the rate of pay at which they were hired, 

and their current rate of pay; secondly, other staff who were 

hired as a result of the expansion, again including the names of 

those hired, a job description for each, the rate of pay at which 

they were hired, and the current rate of pay of those 

individuals; thirdly, the total value of additional salaries 

provided to members of the Legislative Assembly who were 

promoted to cabinet; and fourthly, the total value of additional 

benefits and allowances provided to MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) promoted to cabinet, such as their 

government vehicles, cellular phones, expenses for 

entertainment, and so forth. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- We'll undertake to provide that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Premier, last week when I had the 

opportunity to raise some questions with you, I was wanting to 

find out from you some of the policies regarding health for the 

province and the direction in which it's going.  I think this can 

be done quite expeditiously.  I'm wondering if you would 

comment, please, and I'll go back to one of the things that I 

raised and was unable to get a response to. 

 

In a letter to your fellow New Democrats, your Minister of 

Health wrote, and I quote: the changes coming in health will be 

implemented with extreme care.  And yet your government 

decided to tell 52 communities that they would not have acute 

care funding after October 1.  And this was before the boards 

were ever given an opportunity to finish their own needs 

assessment.  I would like your comment, please, on why it was 

that you chose to go ahead and change the shape of the 

playing-field, and the rules, without notice to these 

communities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't agree with the 

member's view that there was no notice.  The notice was fully 

there in the field inasmuch as everybody knew we were 

moving into health districts areas.  But what everybody was 

asking the ministry of 

Health was very simple.  They wanted to know what the 

funding objectives for this year were going to be, what kind of 

configuration.  They needed some, as they described it, some 

leadership from the Department of Health in this particular 

area.  And that's exactly what we endeavoured to do, was to 

provide the numbers based on national averages and fiscal 

needs, if I may put it that way, on our side. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  Mr. Chair, Mr. 

Premier, I guess one of the concerns that people have raised on 

a consistent basis is that they really did believe that they were 

going to be more a part of the process, and particularly those 

communities that were taking this quite seriously and were 

excited by the prospect of being engaged in change but really 

have felt that they were being left out. 

 

The health centres that have been talked about have been 

commented on by you in the following terms.  You've stated 

that health centres can provide physician services; can provide 

therapy services; can provide 24-hour, on-call nursing lines; 

can provide access to ambulance services; can provide access 

to social services; and can provide self-help counselling 

groups. 

 

And I guess the concern here is not so much what they can 

provide, but what they will provide.  And I would like your 

comment on that, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well again in an attempt to be 

consultative and to make sure that we get the input of the 

communities, what we want to do is to have the health districts 

form themselves as quickly as they can.  Then each region will 

know what their specific needs are with respect to acute care 

beds, hospital locations, and wellness centres and the like, and 

what they think is needed for the particular area. 

 

The Department of Health has a variety of ideas but I don't 

think that they can be monolithically applied to each and every 

district.  And I think these have to vary based on some two-way 

dialogue.  At the rural conference on health, on this health 

strategy which we just completed over the weekend, there was 

a lot of discussion in this regard, and I'm told by the Minister of 

Health some rather enthusiastic support still for the process of 

participation by people in the system. 

 

So we're looking for input and looking for definition, and I 

suspect sometime -- my guess would be either shortly before or 

shortly after, and here I have no authority to say this except 

perhaps maybe my own express timetable -- sometime before 

or after the deadline for the health districts, we will be in a 

better position to know which district has what and what a 

health centre would look like in each district. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, I guess part of 

what people are needing is the reassurance that we already 

know what their health centres are going to look like.  At a 

meeting in Eston 



2716 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

which I attended and your Minister of Health attended and of 

course the member from Kindersley was attending, there was a 

promise of ambulance and emergency services that would be 

upgraded before the closure of any hospitals.  But local people 

didn't think that this was possible.  And if anyone had taken the 

time in the Department of Health to have discussions with the 

people in this community, they would have found out that at 

present there aren't enough paramedics and there isn't an 

opportunity in the time frame that's been provided to be able to 

train the emergency medical technicians fast enough.  So I'm 

just wondering on their behalf aloud, what arrangements are 

being made in the event that these things will not be available 

for people because they . . . 

 

I wish to reiterate something I talked about last week, and that 

is that people do want to be a part of the process of change.  

They're not feeling threatened simply because reform is 

necessary.  They're feeling threatened because of the unknown, 

and they want some sense that they're going to be able to help 

determine what happens to their communities, and particularly 

when it comes to being able to have the kind of accessibility to 

services that they require.  So what arrangements are being 

made in the event that these things are not accessible for these 

people, such as ambulance services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I think the answer is not an easy one 

for me to make, because obviously, as the member I'm sure will 

appreciate, what is done or not done, what can be met or cannot 

be met, I suspect will depend upon the district to the district.  

And some districts we might be short and unable to fulfil a 

particular community need.  In another area we might be short 

and the Department of Health might be able to fulfil it. 

 

You identified the Eston one.  It so happens I happen to know 

that one too because Miss Thompson has provided me with a 

copy of her paper and I've looked at it, and I've asked the 

Department of Health people, because I promised Miss 

Thompson I'd get back to her in this regard, to do a further 

analysis of it and to give me some form of a report that I can 

respond to. 

 

But as the member will know, there are many communities out 

there and each one will have special needs and special, 

perhaps, concerns.  There's no doubt about it.  This is really a 

major undertaking.  And as I've indicated in many of my 

speeches, there'll be potholes and difficulties along the way.  I 

don't expect it'll be a neat . . . completely neat transition.  But I 

do think that in its fundamentals it'll be fairly successful, so 

we'll have to take each one of these on a case-by-case basis. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  I guess the point 

that I'm making is that we aren't really simply talking about 

communities here.  We are indeed talking about health districts.  

And I'm wondering, given your comment about there will be 

some communities that I'm sure find out that they don't have 

certain kinds of services and some that find 

that they're further along the way, I think this is precisely the 

case in point that I was trying to make some months ago, many 

months ago, that why is it that when we saw the medicare 

system in our province unfold, it didn't just simply happen.  It 

unfolded and health regions of this province were actually the 

pilot projects for it. 

 

I'm wondering why it is that we're doing such carte blanche 

change without providing people the bottom-up opportunity to 

be involved and doing pilot projects in order to determine what 

works and what doesn't.  If a certain period of time happened to 

be designated to be able to look at how we could provide 

services in certain health districts and if actually the people be 

empowered to carry that out, I think they would have done so 

not only enthusiastically but they would have been able to find 

out things that perhaps we won't be able to find out now 

because the process has been usurped. 

 

I hope that you will comment on this because I'm wondering 

where it is you have stood as far as a pilot project in different 

parts of the province.  And the reason I'm asking this is because 

the south-west part of the province is significantly different 

from the North.  Northerners have been given a certain specific 

and different mandate and time period from different other 

parts of the province. 

 

And what we're talking about here are areas of Saskatchewan 

that are significantly and uniquely different from one another.  

And I think a pilot project would have very much been a 

valuable undertaking when we're looking at the different needs, 

the different distances, the different approaches already used to 

health care in different parts of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I think essentially there are three 

points that I'd like to make in response.  First of all, with 

respect to the Swift Current health district, the so-called 

forerunner to medicare, I think that region was around for 

something like 29 or 30 years before actually medicare got 

established.  I think it's a little too long to wait as a pilot 

project. 

 

The second point I want to make is that much information 

really is around and available.  The documentation is there. It's 

a question of organizing it and translating it. 

 

And finally, I think the point that the member makes herself in 

support of pilots is probably one of the arguments against 

pilots.  You might be able to find a pilot project in the 

south-west where you can learn about the south-west, but not 

really learn very much with respect to the far north because the 

circumstances are, as you've pointed out, totally different. 

 

I think what's required is to make the move for the 

reorganization of the health delivery systems based on the 

objectives of the health community and the people at large.  So, 

to me, I think it's a question of why wait, and to what extent 

would it really be of assistance. 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2717 

Ms. Haverstock: -- So, Mr. Premier, I didn't indicate that Swift 

Current was the pilot project and that it took place in a specific 

time period.  I indicated that it was one region that was 

expanded into other areas of the province on a region-by-region 

basis. 

 

And what we're talking about here are health care districts.  

And for you to indicate that there has been documentation on 

this is an absolute fallacy.  There is no documentation on what 

you're calling the wellness model of the New Democratic Party 

of Saskatchewan in your government.  There is no 

documentation.  And there is no documentation to which 

people can go from one district to another.  This has not been 

applied.  You can talk about things that have been discussed in 

theory, but you cannot talk about it in an applied sense.  And 

that's what has people worried. 

 

(1915) 

 

And I'm not indicating for one moment that people in the 

south-west would be the only pilot project and that somehow 

that should then be taken and spread throughout the province.  

I'm talking about the uniqueness of areas and that people 

should have the right and the opportunity to participate in 

creating what is going to work for them.  And that, to me, is 

really a substantive issue here. 

 

We have a lot of people in rural Saskatchewan who have done 

some very, very, I think, experimental things.  They've done 

things which have created an unusual circumstance for their 

particular area.  And what we need to do here is to provide 

them with the challenge and the opportunity to be involved. 

 

Now your health care districts Act allows you to appoint 

members, but will this also allow you to appoint additional 

members to boards when you see fit?  Because I don't quite 

understand what the implications are of that particular Act, 

section of the Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well again, Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry I 

cannot enlighten the hon. member about the specific provision 

of the Act.  I do not have a copy of the Act in front of me or 

nor the officials either from Health or AG (Attorney General) 

to give an interpretation of that section.  But I can certainly 

take a look at it and provide some information at some later 

time. 

 

But the two points that I do wish to make is that I think that 

there's a lot written about wellness.  I remember serving on a 

Canadian Medical Association task force committee, 

nationwide, myself from 1983 to '85.  And we tabled a great 

big report, the CMA (Canadian Medical Association), talking 

about wellness.  I don't think . . . I'm not arguing it's the 

definitive word, but certainly there's lots written.  And the 

Minister of Health herself talked about what wellness concepts 

she had in the consultative process which began well over a 

year ago. 

The second point that I wanted to make is that I agree about the 

uniqueness of the areas.  I was not trying to single out the 

south-west, except I thought your first argument was that 

things should be gradual, that there should be sort of an . . . 

(inaudible) . . . there should be sort of a step-by-step approach 

to this.  You were talking about how medicare evolved from 

the Swift Current health district.  And all I'm saying, it took 29 

years, or roughly that, whatever the figure . . . maybe even 

longer than that for it to blossom into medicare.  And I think 

that this is too long when it comes to the reorganization of 

health care services. 

 

This plan that we have allows the uniqueness of the areas.  In 

fact, the very beauty and the pain of it is to say to the far north 

or to the Eston, Kindersley region, look, get together and 

decide for yourselves which is best for your areas rather than 

by fiat or by diktat from Regina.  We want to hear what you've 

got to say. 

 

Now we've got to get those boards formed first in order to 

determine what they have sorted out for themselves in the 

regions and in the areas, and then we can see what we can do to 

help out.  The other way would be -- and I'm not being political 

about this -- but the other way would be to do it like New 

Brunswick has done it.  New Brunswick simply, by fiat, has 

eliminated 33 hospitals and now has one hospital board 

virtually for all of New Brunswick.  And all the standards and 

the nature and the form of the health care system is, in effect, 

dictated to by the Department of Health. 

 

I don't dispute Premier McKenna's approach.  He knows what's 

best for his province.  I'm only saying that that is the other way 

to go. 

 

We have chosen a hybrid situation, one which allows 

meaningful community input and sorting out, painful as it 

might be, challenging as it might be, participatory as it might 

be.  Some are further advanced than others.  We've chosen that 

model coupled with where we can guide, supplement, augment, 

answer at the provincial level, thus the dialogue that continues 

on.  And if in the consequence there are some uncertainties, I 

think that that is the price that one pays for consultation and 

meaningful input. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Premier, by the very statement "pilot 

project" it implies a time frame or it wouldn't be a pilot project.  

We're not talking about endless stringing out of 25 or 30 years 

of a pilot project.  We're talking about providing people with a 

specific period of time in which to have some autonomy in 

their own area of the province and make some determination as 

to what works for them. 

 

You may state that you are interested in what people have to 

say, but I'm hearing from a lot of people, some of whom who 

do not have their hospitals earmarked for closure, that people in 

the Department of Health and your government are not 

interested in what they have to say.  So that's in part why I'm 

asking this series of questions this evening to you. 

 

And you may indicate, Mr. Premier, about wellness 



2718 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

and having . . . that we're rife with material as far as wellness is 

concerned.  But you are indeed talking about what you 

specifically stated, and that's concepts.  Concepts are quite 

different from applied practice, and that's what this happens to 

be about, that people don't simply want to be told that they'll be 

safe, based on a concept.  They want to be involved in knowing 

what they can have in place before fundamental changes are 

made and their lives are put at risk. 

 

And it's a very, very different thing for your dad or your mom 

to be in Regina or Saskatoon and have a heart condition versus 

someone who's in Mankota with a mom and dad who lives 

there with a heart condition. 

 

And that's really what this is about.  It's ensuring that people 

indeed are listened to and that they are empowered to 

participate in change to their own district.  And these people 

with whom I've spoken, they are not adverse to change.  

They're quite willing to embrace change but they don't feel like 

they have been real participants in that and that's their major 

concern. 

 

Mr. Premier, there are questions about how districts will deal 

with debts for capital projects, and in a situation where a board 

has been created where acute care hospitals must be converted 

into another facility, who is going to decide how debts from 

capital projects are settled? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Again, Mr. Chairman, with respect to 

the specific question, this will have to be answered and will be 

answered, I suspect, by fall time when the boards are actually 

established and the consultation process has been completed. 

 

As for the first part of the comment, the use of the word 

empowerment, that's exactly what we're doing here is we're 

empowering people.  And again I understand what the member 

says but I don't think it's empowerment to say, well we'll give 

or establish a pilot project for one area but for the others it 

trudges along the way it does.  The system sort of decays and 

gets weighed down by all of its inefficiencies and all of its 

governance and structures, but for this area it continues. 

 

I mean I understand what the member's saying but I don't think 

it works that way and I think, moreover, not much can be 

learned.  I repeat again, from a south-west pilot project with 

respect to its health care needs, a lot can be learned but not all 

can be learned from a pilot project in the south-west and, say, 

the far north.  We have to get in there and we have to give it a 

try and have to see what the communities can do. 

 

And I have great faith and confidence in the local community, 

local communities, local leaders of the communities, to get 

together around the health district boards and talk amongst 

themselves and decide what exactly would be needed for this 

community or that community, what kind of ambulance care, 

what home care, what outreach care, meals on wheels.  I think 

that people in this province are ready to 

contribute in a very positive way and that's what they're telling 

us -- let's get on with it and let's get our sleeves rolled up and 

do the job. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, you're 

absolutely right.  The people of Saskatchewan do know what's 

best for themselves and they do know what's necessary for their 

communities, and they do not feel like they're being much 

heard in terms of the contributions that they're able to make. 

 

Part of the concern that I have here is that some of these 

answers should be known before the fall when these things take 

place.  If you don't know the answers, then perhaps we should 

find out some of those answers before we proceed any further. 

 

In the event that money is owed by a community whose 

hospital is slated for closure, who's going to be obliged to pay 

that?  I mean, you should have the answers to these things 

before it happens, not waiting until October to determine after 

the fact. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well again I say with the greatest of 

respect to the hon. member, she can't have it both ways.  You 

can't on the one hand say that we should be listening, and then 

on the other hand saying, as you are to me tonight, don't worry 

about what the people might have to say about this; tell us and 

tell me what's going to happen in these sets of hypothetical 

questions. 

 

So what is the position of the Liberal Party?  Do I listen or do I 

not listen?  What if I put out something by diktat, or do I 

answer something on hypothetical circumstances?  I'm saying 

to you that the proper way to proceed is to listen to the 

communities, listen to what they've got to say, have them put 

forward these concerns of which they are variances. 

 

There are variations of that for the very argument the member 

talks about.  The province is different, and in due course, 

hopefully with more people in support of the policy 

conclusions that are made than opposed, we can unveil a plan 

which has a sense of empowerment, a sense of purpose, a sense 

of flexibility, and a sense of modernity to it. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, with the 

greatest respect to you, I'm not asking these questions for my 

well-being.  I'm asking what people throughout this province in 

various communities, particularly rural communities and 

remote rural communities, are asking of you.  But you're not 

hearing. 

 

They want to know what happens in terms of how debts from 

capital projects are going to be settled.  They want to know 

who's going to be obliged to pay when we're talking about 

monies owed by a community where the hospital already is 

slated for closure.  They're wanting to know this. 

 

And I don't think that it's simply a case of, you either listen to 

the people but don't have any answers and wait for them to 

come up with the answers.  I think that 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2719 

you're obligated to know where it is you're going and what 

direction you're going in and help these people to, first of all, 

understand the bigger picture and allow them to be participants 

in the process.  These are questions they're asking, not me. 

 

The idea of voluntary funding is another one that creates an 

enormous problem.  We all know that some areas of this 

province are more affluent than others.  This inevitably means 

that some health districts in this province will be far better off 

because they can get voluntary funding while those in poorer 

regions of the province are going to be left out in the cold.  

People in those areas will receive . . . they're afraid they will 

receive a lower standard of care.  Are you concerned in fact 

that we have a possibility here of having this lead to a 

two-tiered system of health care in the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well indeed the whole purpose of this 

is to avoid a two-tiered system of health care because the 

reform is designed to obviously grapple with the growing push 

in Alberta and other places for a two-tiered system of health 

care.  So the answer to that is, of course we don't want a 

two-tiered system. 

 

But I want to come back to the very, very specific questions 

which I'm assuming the member had opportunity to ask the 

Minister of Health about, and received answers or did not 

receive answers, at least would have gotten the flavour of what 

I'm trying to say here.  When the member gets up and says that 

this is what the people are asking, it's the member who's asking 

the questions.  I'm not denying that there aren't people out there 

who don't ask these questions; but look, we're trying to answer 

them by listening and getting their input. 

 

There were hundreds at a rural health strategy, rural health 

strategy in Prince Albert, just 4 or 5 days ago, raising these and 

other issues in dialoguing, responding to the minister's and the 

officials' requests for their inputs.  Now that's, I think, the 

healthier process, that's the process of empowerment. 

 

If the argument is that we should simply by fiat or diktat, I 

repeat again, simply articulate the answers today, I'm not 

prepared to do that.  I do not have the detailed information to 

provide that in any event unless I get the Department of Health 

people to join me here.  But even more importantly than that, 

what I want is I want a full and adequate discussion and input 

by the public at large. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier, people may infer 

from your comments that I'm talking about a fiat or a diktat.  

I'm not making reference to either one of those things.  I'm 

talking about process in dealing with change to a system that 

has taken years and years to evolve.  And part of what we're 

talking about here is so many people in this province feeling 

under siege and not entirely as a result of things that have 

happened under your administration.  They are unable to cope 

in so many ways with the changes in their lives, with so many 

of their young people leaving their 

communities, the fact that they are hearing more and more 

often not only what is owed by the province of Saskatchewan, 

but hearing from the Canadian taxpayer's association how the 

Government of Canada actually owe $640 billion, and what 

this means to their lives, the fact that they're having to deal 

with so many changes, just in the way that their communities 

function -- small businesses having more difficulty and farm 

families not being able to cope with all of the things that have 

transpired over the last decade, not just in the last year. 

 

Part of what I'm trying to convey to you is that this one more 

change is very, very difficult for a lot of people.  It's difficult 

for health care workers in rural Saskatchewan.  It's difficult for 

health care administrators in rural Saskatchewan.  It's difficult 

for people who are ill in rural Saskatchewan.  And it's difficult 

for people who want to remain living in rural Saskatchewan.  

They want some sense that it isn't just gratuitous words in 

rhetoric, saying everything will be just fine. 

 

(1930) 

 

Yes they want some sense of direction.  They do want some 

direction.  They want to know that you know where you're 

going with the health care plan.  And they also wish to know 

that they can be part of that process.  It isn't an either/or thing.  

It isn't simply a fiat or diktat versus going out and listening to 

the people.  It's a combination of making clear what your real 

vision is, what the real plan is -- not just the vision -- but also 

the plan and the process, and then including them in that 

process.  And that's really what this is about. 

 

And I hope that what I've been able to do . . . you talk about 

people meeting in Prince Albert -- well I do have calls, not 

daily any more, but I do have calls frequently.  And I have had 

people who are a member of heath care boards in my office as 

recently as last Friday. And you may say that I'm simply asking 

these questions on my behalf.  I'm not.  I'm asking these 

questions on behalf of people who are concerned and they do 

want a clearer sense of what the real plan is. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 10 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Electoral Expenses 

Vote 34 

 

Item 1 -- Authorized by law. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan 

Vote 165 

 

Item 1 -- Authorized by law. 



2720 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

Vote 152 

 

Item 1 -- Authorized by law. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Vote 150 

 

Item 1 -- Authorized by law. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

SaskTel 

Vote 153 

 

Item 1 -- Authorized by law. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Legislation 

Vote 21 

 

Items 7 and 8 agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- And that concludes the votes and questions for 

the Committee of Finance.  If we could ask the Premier at this 

point to thank his officials for attending us before the Minister 

of Finance moves the motions for the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, you stole the very 

thought from my mind and the very words from my lips.  I 

want to thank the hard-working officials and to be very frank 

with you, the exchanges that I've had with the official 

opposition and the leader of the third party . . . So thanks to all. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd also like to 

thank the Premier and his officials for their work and even 

accommodating us over what was half of the supper hour.  

Thank you very much. 

 

Motions for Supply 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I move: 

 

 Resolved, that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1993, the sum of 

$68,514,200 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I move: 

 

 Resolved, that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year 

ending March 31, 1994, the sum of $2,947,231,000 be 

granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I move that the resolutions be now 

read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 

time. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

 That Bill 91, An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums 

of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Years ending 

respectively on March 3l, 1993 and on March 31, 1994, be 

now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be 

now read a second and third time and passed under its title, by 

leave. 

 

Motion agreed to on division and, by leave of the Assembly, 

the Bill read a second and third time and passed under its title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 90 -- An Act to protect the financial viability of 

NewGrade Energy Inc. 

 

The Chair: -- I should like the Minister of Justice to please 

introduce the officials who have joined the committee this 

evening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I have with me 

on my left, Mr. Harold MacKay, Q.C., of the law firm of 

MacPherson, Leslie & Tyerman.  Once again I have Mr. Ching, 

the acting president of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan), and Mr. Darryl Bogdasavich of the Department 

of Justice with me. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a few 

observations to make, Mr. Minister.  I have not had an 

opportunity to discuss this with you and talk to you about this 

from my perspective.  So I just want to make some points here 

that I think are relative. 

 

I think that there probably isn't a family in Saskatchewan that 

hasn't at some point in time dealt with a co-op movement, and 

have parents and grandparents that have been involved with it. 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2721 

(1945) 

 

And regardless of philosophy, they've organized these kinds of 

organizations throughout the province.  And so when you 

speak to them about various concerns, they're absolutely, 

totally familiar with some of the aspects of what the co-op 

movement is and what it can do.  And there probably isn't any 

one singular agency that is more focused and has provided that 

dynamic for being involved than the petroleum side of the 

industry. 

 

And I go back in a long way with that to my grandfather who 

was probably one of the first people to sign up in the co-op in 

the south-west.  And that was a part of what the family did 

there, and it was a community effort.  That's what it was.  It 

wasn't a philosophy.  It was a community response to a need. 

 

I guess one of the things that concerns me about how you're 

dealing with the refinery and FCL (Federated Co-operatives 

Ltd.) is that you're taking an almost an overpowering kind of an 

attitude towards them in bringing this Bill forward. 

 

I look at it and I'm concerned about it from a number of areas.  

You have all kinds of opportunities to bring forward, as my 

leader said the other day, arbitration.  You could deal with 

arbitration in a way that would probably satisfy the 

requirements.  And yet on the other hand, Mr. Minister, you 

negotiate in the public with taking away their rights in a court 

of law.  And that is, for me, somewhat obnoxious. 

 

It has been made that way by some of the other actions that 

you've done in the past.  And one of them is the employee 

contracts that you put forward, and that . . . taking the right to 

the court away on that one.  And then also on, even more, the 

taking away the right to the court by taking away the GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) contracts that the farmers 

had last year and saying, well it's in the best interests of the 

common . . . of the taxpayer and not recognizing that there are 

a significant amount of those people who you took it away 

from who are also taxpayers. 

 

And so, Mr. Minister, when I see this coming up for the third 

time, my question then becomes:  how many times are you 

going to destroy individual groups of people in the province of 

Saskatchewan with this kind of a function, with taking away 

their right to access to the court?  And I find that alarming.  

And you've done it systematically and for what you probably 

consider the good of the total. 

 

And I raise the question from another perspective.  When are 

you going to do this with the pension plans that teachers have?  

When are you going to do this with pension plans that SGEU 

(Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union) have?  And 

that, Mr. Minister, is the next on the book.  And if you really 

have the debt of the province in mind, then go after those big 

ones.  But no, maybe that's too big.  Maybe that's too big.  The 

teachers may amount to about 25,000 teachers in total who are 

in the pension plan, and I couldn't tackle 

that because there's a lot of teachers in my caucus. 

 

And yet you deliberately decided to take on the rural people in 

the province of Saskatchewan and deliver to them something 

that you would probably, if you were outside of the legislature, 

have taken and been adamantly opposed to.  If I would have 

done this in the 10 years preceding, taken the legal rights away 

from people to appear in the court, then you would have 

probably been the first to attack on the principle of democratic 

rights.  And yet you, sir, have seen fit to do it, not once, not 

twice, but three times. 

 

And then I ask the question, who's next?  Who's going to be 

next that you're going to say, we can eliminate that contract 

from the public and say it doesn't matter?  And that's why the 

Federated Co-op put this little line there: its threat of legislation 

to unilaterally amend the upgrader agreement is a totalitarian 

act unworthy of a democratically elected government.  And 

that, Mr. Chairman, is, I believe, they're accurate in their 

assessment of it, and they're accurate in defining what you're 

doing.  And that causes me a great deal of concern. 

 

The other reason why it causes me a great deal of concern: 

what you're doing, Mr. Minister, is attacking the under . . . well 

let's . . . for a better way of phrasing it, the underbelly of the 

co-op movement.  That's what you're attacking.  You're 

attacking the one that is indefensible from your perspective.  

And that is the reason why the co-op is irritated by it.  That's 

why people in this province are irritated by it.  You are, for 

example, in the $90 million that the Federated Co-op earned in 

dividends, or that's what they take in, the $90 million -- 34 or 

$30 million is roughly what is generated out of the refinery. 

 

Now that $30 million, that $30 million, Mr. Minister, accrues 

as a net benefit to who?  It affects just about every retail co-op 

in the province of Saskatchewan.  Why, Mr. Minister?  

Because they are in fact supplying the basis for solvency of the 

majority of the small co-ops in rural Saskatchewan.  So what 

you're doing is you're attacking those same rural people that 

you've attacked through the last session of the Assembly and 

through this session of the Assembly. 

 

And I'll just use one example of that -- the small community of 

Glenbain which is typical of all of the people.  And you were in 

the south-west for a while; you know where it is.  They have a 

very, very small hardware and grocery part, but the majority of 

that co-op operates on the basis of its petroleum products, the 

majority of that. 

 

And you can go to the Vanguard Co-op which is a small, 

independent co-op retailer.  You can go to many of those in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  The reason they survive in rural 

Saskatchewan is because Federated gives them a dividend in 

order for them to cover off the losses that they have in their 

hardware and in their groceries which they use in fact to supply 

a service to the community.  That is the reason, Mr. Minister, 

why I look at this in a way that says you're just devastating 

those rural retailers in Saskatchewan, 



2722 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

and that has caused a concern among many of the people in the 

province.  And I say to you that you are putting that co-op 

movement at risk. 

 

The article that Federated took out says the legislation puts at 

risk the future of CCRL (Consumers' Co-operative Refineries 

Ltd.) which operates Saskatchewan's only oil refinery.  And 

you're doing that, Mr. Minister.  There has to be a way that by 

arbitration that you put together the deal that's going to make it 

work from the taxpayers' side as well as FCL.  You can't be 

exclusive, just to say that's done and I'm going to take that $34 

million and put it into my pocket.  Because that's what you're 

suggesting to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I'll just give you an example of what that means on the 

average farm in the province of Saskatchewan.  The majority of 

the people who buy at a co-op petroleum service station buy 

their bulk fuel from the people from the Federated Co-op.  And 

I'll use myself as an example.  This spring Federated Co-op 

paid to the Pioneer Co-op in Swift Current a significant amount 

of dividends in relation to what they had sold, and by the litre.  

And I believe it came to three and a half cents a litre.  That's 

what the Federated Co-op gave to Pioneer Co-op in Swift 

Current. 

 

And you know what that was on my farm? -- $5,000.  Now 

there's three of us living on that place so you can split that off 

whichever way you like but it came to $5,000.  Now that 

$5,000, if you want to tax it, you're going to go right down to 

the very last of those farm rural people that you have picked on 

this session and last session and you're going to take that out of 

their pocket again.  And, Mr. Minister, that is what I see as one 

of the major problems in this. 

 

Fine, each one of those individuals is not a taxpayer but the 

majority of them are.  The Premier read from information he 

had from Farm Credit Corporation this afternoon.  He read 

about a third of the farmers in the province have no debt who 

pay taxes.  There's a third of them that are in the split between 

taxpayers and not taxpayers, and then you have the bottom end 

of the equity scale that are not the taxpayers.  But you have that 

in every group in society in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is the reason why these people don't 

deserve what you're going to give them.  They deserve a fair 

deal; they deserve a fair response from the perspective what the 

agreement says and also from what the refinery, as a separate 

unit from NewGrade, is required . . . or has been traditionally 

paying to the producers of this province of Saskatchewan.  And 

that, Mr. Minister, has to be recognized. 

 

I know that you took $20 million out of rural Saskatchewan 

when you took the farm fuel rebate and made coloured gas.  

That's what you did there.  You've taken and cut back on fees 

paid to the provincial government.  You've taken money in 

there.  All of these things are just pulling the money right out 

of rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, and now you're doing 

another one.  Now you're taking another one and you're going 

to say, this is going to be better.  Well Federated doesn't 

believe you're right and I have a tendency to believe them over 

you. 

 

And then another thing that comes to mind, Mr. Minister, is 

this: the concern that I have about other people wanting to 

invest in here. That causes me a great deal of concern and I 

think it should cause you some concern too.  Now in order for 

us to attract business of any kind, you're going to have to have 

a climate that allows them the freedom to operate.  And if 

there's a disagreement on the basis of a contract, then that 

disagreement has one place it has to be dealt with: not in this 

Legislative Assembly, but in a court of law.  Let the court 

determine whether you have a right in a contract, in a legal, 

binding contract. 

 

(2000) 

 

Another point that I want to raise with you, Mr. Minister, is 

that I believe that you have the responsibility to have windows 

of opportunity, a climate that is here for investment, and I think 

that you're taking it away.  Every time you realign one of these 

functions of a contract with people, you destroy your own 

credibility in the public of the province and other provinces.  

And that, Mr. Minister, is a fact. 

 

Federated Co-op is not unique to Saskatchewan; in fact, 

Federated Co-op is . . . probably only one-third of its sales are 

from Saskatchewan; the majority of them are from outside. 

 

Now the next one to come along, are you going to . . . one 

where you have a problem with a contract, are you going to do 

like you did with the potash mines?  Where the Supreme Court 

said to you and to the Attorney General at the time, we're not in 

agreement with the way you are taxing and therefore you had 

to change the rules?  And what you did finally was you bought 

the potash mines. And that cost the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan very, very dearly, Mr. Minister.  That cost the 

people of the province. 

 

I was not directly involved in politics as a member at the time 

but, Mr. Minister, I ran in 1975 and I ran in 1978, so I 

understand what was going on at the time.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, led to the fact that there was significant amount of 

people said, I don't want to do business in that province 

because of that.  And that is a fact, Mr. Minister. Not only did 

you do it with potash, you did it with other groups.  You did it 

with pulp mills.  You did it with packing plants.  You did it 

with a whole group of people in the province of Saskatchewan.  

You bought them out. 

 

And just take Intercontinental Packers, for example. You 

bought them out -- and what was their value?  Their value was 

not changed, didn't increase their jobs, didn't increase the 

volume of jobs.  Nothing of that happened.  And now you're 

saying, oh this is a bad deal done by the Tories, and now you 

want to discredit Federated Co-op in the whole scheme of 

things.  And that, Mr. Minister, is not fair to the Co-op and it's 

not fair to their members. 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2723 

The members' rights are at risk, Mr. Minister, but I have heard 

you explain this away when it came to the employee contracts 

that you broke when you put the rules and legislation in.  I 

heard all those arguments but I don't believe you.  And I'll tell 

you why I don't believe you.  A court of law will some day 

determine, Mr. Minister, by the Supreme Court, will determine 

that you did not have the right to take that away from . . . those 

rights away from people.  You do not have the rights. 

 

There is only one time that rights can be taken away from 

individuals to appear in a court, and that is when the court 

determines it, Mr. Minister -- not when the Legislative 

Assembly does.  Now you don't have the right of this Assembly 

to take that away from people because the Bill of Rights 

establishes that in the first place.  And I don't believe ethically 

and morally and legally you have the right to do that. 

 

And yet you say, well there is one part of the constitution that I 

can get around. It's a notwithstanding clause.  Or then I can go 

to the part that says, if there's a reasoned approach to the kind 

of things that we would say it perhaps is in the best interest of 

the people.  And that's why you put the whereas's in, to try and 

justify your position to the public, to try and justify your 

position in relation to the court. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, has not been done too many times.  I 

don't ever recall it having been done when I was in 

government.  And I don't ever recall it ever appearing prior to 

1982.  And that, Mr. Minister, is the reason why this 

Conservative government has a serious problem with what 

you're doing.  You're taking away that access to the court 

because you haven't got the courage to take it to court.  You 

haven't got the courage.  In fact you haven't got the courage to 

let it go to the Court of Appeal to deliver you an answer to 

what that would be.  What that contract reads . . . is it a 

legitimate contract?  Who else can you break contracts with, 

Mr. Minister, and then not allow them to go to court? 

 

Now there's going to be some discussion here probably because 

I'm a farmer, and a rancher, that we took the rights away from 

them in land bank, but we never took the access to the court 

away on them.  We never did.  In fact they had a better 

agreement after they were finished with land bank than they 

had before.  And we still haven't done anything to change the 

flow of the access to the court.  We never did. 

 

And yet I can recall early in 1982 and '83 when we did this, 

there was a big kerfuffle about it and then people said well, 

you're breaking the contract.  What they found out was that the 

contract that they got was better than the one they had.  And 

that is a fact.  And when they wanted to take it to court they 

were not excluded from court.  But you, sir, on three occasions 

have done that.  You have refused access to court. 

 

What's also interesting, Mr. Minister, the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) Party has traditionally represented 

groups of people who are supposedly those people who are the 

suppressed groups of people.  And I'm going to say to you that 

when you decided to take the access to the court out of the 

GRIP and the revenue contract, you took it from those people 

who had the least opportunity to mount an attack, to go to the 

Supreme Court on a challenge on whether you had the right to 

rule them out of the court. 

 

And so today that's what you're doing again.  And I say to you 

that if my tax . . . if my dividends were going to go to challenge 

you before the court, I would say to my co-op representative in 

the south-west part of the province, you do that because there is 

more at risk in this than just FCL.  There is risk in every one of 

those small communities in the province of Saskatchewan.  

Every one of them.  And that is the reason why, Mr. Minister, 

we find this extremely onerous, and we say to you, you should 

not be doing it. 

 

And I guess those are the kinds of challenges that I put to you 

as the Minister of Justice who is the first judge of the province.  

And I ask you how you can do that, how in good conscience 

you can do that.  And that is the question that I lay before you, 

sir. 

 

I don't understand how you, in good faith and conscience, can 

do that as the Minister of Justice.  And that's my question for 

you today.  How can you do that?  I find that very difficult to 

understand.  As a defender of the justice system, how you can 

do that.  And I guess maybe I should wait for an answer for 

you, and I'll do that and see what you have to say. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, the short 

answer is that in this Bill we're not taking away anyone's right 

to sue in respect of any cause of action that they now have.  I 

don't know where this idea got started that the Bill did that, that 

it was interfering with existing rights.  But the plain fact is that 

the Bill does not affect the right of anyone to sue anyone else 

under any contract or any cause of action that they may have 

right now. 

 

Now the member says that's what I say, and that's right, that's 

what I do say because the member looks at the Bill for two 

sections that affect the right to the access to the courts.  One is 

section 12, and the other is section 16.  So far as section 12 is 

concerned, this applied to actions or causes of action arising 

out of or relating to the enactment or application of this Act or 

anything done pursuant to or in connection with this Act or the 

regulations or an order in council made pursuant to this Act. 

 

And that's why I say as regards all the rights that everybody 

has, as we stand here and speak, those rights are enforceable.  

They're not going to be affected by the passage of this Act.  

They will be able to go to court tomorrow or next month or 

next year, whenever they want to, and this Bill will not 

interfere with their right to do that. 

 

The second section where there is a reference to access to the 

court is section 16.  Section 16 merely protects decisions of the 

minister where the minister is 



2724 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

given the responsibility, as is so often the case in legislation 

passed in this Assembly, to make certain decisions.  And all 

this says is that it is the minister who will make those 

decisions.  The court can't interfere with the minister's decision.  

The minister is mandated by this Assembly to make decisions 

and we have done that with almost countless boards and 

commissions throughout the whole of the government system 

in this province and every other province in Canada and for 

that matter the Canadian government itself.  And those 

decisions are almost without exception protected by this kind 

of a clause. 

 

If the minister makes a decision that the minister has no power 

to make, then the courts can enter, and they do it all the time 

and set the decision aside.  That happened just the other day in 

connection with the Labour Relations Board decision in the 

Westfair case.  Mr. Justice Barclay set aside the order of the 

Labour Relations Board on the basis that the board did not have 

the jurisdiction, under the law that we passed in this Assembly, 

to make that order.  So that would be the case here. 

 

But section 16 merely sets up a situation where the minister's 

decision can't be reviewed and altered in the courts where the 

minister is given the power to make that decision by this 

House.  In other words it's the minister who's responsible, not 

the courts. 

 

Now that's a far cry from what the member was saying.  That's 

a far cry from interfering with the rights of people to go to 

court.  Anybody who can now go to court can go to court after 

this Act has passed.  Those rights are not interfered with, not 

interfered with at all.  And as I say to the member, I don't know 

where this idea got started.  I don't know where it took root but 

it's been wrong from the beginning.  And I'm not blaming him 

for raising the point, but it simply has no substance. 

 

The second point that I would like to deal with that the member 

raised is the notion that in this Bill we are, as he said, attacking 

the underbelly of the co-op movement.  Now plainly that is a 

misstatement.  We have made it crystal clear in this House and 

outside this House that we want to negotiate the issues that are 

outstanding in this matter and we propose to do it on the basis 

of the Estey report. 

 

The recommendations in the Estey report are well known to all 

of us.  And all of us who have read that report must have been 

impressed by the extent to which Mr. Justice Estey was 

protective of the co-op system.  Over and over again he made 

the point that the co-op system is a very important factor, a 

very important institution in the life of our province.  And he 

was at pains to ensure that his recommendations did not 

endanger or threaten in any way the integrity, the financial 

integrity and the viability of the co-op system. 

 

But we want to negotiate a settlement to these matters on the 

basis of Estey.  It is the last thing that we want to do when the 

member says we're attacking the underbelly of the co-op 

movement. That's the last 

thing on our minds. 

 

What we're trying to do is resolve some of the obvious 

problems that exist in the contractual relations surrounding the 

NewGrade facility.  That's all.  And that's a far cry from 

attacking the underbelly of the co-op movement.  We think Mr. 

Justice Estey was perfectly right when he was as protective as 

he was of the co-op system, and we want to negotiate a 

settlement that's consistent with the recommendations that he 

put forward. 

 

(2015) 

 

Now the member said one other thing in connection with 

arbitration.  And as I heard him, he was suggesting that the 

issues between the government and Federated might be . . . the 

outstanding issues that we're trying to negotiate and trying to 

address in this Bill might be arbitrated, and that from that 

perspective would be a new idea.  No one has proposed that.  

Estey didn't propose it.  Federated hasn't proposed it.  I don't 

think that the Leader of the Opposition proposed it.  I didn't 

hear it anyway. 

 

But there are of course a . . . Arbitration itself is an issue in 

these negotiations because the arbitration process has not been 

working and hasn't for several years.  It has been unblocked 

recently, and we welcome that.  And if that works, of course, 

then the arbitration provisions in this Bill will never have to be 

proclaimed.  But the experience with arbitration has not been 

encouraging in this relationship, and so we propose to pass 

these provisions and, in the event that they become necessary 

to use in the future, to use them.  But we are perfectly prepared 

not to use them if the arbitration process continues and if it 

works. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I believe it was on Friday 

when the Premier was here, the Leader of the Opposition raised 

the matter of arbitration with him and said that we would be 

prepared to allow you to deal with those I believe it's four 

outstanding issues that are in relation to the agreement, that 

need to be dealt with. 

 

We said we would back away and not allow any interference to 

occur during the time of that arbitration.  And we would be 

willing to allow that to happen.  And the reason I raise that as a 

point to consider and also to say to you as a response to what 

you mentioned to us, that as I read through the Bill, on page 3 

and on page 4, you have set down a pattern where CIC (Crown 

Investments Corporation) will deliberately and systematically 

take away the rights of individuals because they have the . . . of 

the FCL because they have the authority under the Act to do 

that. 

 

You have dispute settlement mechanism and protection of 

NewGrade's financial viability and what you do is you move it 

from its own independence as an organization that is separate 

from FCL and separate from government, you take and 

establish the fact that the Lieutenant Governor in Council can 

determine exactly the rules of arbitration.  You say, we will 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2725 

arbitrate after this Bill is done, you put it into law, and then 

your decision for arbitration is what we get.  And we're saying 

to you, that's not the way it should be done. 

 

It says: 

 

 CIC may, on behalf of and in the name of NewGrade, do 

either or both of the following: 

 

Then it says: 

 

 CIC may exercise its powers pursuant to subsection (1) . . . 

 

Then it goes on: 

 

 (5) NewGrade shall reimburse CIC for the costs and expenses 

(of all of the things in relation to the arbitration) . . . 

 

Then you're going to take and not only say that all of these 

things that we have discussed are going to be according to CIC 

rules -- FCL has nothing to say about it -- they will then have 

to pay, they will then have to pay the upgrader, NewGrade 

upgrader, for those costs incurred in that confrontation and 

arbitration. 

 

And then we have the minister stepping in, in light of the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council getting involved -- which is 

the cabinet -- then the minister has the authority, based on the 

decision made by cabinet, made by cabinet under section 4(1), 

Mr. Minister. Under section 4(1), cabinet will decide what the 

rules will be in arbitration. 

 

You'll set the parameters, you'll set the rules because you will 

say, I have five people in the board of directors and they have 

three.  We will determine that.  We will say to NewGrade, you 

do this, and FCL has no choices.  And that's what the problem 

is. 

 

 . . . the Lieutenant Governor in Council may, by order in 

council, issue directives governing the conduct of the 

arbitration . . . 

 

Now is that outside of government that is allowing the freedom 

of arbitration to work?  That's not what I read.  That's not, in 

my view, what that says.  It goes on to say: 

 

 . . . may, by order in council (by the cabinet), issue directives 

governing the conduct of the arbitration, including, without 

restricting the generality of the foregoing, directives 

amending, modifying or supplementing the rules and 

procedures respecting arbitration set out in the operating 

agreement. 

 

So you can change anything in the operating agreement to suit 

yourself and then you have absolute determination by cabinet.  

Who goes and does it?  The minister.  The minister then goes 

out and does as cabinet has directed, based on section 16. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is where this whole thing flies 

apart.  In FCL's estimation of it, in my estimation of it as a 

politician, that is where the problem exists, because you will 

determine behind closed doors what the rules will be for 

arbitration.  You will determine then that the minister shall set 

those guidelines.  And with that power, with that power: 

 

 The Lieutenant Governor may, by order in council: 

 

  require CCRL and the Government of Saskatchewan to 

make equal cash payments to NewGrade whenever 

the minister (the minister, Mr. Minister) considers 

that NewGrade has experienced or may experience 

a cash flow deficiency . . . 

 

Now we go into the area of a probable . . . If you consider, for 

example, that CIC needs some money, you can say to 

NewGrade, well there's a probability that the differential in the 

oil, in the sour crude, is going to be $3 next year.  And then 

you can say, well we say it may happen and therefore we're 

going to say, you're going to have to pay equivalent to that.  

And then FCL loses.  They'll lose every time.  Because that's 

what your agenda is on this one, Mr. Minister.  It's to take 

control of not only, not only the upgrader but the refinery as 

well. 

 

And you do it, Mr. Minister. You're laughing, and what you're 

doing is you're doing it . . . In this Assembly, what you can't do 

directly, you can't do indirectly.  And that's a rule that should 

apply to this decision right here.  You are going to put the 

refinery at risk by the things you do with NewGrade.  And 

what can FCL do then? 

 

And it's like they said, we can just give up the whole thing.  

And we've had the Premier suggest in this Assembly, give me a 

dollar, give me a dollar and I'll sell the upgrader.  And he said 

that on a number of occasions. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I'll even do it for fifty cents. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'll give you the dollar right now and this 

caucus will buy it.  I'll even throw in the commission of ten 

cents. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Will you take all the debt too? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well why not?  The people in the province of 

Saskatchewan believe in it.  The people in the province of 

Saskatchewan believe in this.  But you don't.  You're the guy 

that doesn't believe in it.  I'm sorry.  The Premier doesn't 

believe in it.  The Premier is the individual who doesn't believe 

in the NewGrade and the refinery.  And that, Mr. Minister, is 

why this Bill is here.  Because he doesn't believe in it and 

therefore the people of the province of Saskatchewan and the 

co-op movement have to suffer for that.  And that causes very, 

very serious concern. 

 

So when you add up what you said in relation to what I said, 

because the one comes first, the directives from 



2726 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

CIC are going to come down the pipe from the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council.  Then they tell the minister and the 

minister will tell NewGrade exactly what the deal will be.  And 

that is the reason why, that's the reason why this Bill is so 

repulsive to the Federated Co-op.  And that, Mr. Minister, is 

why we on this side of the House have become rather defensive 

about the position in relation to this, and your position. 

 

And then, Mr. Minister, and then, Mr. Minister, when you 

decide what the arbitration process is going to be, what the 

rules are going to be, then the court is . . . opportunity for court 

in relation to that arbitration are taken away.  And you say, oh 

no, oh no, oh no, but I don't find it in here. 

 

If you really believe that why don't you take it out.  Why don't 

you just amend this Act to take section 12 and section 16 out 

and then see what kind of a Bill you have.  Then you would 

have to rewrite the Bill, Mr. Minister, because then your 

arbitration wouldn't work because there's no goodwill in this 

Bill.  There is no goodwill at all between you and FCL. 

 

This is a hammer, as driving a wedge between the government 

and Federated Co-op, and that causes a very serious concern on 

our part and the part of the members.  And that, Mr. Minister, 

I'd like to have you explain to this Assembly how this process 

works from the time that you decide that your cabinet has the 

authority to set the arbitration.  You tell this Assembly how 

you think it's going to work and then I'd like to hear that, and 

then we can talk further on it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well the member is of course just dead 

wrong, and the member knows perfectly well he's dead wrong.  

The member is dead wrong when he suggests there's some 

other kind of agenda operating here, and the member knows 

that he's dead wrong. 

 

The fact of the matter is that this is a project in difficulty.  This 

is a facility that is in difficulty.  Estey makes that perfectly 

clear.  A former Supreme Court justice in this province for five 

and a half months working with the parties to try and make this 

project work and he concludes that there isn't enough cash flow 

in the project for it to work.  It just doesn't generate enough 

cash flow to ever repay its debt.  That's something we have to 

accept, that's something you have to accept.  And it's something 

we have to do something about. 

 

It would be just the height of responsibility for us to sit here in 

this Assembly and just allow that situation to drift along, 

because it can't work.  Ultimately it will crash. 

 

The only question at issue is how we can save it, how we can 

put it back together, how we can remake the project in such a 

way that it will survive.  And that is a very, very difficult 

question.  It's a very difficult question for the government.  It's 

a very difficult question for the opposition.  And I realize your 

sense of ownership of this facility because of course you 

negotiated this deal in the first place. 

 

It's a very difficult problem also for Federated to have hooked 

up to their refinery an upgrader that just is not going to work; 

it's going to fail unless something is done.  And Estey makes 

that perfectly plain, and there's no miracle that's going to come 

along that's going to save this.  The differential is not going to 

grow to such an extent that suddenly there's enough cash flow 

to carry all this.  It's not going to happen and we can't just sort 

of sit back and hope and wish that something good will come 

along one of these years and then it won't be such a problem, or 

maybe the problem will go away altogether.  It's not going to 

do that.  It's going to require us to begin to solve it. 

 

Now we want to solve it by discussing with our partner, 

Federated, CCRL.  We want to discuss with them the issues, 

and Estey does a wonderful job of identifying the issues.  We 

want to discuss with them how these issues can be resolved in 

such a way as to make the project work, as to make the facility 

work.  We want it to work.  We want it to work.  We want it to 

survive.  We want it to continue to process Saskatchewan 

heavy oil into feedstock that can be used in that refinery, and 

we want Federated to continue to do well in its petroleum 

division from its profits from its refinery.  We want it to do 

that.  We want it in due course to reach the solution proposed 

by Estey as to the ownership and control of the refinery and 

upgrader.  We want that too.  All of that the member must 

know.  In spite of all his rhetoric, the member must know that. 

 

(2030) 

 

The question is how we get there.  We want to get there, as I 

say, by discussions and by negotiations with our partner.  And I 

ask the question: what kind of partnership is it when you can't 

even get discussions going with respect to the issues that aren't 

just our issues but are issues that have been identified by Mr. 

Justice Estey, who spent five and one-half months working 

with Federated and with the government trying to find a 

solution to these problems?  So we're not just pulling issues out 

of the hat, pulling issues out of the air saying, we want to talk 

about these.  We want to talk about what Justice Estey said we 

should talk about. 

 

Now what are you going to do when you can't get those 

negotiations going?  Sooner or later you have to act, and that's 

what we're trying to do in this Bill.  We're trying to act. 

 

Now I appreciate what the Leader of the Opposition said last 

Friday with respect to the arbitration issues.  That was an 

important thing for him to say and, as I say, we are heartened 

by the fact that Federated have unlocked the arbitration process 

and are allowing those issues to go to arbitration. And if that 

works, that's just fine. 

 

If that process as it's described in the agreement will work, 

that's just great with us and we won't ever have to proclaim this 

part.  It's only if we run into the 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2727 

problem that you ran into starting in 1989 where you could not 

get your issues to arbitration.  You couldn't get it to arbitration 

because it requires a 75 per cent vote of the board of directors 

to get a dispute to arbitration, and CCRL has 50 per cent of the 

board of directors and they simply blocked a reference of 

dispute. 

 

Now if we run into that situation again in the future, we're 

going to have to act.  We're going to have to act because 

arbitration is the only method of dispute settlement for most of 

the issues that arise under this agreement.  Now sure, that's not 

a big leap for any of us to take.  All we're requiring, in effect all 

we're requiring by this Bill is that the arbitration process set out 

in the agreement will work.  And the provisions in there that 

the member mentioned about CIC doing this and CIC doing 

that are simply there to ensure that the arbitration process, as 

the parties intended it, will work, will work. 

 

So if the board of directors in a future dispute, Mr. Chair, were 

to refuse to submit a dispute to arbitration as they have done in 

the past, then it says CIC, on behalf of and in the name of 

NewGrade, can submit the dispute to arbitration, or it can 

commence an action where the terms of the operating 

agreement provide that the question will be decided by a court. 

 

Those two provisions, in 3(1)(a) and 3(1)(b), are drawn 

precisely in accordance with the terms of the operating 

agreement and then the rest of the provisions in section 3 

merely give you a workable process if the arbitration has to be 

forced under this Act; a workable process where there will be 

someone arguing one side of the issue and someone arguing the 

other side of the issue.  And the way that it'll settle out is CIC 

will argue one side, CCRL will argue the second side, and 

away we go. 

 

By the way, just for the member's reference, it is on page 11 of 

Justice Estey's report that he talks about the project: 

 

 . . . in a financial sense (having) run aground.  Operating at 

capacity, it cannot sustain the existing debt load. 

 

And so on and so forth.  I refer him to that in connection with 

the argument that I made earlier.  Now Justice Estey 

recommended, of course, that the arbitration process be 

followed by the parties and, as I repeat again for the third time 

tonight, if Federated will do that, if that can stay on track, then 

there will be no need to proclaim part II of the Act. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- First of all, under section 5, you have the 

authority . . . well under section 4 you have the authority given 

to the cabinet or the cabinet takes the authority, transfers it over 

to the minister, the minister then refers it to CIC, and CIC then 

operates on behalf of the government under the direction of the 

court. 

 

Under section 6(2), you've already begun to put the items for 

arbitration within the framework of the Bill so that you can 

hold that hammer over their head too. 

And you say that if they failed . . . if CCRL failed to pay, 

together with the interest calculated at a rate, it is conclusively 

deemed to be debt due from CCRL to NewGrade. 

 

In my view, what you're doing is indirectly doing what you 

don't have the courage to do directly, and that's to tax the 

upgrader for those dollars.  And you're going to take it by 

arbitration and deem it to be correct and take it anyway.  And 

then you don't have to tell them that you're going to take it 

from a tax.  And indirectly this is the latest in a new-style 

taxing method. 

 

And that's what you're going to do, Mr. Minister.  You're going 

to deem the debt due from CCRL to NewGrade and then that 

payment goes to CIC.  And that, Mr. Minister, is how this 

reads. 

 

Now deeming, in my discussion with legal counsel in the GRIP 

debate, deeming is a legal -- and the three-letter word starting 

with L that I can't use -- deeming is a legal whatever.  It's the 

L-word; that's what deeming is.  You're making a law that you 

didn't want to have in place to start with to tax the refinery.  

You're taking a law and indirectly doing what you didn't have 

the courage to do directly. 

 

That's what you're doing, Mr. Minister, because you want to 

tax them but you don't want to call it a tax and that's the nuts 

and bolts.  This is a new-style NDP tax law, that's what is is.  If 

you don't play it my way, this is what you get.  And the 

arbitrator will be . . . the decision for arbitration will be made 

by the LG in C (Lieutenant Governor in Council).  And then 

who makes the rules?  The rules will be made by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 

Mr. Minister, there are a lot of negotiations that take place 

internationally and we have those that take place between 

Canada and United States, and there is an arbitration method 

set up that deals . . . sometimes we win, sometimes we lose.  

And that, Mr. Minister, I say to you: you haven't the courage to 

put this tax where you're putting it except by this method, 

except by this method. 

 

And you're going to deem it to be okay, that's what you're 

doing.  And then you're going to make NewGrade . . . FCL 

responsible to NewGrade and the debt and infusion of capital.  

If there isn't enough money there, you're going to say, you got 

to cough up some more, we'll change the clauses in the 

agreement; you'll do it unilaterally.  And then what have we 

got?  We've got section 16 that says you can't take the minister 

to court for doing it.  And that, Mr. Minister, is where it's at. 

 

This is a new tax law that we've got in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  A new system to bring tax in from a group of 

people who you haven't got the courage to go and say, I want 

50 per cent of your dividend profit, because you know it would 

make everybody angry in the co-op movement; but you're 

going to change the rules to make them pay before they get a 

dividend and then that's how you're going to solve the problem. 



2728 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

Because this has to do with two things: changing the rules to 

get the money, and getting the money is simply called a tax.  

And you haven't got the courage to tax it directly and you're 

going to do it indirectly.  And that's what this is about, Mr. 

Minister.  And actually, the Minister of Finance should be 

bringing this thing forward and not the Minister of Justice 

because it's a new kind of tax. 

 

It's a new kind of tax, and would you have the courage to tell 

this Assembly what that tax will be?  What's the percentage 

that you're going to require from NewGrade, who are going to 

require it from FCL in payment?  How much of that profit and 

dividends is going to be taken out of the FCL refinery?  How 

much? 

 

Federated has already said they're prepared to put some money 

in.  They've already said that they're interested in discussing 

that.  But what you have done is you want to make it an 

ongoing, an ongoing cost of doing business for Federated 

Co-op.  And that, Mr. Minister, is where we have a lot of 

grasping to do both within the framework of the law and 

whether it's legitimate to tax FCL in this manner.  And my 

question to you is: how much is the rate going to be that FCL 

gets taxed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well that, if I may say so, Mr. Chair, 

was a novel interpretation of what Bill 90 is all about.  That 

sort of boggles the mind because it is clearly not a tax and it is 

clearly not intended to be that.  I wonder is it . . . Do I 

understand from the member's speech that he has just made that 

it is the position of the opposition that the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan should be the sole bearer, be solely responsible 

for all losses suffered at NewGrade? 

 

Because I will tell the member that there is nothing in the 

agreement that provides to that effect.  There is nothing in the 

agreement that says that the government or in effect the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan are responsible for the losses.  And 

if I understood him correctly he must be proposing that we 

rewrite the agreement to insulate CCRL and Federated from 

any losses at NewGrade no matter what the circumstances, and 

I point out that that is not in the agreement and that would 

require a revision of the agreement. 

 

Now it's true that the government has stepped in and provided 

cash where necessary in order to meet crises from time to time, 

cash shortfalls.  And the government did that in the case of 

your government and in the case of our government because 

the alternative to it was default and default would mean a 

calling of the guarantees.  And neither your government nor 

our government want that to happen.  So in desperation, really, 

we put up the cash that we had to put up but there is nothing in 

the agreement that requires it. 

 

And Justice Estey says, on page 14: 

 

 It was not in the contemplation of the parties that 

Saskatchewan would supply the cash deficiency indefinitely 

so as to keep the project in operation mainly for the 

advantage of others, 

including FCL and its member Co-operatives. 

 

He so said. 

 

(2045) 

 

Now if Saskatchewan is not to bear the sole burden or losses, 

then what should be done about it?  Well what we propose in 

this Bill is that the responsibility for those kind of payments 

fall equally on CCRL and the government.  Now we have tried 

to negotiate that question with Federated and we continue to 

wish to negotiate it with Federated.  We'll meet them tonight to 

begin discussions on those and other issues.  Any time, any 

place, has been our attitude; and that has been our attitude over 

the past several months without any progress.  We stand before 

this House and report that there is no progress on that issue. 

 

Now do we just keep allowing time to drift along while the 

facility is, you know, under threat?  The facility is on shaky, 

shaky financial ground.  Or do we try and bring the thing to a 

head?  And that's what we try and do here. 

 

It's not a question of a new method of tax.  It's not a question of 

a new style of taxing, and it's certainly not a question of taking 

by arbitration.  The arbitration provisions are separate from the 

financial provisions set out in section 5, 6, 7, and so on -- 

separate entirely; separate issues. 

 

For something to happen under the financial part, part III, the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council, or at least the minister, would 

have to determine "that NewGrade has experienced or may 

experience a cash flow deficiency that may adversely affect the 

financial viability of NewGrade."  And the minister is 

responsible for that decision.  It's a ministerial decision that 

carries the normal responsibility of a ministerial decision, and 

it has to be exercised in accordance with the Act. 

 

If that happens -- and that can be a pretty serious circumstance 

-- it may involve, probably would involve, the viability of the 

project and the survival of the facility.  So the minister and the 

government has to act quickly.  And they act by invoking the 

powers under section 5, by passing the order in council, by 

requiring both parties to put up an equal cash payment.  Now 

the rest of it follows from that because if they don't put up . . . 

if CCRL or Federated won't put up their half then what do you 

do?  Well money's got to come from somewhere so the 

government will advance it and then collect from CCRL its 

half share.  And that's what those provisions are all about. 

 

It's not a question of a new taxing system or anything like that.  

It's a question of getting into NewGrade the cash that it needs 

in order to get over a cash flow deficiency that may adversely 

affect the financial viability of NewGrade.  Those are the 

words in the Act and those are the circumstances in which that 

power can be invoked. 

 

Now that, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Member, is not a new 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2729 

form of tax.  That is solving a problem with the agreement that 

you entered into -- not you personally, but your government -- 

which simply overlooked the question of who was going to be 

responsible if there was a shortfall.  I'll talk about a golden 

view of the future.  I suppose that could be characterized as a 

golden view in the sense of being a highly optimistic view of 

things to come.  But it is a serious shortcoming in the 

agreement and it is one that Estey has identified as requiring 

repair. 

 

We're prepared to talk about and to negotiate the circumstances 

of repairing that.  I want to restate that for the . . . how many 

times now.  We want to negotiate that and we're prepared to do 

so.  But in the absence of those negotiations, in the absence of 

some negotiated agreement, we've got to do something.  We 

just can't allow it to drift.  And there is no argument to be made 

on the basis of that agreement that it is the government or the 

taxpayers who are responsible for the annual losses that occur.  

There is absolutely nothing in the agreement to suggest that 

that's the case. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- NewGrade's got the debt.  There's only one 

refinery providing any kind of service in energy or using the 

energy that comes from that operation.  There is only one 

agency that uses that.  There aren't half a dozen.  There is only 

one that uses it, and you will say to that CCRL, we need to 

have $50 million this year or we need to have $30 million 

annually for the next five years in order for us to reduce the 

debt.  And what do you call that, Mr. Minister, if it isn't the tax.  

If you go to FCL, CCRL and say NewGrade is going to lose 

money if it doesn't reduce its debt load, if it doesn't reduce its 

debt load it's going to lose money . . . So you go to FCL and 

say I want $30 million every year for the next five years.  

That's a tax, Mr. Minister. 

 

That's like going to the CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway) and 

saying, we know that you've got the running rights across 

Canada, and you drive everyone of the rail cars through the 

province of Saskatchewan, and we're going to turn on you a 

capital tax, which is what we have done.  And what you're 

going to do is take an operating expense from FCL and put it 

into NewGrade.  That's a tax, Mr. Minister.  I want to know 

how much that's going to be, and I think FCL want to know 

how much that's going to be because that is nub of the problem. 

 

And reducing the debt is what NewGrade's got to do.  

Everyone of us recognize that.  But we want to know too how 

much that's going to be.  Is it going to be $15 million a year 

from FCL or CCRL for each of the next 10 years?  Is that 

going to be included with the very fact that they have to buy 

the energy from NewGrade? 

 

And that's what we're asking.  That's what we want to know 

too, and that's what FCL has to have an understanding of as 

well.  And that's what the people from across this province 

have to have: an understanding of what that's going to be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, there is 

nothing in Bill 90 that addresses the 

question of the reduction of the debt, of the long-term debt.  

Now Estey had a great deal to say about the reduction of the 

debt and made a proposal that would involve cash infusions 

from the Government of Saskatchewan, from the Government 

of Canada, and then went on to treat Federated in a very special 

way. 

 

In above all in that area, Mr. Justice Estey was protective of the 

financial viability of the cooperative system because, while 

they had to put up some cash under his proposal, they got title 

to certain equipment at book value, as I recall.  And in the end, 

they wind up owning the whole thing anyway under Justice 

Estey's proposal.  So it doesn't require them to ante up any 

unsecured cash or at least any cash that's going to drift away on 

them.  They're going to get it all back.  There is nothing in this 

Bill that deals with debt reduction.  So far as the financial 

aspects of this Bill is concerned, it only deals with the cash 

shortfalls, with the cash flow deficiencies and is not concerned 

with debt reduction, so that the hypothetical situation that you 

put forward won't happen.  That's not how the Act can be used, 

to reduce the debt. 

 

That remains an outstanding issue that requires negotiation in 

due course.  Obviously it is to the advantage of Federated to 

negotiate something there because if Justice Estey's 

recommendations are to be followed, it will result in both 

Canada and Saskatchewan infusing large amounts of capital 

into the project, and that must be to Federated's advantage.  But 

that question is not addressed in this Bill. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

we're discussing another one of your Bills, Bill 90, that it's 

another one of your Bills that going to destroy rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You seem to think that your government can just up and 

change contracts just to suit yourself.  If it doesn't work out for 

you and . . . and didn't think it's right, just like you did a year 

ago we were here discussing Bill . . . or the GRIP Bill.  You 

didn't worry about breaking a contract.  You don't seem to 

understand, Mr. Minister, that was a contract, is a contract, and 

you shouldn't be breaking it. 

 

Now you said to the member from Morse here tonight very 

clearly that whatever the Estey report . . . You want it very 

clear that you're sticking right to the Estey report, doing exactly 

what he says.  And you're making it very crystal clear that 

there's no way you're going to hurt this co-op movement.  And 

instead of giving a long speech like you did to the minister, can 

you just give me a very . . . you get up and that's where most of 

our time goes; you get up and make long political speeches.  

Because really we're far better off with the members on this 

side never even fought against these Bills, because politically it 

would be far better off if the province . . . just wait to see what 

they have to say about it come next election.  They're not going 

to forget. 

 

You've gone so far this time on all these different retroactive 

things you've done, all the promises 



2730 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

you've broke, that the people out there are going to speak.  But 

I can't do it that way.  I can't just sit here.  For the sake of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, we have to try our 

very best that they're being heard. 

 

I keep hearing from your ministers.  And the Premier this 

afternoon said it to the Leader of the Liberal Party.  You said it 

to our leader.  Oh you people over there, what's your thoughts 

on this.  It isn't our thoughts; it's the people's thoughts we're 

bringing to you.  Go out.  If you want to know what's going on, 

get off the plane, Mr. Minister, going to Saskatoon when you 

go home, and drive a car.  Stop at the old towns you used to 

stop at, at Chamberlain, Davidson, and ask the people what 

they think; just ask them what they really think. 

 

And you're going to get up in your sanctimonial way here and 

say exactly what you think, and just so smooth.  But I tell you, 

you're dead wrong.  You said the member from Morse, he's 

wrong and he knows he's wrong.  And I didn't like that 

statement coming from you because he's an honourable 

member and if he thought, Mr. Minister, that he was wrong, he 

wouldn't have said it.  He's saying what he believes in his heart 

and so am I.  I believe the people of Saskatchewan.  I believe 

out there that what they're saying to me, that it's wrong what 

you're doing. 

 

Can you just sum up in a few words that you really mean it, 

that you're sticking right to the Estey report and you're going to 

. . . you really mean crystal clear that you're not going to hurt 

the co-op movement?  Then I'll have some individual questions 

on that statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, I 

appreciate the question.  I want to say that I don't want to sound 

smooth or anything here.  I just want to directly answer the 

member's questions. 

 

This Bill does not, with respect, break any contracts.  It tries to 

make workable the arbitration process which is already in the 

contract and which hasn't been working for the past four years.  

And secondly, it tries to deal with this question of cash 

shortfalls -- losses, in effect -- which is just a blank spot in the 

agreement.  It just is . . . it's there and there's nothing in the 

agreement says the government's responsible but nothing in the 

agreement that says Federated is responsible, and yet 

somebody's responsible because there are losses occurring and 

there has to be a mechanism for covering them.  So we don't 

think that that provision breaks any agreement at all. 

 

In the final analysis, if the project comes right to the brink and 

is in danger of collapse, there is a provision in the Bill to allow 

us to rescue it and to vary the agreement in whatever way is 

necessary in order that that whole project doesn't collapse 

because we could not bear that loss.  The province just could 

not bear that loss.  So if worse came to worse, we would have 

to act.  But there is nothing in the Bill itself that breaks the 

contract.  And I want to say that directly to the member.  It is 

my best opinion and all of my advice to the effect that that is 

the case. The contract is not 

broken. 

 

When I spoke to the remarks of the member from Morse, I was 

not implying any insincerity on his part.  I just felt that with 

respect to the particular point, he was making a political point 

rather than a substantial point.  And I believe on the question of 

substance that he would agree with me, and that's what I was 

trying to suggest to him. 

 

(2100) 

 

So far as this Bill destroying rural Saskatchewan is concerned, 

that brings me to the member's question.  Justice Estey was, 

throughout his report, very protective of the financial viability 

of the co-op system in Saskatchewan.  And that system, of 

course, the member knows: Federated with all of its subgroups, 

the refinery, the petroleum division, the retail division, and so 

on and so forth.  He's very, very protective of that, and that 

strikes a deep chord with this government. 

 

The member will know the relationship between many 

government members and the co-op movement.  I myself and 

one of my colleagues from Regina North were raised on co-op 

farms.  Our parents started co-op stores and credit unions and 

Wheat Pool.  They didn't start it, but they were involved in the 

Wheat Pool throughout all their life.  And our lives have been a 

cooperative way of life, and we certainly are not out to destroy 

any of that. 

 

So in answer to your question, yes, we respect the Estey 

recommendations, and we are prepared to negotiate with 

Federated based upon those recommendations.  We think it's a 

good report, a workable . . . a good, workable report from a 

very capable, very intelligent man who spent a lot of time and 

effort trying to resolve these issues and made remarkable 

progress.  So we're quite content. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I think that's quite a statement 

you're saying.  You're contradicting some very clever people 

out there, Mr. Minister, when you're saying you're not breaking 

a contract.  Maybe you being a lawyer and your people around 

you being Justice lawyers, maybe they can read something into 

the Bill that I can't.  But I have to go by very clever people out 

there that are saying that you are breaking this contract. 

 

Can you say to Harold Empey, if he was sitting here tonight in 

my place, and Mr. Leland . . . That they say you are breaking 

the contract, their lawyers say you are breaking the contract, 

the co-op people out there say you're breaking the contract.  

How do you stand in this House and say you're not because 

they believe it's being broken?  I mean you just like to stand 

here and say no, we're not breaking a contract.  But you are, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

You can tell me all the little fancy words in your Bill that you 

can put this into it and you can read that to it, because we're 

going to get into that tomorrow in 38 and you're going to do the 

same thing.  You're going to 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2731 

say, yeah, this is what it means and this is what it means.  And 

I don't know whether . . . And I believe you're the type of man 

that's sincere and you believe these things. But why is 

everybody else wrong?  Why is this government always right 

and the people are always wrong? 

 

I mean there is some very clever people in the co-op movement 

out there.  And then you talk about that your family started in 

co-ops and started on a co-op farm. Well, my goodness, do you 

think that these people haven't?  Harold Empey has given his 

entire life working for co-ops.  I remember when he was the 

manager of the Craik Co-op at Craik, and his whole life was 

into co-ops.  And Mr. Leland, a fine gentleman. And they've 

consulted lawyers, and some of the best, and I've talked to 

some personal lawyers that I know and they have looked at 

your Bill and they said it's a broken contract.  So who is right?  

I'm not a lawyer; you are.  You tell me it's not broken, but they 

say it is. 

 

I don't know how you can say that Estey says that we have to 

protect the co-op movement.  He says that in his report.  And 

you say that's the most important thing to us, we have to make 

sure that we do what Estey says and protect the co-op 

movement.  How can you stand there and say that the 

government's protecting it?  You can say we believe what he 

says but your actions in this Bill is not doing that.  How can 

you say that? 

 

Mr. Minister, there is so many things that you've done here.  I 

don't know why you have to break the contract.  You should 

have lots of money coming in.  You broke almost every 

contract since you've been in government.  Where's all your 

money you're saving?  Goodness, you've closed rural hospitals.  

How many multimillions are you saving there?  We've heard 

all the way from 5 million to $100 million.  We don't even 

know. 

 

You're closing down rural schools.  I'm losing three schools in 

my area.  That's government saving.  In the 1991 GRIP you cut 

it off.  The farmers are going broke.  Looks like you're trying to 

turn out the lights in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

You're laying off hundreds of nurses.  You're breaking every 

promise to them.  You told them at election time you're going 

to do this and you're going to do that, you're going to improve 

health care.  But still where's all the money you're saving?  

Why do you have to save all the money from all these 

cut-backs and then turn around and break a contract with the 

upgrader contract?  Why do you have to do that? 

 

You're closing down rural service centres in Saskatchewan.  

You're closing down the crop insurance centres in 

Saskatchewan.  The service . . . I know many, many adjusters 

that I'm talking to, they're cutting back.  They're not even 

bothering to measure the bins out there right now.  That's 

happening right now -- cut-backs, cut-backs.  Where's all the 

money that you should be saving to be able to protect your 

contract that was put together with the prior government?  Be it 

a good contract or a bad contract, 

that has nothing to do with it. 

 

The people that put it together would be probably the same 

officials as sitting beside you today.  Some of them would be 

the same ones.  They thought they were doing best.  But oh no, 

Mr. Minister, oh no, Mr. Minister, you . . . It has to be the 

direction from the minister, not from your officials.  You just 

tell them what to do.  Put a Bill together that's going to rip off 

the co-ops in Saskatchewan, not intentionally, but that's what 

you're going to do.  You're going to do that. 

 

And even another one that you're talking about closing down 

now -- we'll see that in a few days -- you're going to be closing 

down the SaskPower service centres in rural Saskatchewan.  

Where's all the money you're saving from all this?  You cut 

back and cut back.  You broke every promise on essential 

services.  You've increased taxes.  Why aren't you saving 

enough money there to honour the contract? 

 

Did you, Mr. Minister . . . I guess I done the same thing as you 

did, and that's going to make a little longer debate because I 

asked you a direct question and you got up and made a speech 

and just says, now I'll get to the member's question.  Well now 

I'm going to hope you forget the first part and not respond and 

jut add to this question.  How much have you really done to 

contact CCRL and sit down and talk to them?  Did you just 

phone them and they wouldn't come?  Or did you go right to 

their office and say, let's sit down and talk?  How much did you 

push? 

 

When I'm in a debt problem and farmers are in a debt problem 

and rural businesses are in a debt problem, they go some place 

and push to get settlements.  And the lenders do that.  They 

come to them and they get at it.  There's boards to go to; there's 

everything else.  But did you people just make a few calls?  Or 

can you tell me exactly what you've done to encourage a 

settlement here?  What did you actually do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We have been attempting to get 

discussions started with Federated for a very long time, over a 

year.  We have made these approaches, Mr. Member, at every 

level, at the official's level, at ministerial levels, at the level of 

the Premier.  We have done it by telephone.  We've done it 

personally.  We've done it by letter and by fax.  We have even 

made the offer publicly, publicly, publicly committing ourself 

to meeting any time, any place, anywhere, whenever Federated 

would like to do.  And the member asks how much contact, I 

would say a great deal of contact. 

 

I just want to deal very briefly with the question of breaking a 

contract.  If the member looks closely at the Bill, it's a very 

simple Bill.  First of all it deals with arbitration and it enforces 

it.  It reinforces the procedure that is already laid out in the 

contract.  I mean Federated agreed that disputes would be 

arbitrated and then since 1989 has not allowed that process to 

work.  And what this legislation is doing is trying to ensure that 

that very process will be worked.  So that's not breaking a 

contract.  The break in the contract comes from refusing to let 

the process work. 



2732 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

Secondly, we've already dealt with the question of the cash 

shortfalls.  Nowhere in the agreement does it say that we have 

to pick them up, nor in the agreement is it the sole 

responsibility of the provincial government.  And I've already 

asked the member from Morse whether it's the position of the 

opposition that the province should continue to pick up those 

shortfalls indefinitely or whether there should be some dividing 

of those losses between the two partners. 

 

That's really the question.  We think there should be a dividing.  

Justice Estey thinks there should be a dividing.  We want to 

negotiate that with the co-ops and we've been trying to; we 

can't.  That's not breaking the contract, I mean, but I guess it 

depends on your definition.  It's certainly touching on the 

contracts, no question about that, but it's not wiping out any 

provisions and substituting any other ones or anything like that.  

It's merely trying to make the relationship a workable 

relationship. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you can say 

you've been such great negotiators and such great boys that 

you've been dealing with them for over a year.  Well how long 

did you deal with SGEU?  You dealt with them for over a year 

but you finally made an agreement.  But what did they have to 

do?  They had to come walking into your office.  We seen it on 

television.  They line up the unions and they walk in there until 

you meet with them.  Did you take your crew and walk into the 

co-ops and sit there until they seen you and discussed it?  No, 

sir, you didn't try; it's a smokescreen and you know that.  But 

you didn't mind getting their settlements with the unions; that 

was a smokescreen too; you probably settled it behind closed 

doors.  Why couldn't you go behind closed doors here?  No, it's 

because . . . I don't really understand why. 

 

This is bigger than me, Mr. Minister, because you're the last 

government I ever thought . . . an NDP government that would 

turn on co-ops in this province.  Anybody else, get your money 

from anybody else, sock it out of the free enterprise movements 

. . . give somebody else.  But why did you get into your own 

people, who you've always claimed to be your own people?  

You always rode on the backs of pools, co-ops, credit unions. 

 

I guess you found out really through the latter years that they're 

not your people as much as you thought they were.  I can 

remember arguing with Hon. Mr. MacMurchy in here one time 

when he was blowing about our co-ops, and our pools, and I 

took my pocketbook out, like I could tonight, and brought out 

the membership to the Craik Co-op, the Davidson Co-op, the 

Sherwood Co-op, CCIL (Canadian Co-operative Implements 

Ltd.) and I belonged to them all.  But you guys always wanted 

to ride on the back.  I guess you must have found out that, hey, 

maybe we don't get all this support out of these guys, so we 

might as well sock it to them. 

 

Because that's what you're doing; and if you think you're not, 

you should get a hold of the Craik paper 

this week and look at what one of the board members from the 

Craik Co-op wrote in a whole article on the front page of the 

paper and it's hit about 11, 12 towns in Thunder Creek and Arm 

River, and I'll tell you it's caused a lot of talk, saying what this 

government has done.  It's written by Phil Sanden from Craik, 

and I was proud of him.  And he put it in that paper that this 

government doesn't honour contracts.  They're the first 

government in the history of this province that are breaking 

signed contracts.  I've never known it to happen before; I've 

never known it to happen before. 

 

I want to ask you just a few short, direct questions about the 

report itself.  Mr. Minister, did Estey in his report, any place in 

that report, recommend legislation?  Just a yes or no on it; don't 

need no speech, just a yes or no.  Did he recommend legislation 

to solve this problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Did Estey recommend any place in that 

report?  You see, there's some facts coming out right now with 

that no answer, because we've heard question period here for 

weeks on this and oh, got to do everything Estey says.  You 

used to tell our people over here, wake up.  You used to say, 

wake up and read the Estey report and let's do what he says.  

Now I ask you a question tonight, did he recommend 

legislation?  You had to get up . . . you had to, you're under 

oath in here, you had to say no.  He didn't recommend it. 

 

So you're not paying any attention to the Estey report.  You're 

paying attention to your own . . . I don't know what it is.  I can't 

put a handle on it.  I can't figure you out.  You finally got . . . 

Members in this House and viewers on television, he finally 

said it. 

 

The minister got up without any speech and he answered my 

question when I said, did Mr. Estey put it in his report that he 

recommended legislation.  He got up and he said, no.  That's 

the first direct answer I've heard since Bill 90 came into this 

House, the first time.  So there we are.  We've got somebody 

that says . . . I call people like this hypocrites.  Anybody that 

comes out and says for days and days in this here legislature . . 

. 

 

The Chair: -- I want to just caution the member in the use of 

his language and ask him to use language that's appropriate for 

the House. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, you can sit there and you can 

smile.  I wish the cameras were on you instead of me right now 

so the viewers out there could see you smiling, smiling from 

your seat that you had to admit that Estey said no legislation.  

He didn't recommend it.  Now why did you here for days after 

days after days . . . And the Premier would just about have a fit 

when our leader, the member from Thunder Creek, would be 

saying something in contrary to what he was thinking.  He said, 

read the Estey report; and we're going to do what he says. 

 

All right.  We got that one out of you now.  Did the 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2733 

Estey report recommend CCRL pay 50 per cent of the losses?  

Did he recommend that 50 per cent figure in that report? 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I shy away from such short answers.  I 

got worked over so good after that one that I feel the need to 

make a speech. 

 

The answer is that yes, Estey recommended a 50/50 split.  

You'll find it on page 32 of his report.  He also made it very 

clear in his report the responsibility of the government to act in 

certain circumstances.  He went on at some length about the 

responsibility of the executive and the government to protect 

the fiscal position of the province.  And it is plain in his report 

that if we were unable to . . . you know, if we were unable to 

work it out -- if I can use that term -- by discussions or 

negotiations, that clearly we'd have to do something.  I quote 

from page 34 of his report, where he says the following: 

 

 Should this enterprise now be deemed to be improvident, 

however it might have been at its inception, the responsibility 

of government requires remedial or protective action, or at 

least active damage control.  This is their solemn task and the 

Premier and the provincial executive have clearly recognized 

it. 

 

And he makes other similar references. So he doesn't say we 

shouldn't legislate. He wants us to negotiate, and we have tried 

mightily to do that.  I repeat that to the member.  And we are 

prepared to do it tomorrow but you can't negotiate with 

yourself.  You've got to have somebody on the other side of the 

table prepared to discuss the issues, and we can't make that 

happen, so what are we to do?  Are we to just drift on and 

allow this situation to continue or are we to act?  And I think 

we have to act. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I'm just a little disappointed in 

your answer, when I asked you a direct question.  Did Mr. 

Estey say in his report that the Consumers' Co-operative 

Refinery pay 50 per cent of the losses?  And you get up and 

said yes, and then you said on page 34 of the report, and you 

read it, and the figures 50 per cent did not come out.  We know 

that he's recommending a change in there and negotiations. 

 

But you don't know whether he meant 50/50, or 80/20, or what 

he meant.  He did not say 50/50, and if you can read it in there, 

I'd like to know if you can find the words 50 per cent.  Because 

that's what you're doing and I want to know if the Estey report 

has got something written in between the lines that I can't read.  

You couldn't find it.  If you could have found 50 per cent, you 

would have read 50 per cent. 

 

Now the first question I asked you, is that I got out of you on 

the Estey report and recommending legislation, you got up and 

you said no, and then you got up and you said yes on the 50 per 

cent, then you went to read it to me and you never mentioned 

50 per 

cent.  Now we have to straighten that one out, Mr. Minister.  

Either find it or not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I was quoting from page 34 in 

connection with his general remarks respecting the 

responsibility of government.  But on section 32 he says: 

 

 . . . when a cash flow deficiency arises in (NewGrade) prior 

to the retirement of the guaranteed debt, (there will be) no 

realistic alternative but to contribute such deficiency in equal 

shares as between Saskatchewan and FCL by interest-bearing 

loans which would be repaid to the parties out of cash flow 

immediately upon the ultimate retirement of the guaranteed 

debt. 

 

So there is one situation in which he contemplates it, and that's 

the answer to the member's question. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well that's perhaps, Mr. Minister, getting 

close to it but you can read a lot into what he's recommending 

there.  Mr. Minister, just a couple more questions.  I believe 

that you're putting . . . this Bill can put the co-op movement in 

jeopardy.  We hope it doesn't but for the sake of an awful lot of 

people in this province of Saskatchewan . . . but the little, local 

co-ops that get dividends from the co-op refinery and it helps 

them every year to pay cash dividends out to farmers and to 

members . . . I shouldn't say farmers, members.  That's all the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan.  I guess the big 

numbers would probably come from co-op members in the city 

of Saskatoon and Regina. 

 

But do you not believe that Bill 90 will put the co-ops in some 

jeopardy, the co-op movement?  Do you not believe that they 

will put it . . . You said before you want to protect the co-ops.  

Do you not believe that Bill 90 can put the cooperative 

movement in some jeopardy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think it does not.  I've gone over it a 

couple of times with the members, the parts of the Bill, what 

the Bill addresses, and I do not believe that to be the case.  

Clearly Justice Estey did not either, and he went on to 

recommend more than is in this Bill.  As I said, he went on to 

recommend a comprehensive debt retirement program which 

would involve large infusions of cash by the federal and 

provincial governments, and an infusion by Federated which 

would have been an interruption of its cash flow. 

 

He was protective of their financial position in making that 

contribution.  They were secured every which way with respect 

to getting the money back out, but none the less, that would 

have been a cash injection and that would have interfered with 

the cash flow of their petroleum division.  But I think that this 

Bill does not create any big dangers for the co-op movement. 

 

The bigger danger is that the facility doesn't work and that it 

collapses, and then heaven knows where their refinery is.  They 

would have to reconvert it to accept Alberta's sweet crude and 

there's a dwindling supply 



2734 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

of that available to them.  And in the long run, it would really 

jeopardize the future of their refinery if this facility went down. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, you 

see, you don't understand the dangers of breaking contracts.  

You said you have to break this contract and you must do 

something to help in case this $600 million becomes a liability 

on the taxpayer in Saskatchewan. 

 

You don't seem to be worried about the 35 or 40,000 farmers 

out there that have contracts with Agricultural Credit 

Corporation and things have gone wrong and they can't make 

their contracts.  Are you going to let them break up their 

contracts?  It's the same thing, you know; it's the same 

taxpayer.  Maybe if you let them break up their contract and 

say, well I can't handle it because the situation's changed.  How 

would you like to have it if all the people that have a contract 

with the government says, I want my contract redone, I want to 

do it.  It's the same thing. 

 

What do you think a farmer out there . . . is sitting out there 

tonight that maybe owe a half a million dollars?  Some of the 

irrigated farmers in my area owe up over a million dollars to 

Agricultural Credit Corporation.  And they're saying right 

about Bill 90, I wish they'd let me redo my contract; I can't 

handle it.  Things have gone wrong; I cannot handle it.  You 

should have let the taxpayers break their contract if you're 

going to break the taxpayers' contracts. 

 

Now I only got two short questions to ask you and then I'm 

through.  I want to ask you this question:  will you guarantee . . 

. will you, Mr. Minister, guarantee Bill 90 will not affect the 

co-op movement -- guarantee?  And what will you do about it 

if it does?  You're making a move now with this Bill, Mr. 

Minister -- and I sincerely say this -- you're making a move that 

you think is right and correct to save the government funds and 

save the tax.  But what if it reverses on you, Mr. Minister, and 

the co-op movement gets into jeopardy?  Will you do 

something to save them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I assume that that question is being 

asked on behalf of Federated.  And all I can say in answer is 

that we want to negotiate all of the issues that are outstanding 

here.  Now if Federated want to bring their request for a 

guarantee to that table, it'll have to be dealt with at that table.  I 

don't know what shape it could take or how you could calculate 

it or what it is.  You're certainly not asking me to trump all 

those negotiations or anything like that or give an unlimited 

guarantee for something I don't understand.  But our 

negotiators would be prepared to deal with all of the issues 

surrounding cash flows and the issues raised in this Bill and the 

other issues raised in the Estey report. 

 

I'd be surprised if Federated asked for any guarantees.  There's 

no guarantees in this world, but we want them to have a deal 

that will allow this upgrader to function, that will allow it to 

continue to process Saskatchewan heavy crude.  And the way 

it's set up right now, it's not going to do that.  It can't work.  

That bird can't fly, as I 

said the other day.  And it needs repair and we're trying to do 

that.  So the question that the member raises is something that 

Federated should bring to the bargaining table, and we'll see the 

size and shape of it there. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- My last comment, Mr. Minister.  You see, I 

guess my question to you before there was what . . . and you 

didn't really answer it the way I was hoping you would, that my 

question was that how will you guarantee after the fact, after 

this Bill's in place and you find out that you're wrong, that the 

co-op movement is in jeopardy and there is a problem out there 

with all of the co-ops in Saskatchewan . . . will you come to 

their defence and protect them as you are in this instance? 

 

But my last question to you, Mr. Minister, is really this: maybe 

you need a good negotiator on your team, either with 

Co-operators or with yourself.  And I know one of the best 

negotiators in this province of Saskatchewan, and that's me.  

I've been told that I have negotiated more debt settlements than 

any Farm Debt Review Board, Farm Land Security Board, 

behind the scenes than anybody else in the province.  So maybe 

you need me sitting down at your meetings.  Would you 

consider to let me come to your meetings and help you settle 

this problem because I'm sure I can. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, perhaps the member and I 

could discuss that privately.  We hadn't anticipated that offer, 

so I can't speak on behalf of the government in response. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, 

it's been a fairly wide-ranging discussion tonight, and I 

appreciate the minister's demeanour today rather more than I 

appreciated it the other day in this discussion.  He's not nearly 

as defensive about what the opposition has had to say. 

 

I would say to the minister that we were very sincere last 

Friday when we made the offer to the Premier to take the 

arbitration section of this Bill and put it through the House, 

knowing full well that the opposition then would be . . . there'd 

be a certain amount of complicity there because I believe even 

implementing the arbitration sections in effect would break the 

existing agreement.  But the offer we made to the Premier was 

that let's use the force of this House, if you will, to deal with 

those outstanding issues, make sure that that arbitration process 

goes forward. 

 

And if there is a large sum of money there which the 

government believes . . . the Premier talked about $100 million.  

FCL is of the opinion it is much less, but that we work through 

that process and get that cleared away before we start dealing 

with this bigger issue of whether it's 50 per cent or something 

else that deals with the debt burden of the upgrader. 

 

(2130) 

 

And I think one of the problems that we've had in this debate, 

Mr. Minister, is that there isn't enough credit 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2735 

given for sound ideas in this whole debate.  And I know full 

well that there have been issues and ideas identified by FCL 

that maybe early on when these discussions were subjugated a 

little bit because there was a certain degree of politics involved 

in this whole discussion . . . I think your government has 

realized that that is fraught with danger down the road now, 

that a political agenda will get you nothing but grief for a long 

time to come.  And I appreciate that there has been a 

fundamental shift. 

 

Mr. Minister, I believe as firmly today as I did last Friday that 

we would be doing a good deed for the taxpayer if we settled 

those outstanding issues, that we got that off the plate, and it 

was done in a public way so that no one could accuse your 

government of manipulating the process for your own political 

ends.  And I believe honestly, Mr. Minister, that the other issue 

that's outstanding, which is the fact that the province of 

Saskatchewan does receive some return on this thing even 

though you vehemently deny it . . . 

 

But I can tell you from being an Energy minister in this 

province for two years and signing every last gas removal 

permit -- not because I had to, but because I wanted to 

understand where the natural gas in this province went, and the 

same goes for oil -- that if you and I could shut that refinery 

down for a year, that you would see a change in the price of 

heavy crude, that you would see wells shut in, that you would 

see things occur in the oil patch today which you wouldn't find 

very savoury. 

 

And a lot of the things that your Minister of Energy is working 

on right now with oil companies, vis-a-vis royalty review, 

incentives on horizontal drilling, a lot of those things, quite 

frankly, Mr. Minister, would come to a screeching halt if that 

refinery were shut down tomorrow and it was not using 

Saskatchewan heavy crude.  And I think I would be backed up 

in that throughout the energy sector. 

 

Now I find that a little bit dishonest that you and your Premier 

and others maintain up and above and beyond that there is no 

benefit to the taxpayer of the province because of 53,000 

barrels of heavy gravity crude being used each and every day.  

And I think one of the things that we need to do in solving this 

problem is be honest and upfront about that 53,000 barrels a 

day and other developments that will occur down the road to 

ensure that that production continues and improves, that in fact 

you have more horizontal drilling, that you have less of the old 

style, that some of the other things that have been able to bring 

the cost of production down and therefore benefit the province 

of Saskatchewan, keep occurring.  But we seem to have this 

vehement denial that any of that is occurring. 

 

And I think one of the reasons that you want to deny that is 

because you think that it hurts your bargaining position.  One 

of the problems with this, Mr. Minister, is that there are been 

perceived to be too many hidden agendas going on.  And that's 

why I made the very sincere offer, and that didn't come from 

FCL.  I don't suspect I was terribly popular with them last 

Friday 

when I said that the official opposition would side with you in 

a piece of legislation that would put that to mandatory 

arbitration.  I don't think they were particularly happy. 

 

But this House has put arbitration in place in many disputes, 

many, many disputes through the history of this province, and 

it is accepted by the people of this province as sometimes being 

necessary in order to finish a dispute off.  And I think at the 

end of the day, once that was done, we would see if you were 

right, if your officials at CIC that say that there is a large 

windfall for your government there or if FCL is right.  Those 

issues should be solvable by somebody knowledgeable in the 

business, who is a respected third party, who you can't 

influence and they can't influence and they come to some kind 

of a conclusion. 

 

Because I honestly believe, Mr. Minister, once that process was 

done, once the spectre of some kind of political agenda and 

gamesmanship going on was removed, that the bigger process, 

the bigger process of solving how we pay the principal down 

on the upgrader could be dealt with.  And I guess I would 

challenge you, Mr. Minister, to get it on the record of why you 

reject that process because I asked the Premier to prove to me 

where that particular project was going to go down in a matter 

of days or weeks.  And he said something about releasing 

information today that would prove that. 

 

I asked for information about the banking consortium that 

carries the notes where they say they are ready to pull their 

notes.  And no one wants to do that.  And I guess if it 

embarrasses the former government by you doing that, perhaps 

I as a member of that former government needs to be 

embarrassed then.  But I honestly believe this process, if it was 

approached in a step-by-step scenario, is solvable, that at the 

end of the day we'll get an agreement that will make that a 

long-term viability. 

 

And I really don't appreciate, Mr. Minister, this sort of off-hand 

rejection of what are some very valuable points.  And I would 

not have raised them in here if I didn't think they were valid.  I 

took a great deal of interest in the energy business in this 

province, and its well-being.  I can tell you that the oath I took 

in regards to being the Energy minister was one that meant a 

great deal to me.  And I don't want to see this project not work 

because there is some other agenda at work here.  And I just 

ask you to comment on that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I want to say, Mr. Chair, to the 

member that there is no other agenda at work -- none.  Now 

that's not the first time I've said it, and it's not the first time the 

Premier and others have said it.  That is the fact. 

 

Now people like, you know, the members of your caucus keep 

insisting that there is another agenda.  And all I can say in 

answer to it is, there is not.  We have a partner who is not 

prepared to negotiate what we see clearly to be the issues here.  

And that is a great 



2736 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

frustration for us, as I think it was for you from time to time 

when it was your responsibility to deal with them. 

 

It's not a matter of rejecting the position that the Leader of the 

Opposition took last Friday.  I thought that was a very 

constructive suggestion.  The problem is that we are not 

prepared to just park the rest of the Bill and let those things go 

through.  These are arbitrations that could take just a great deal 

of time.  They're complex; they'll be heard one after another in 

probably some kind of order that will be agreed upon. 

 

The financial situation at the upgrader is precarious.  It is 

precarious.  I think the member knows that.  I'm not able to 

produce documents that show its precarious, or any threatening 

letters from any bank consortium or anything like that.  But it's 

a very delicate and precarious matter.  It can fall into a real 

crisis in practically no time at all. 

 

I believe, without meaning to flatter the Leader of the 

Opposition, that he probably knows more about the process 

that goes on at the upgrader as heavy oil is converted into feed 

stock for the refinery, than anybody outside of that process 

itself.  And I commend him for that knowledge, and he's made 

an important contribution to this debate as a result. 

 

But we simply have to be in a position to make something 

happen here.  We can't just carry on writing or phoning or 

meeting periodically to try and arrange negotiations.  We have 

to get something going and begin to put that facility onto a 

solid footing.  And certainly the arbitration process is part of 

that but so is the question of the shortfalls, and we simply have 

to be in a position to deal with a crisis should a crisis occur.  I 

think no government could do otherwise. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- On another matter, Mr. Minister, I'm told . . . 

and you have very eminent legal counsel there with you 

tonight, someone who I am somewhat familiar with on some 

other issues.  We'll see if he's as good in the oil business as he 

is in uranium. 

 

The references to the Government of Canada here throughout 

the Bill, I have asked some questions of individuals and they 

tell me that vis-a-vis the recent ruling on the Farm Credit 

Corporation, that they are simply not accountable on assets and 

that type of thing to you guys as much as you might wish; that 

the FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) ruling, even though it's 

under appeal, does set the federal government apart in 

relationship to whatever role they may have in this particular 

agreement.  Have you any feeling for that?  Or are you quite 

confident that your Bill totally binds the Government of 

Canada in any way that you would like to see them bound? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It's a very good question raised by the 

Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Chair.  The matter was much 

debated by our counsel -- internal and external -- during the 

preparation of the legislation.  And the conclusion was arrived 

at that section 14 should be included in the Act.  The member 

is quite correct that this is a shaky area of the law and certainly 

the Farm Credit decision . . . If the Farm Credit situation case is 

relevant . . . 

 

But the reality is that the federal government is a party to the 

agreements in question, and in that light it is necessary that the 

Bill be binding upon them, at least that this Assembly so 

declare.  We can hardly legislate in respect of an agreement 

between ourselves and CCRL and the federal government 

without including the federal government in the Bill.  Whether 

it has any legal implications for them may have to be sorted out 

at some other time down the line. 

 

Parts II and III of the Act would seem to be between the 

provincial government and the CCRL, not involving the federal 

government.  But in any event they are parties to the contract, 

and so we extended the Act to cover them. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So if I can get this straight, Mr. Minister, 

you're saying that you just are not certain that this binds the 

Government of Canada, and you'll just sort of give it your best 

shot down the road if something flies apart.  Is that the way I 

take it? 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The legal opinions were stronger than 

that.  We think it does apply to them.  We think they will be 

bound it.  But I did recognize that you did raise a good point.  

There's a shaky side to this question of whether the federal 

government is bound by it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- One of the things that I am led to believe, Mr. 

Minister, is that there is a certain reluctance on the part of the 

federal government -- and they can speak for themselves as 

always -- but a certain reluctance to be a part of the solution, if 

you will, to this particular dilemma as long as the two 

provincial parties can't, sort of, sort things out. 

 

And one of the reasons that I suggested to the Premier, on 

Friday, that perhaps doing the arbitration process separate from 

the rest of the negotiation would set in place some parameters 

that would make the federal government feel somewhat more 

comfortable with the solution.  And certainly the consortium of 

bankers that are involved in this particular agreement, I think, 

given that they are of national character, would feel somewhat 

better about a negotiated settlement that might arise because 

you've cleaned off the major, outstanding issues amongst 

yourselves dealing with the . . . and then they have the bigger 

picture to deal with. 

 

And that if there was some way we could clean this arbitration 

mess up without using the heavy hand of this Bill in this 

legislature, that you may have a federal government that 

viewed this process in a more positive light. You might have a 

banking community that was more than willing to keep the 

lines of credit open.  You've had indications in a public way 

from a spokesperson from the people in the banking business 

that they never expected this thing to turn a profit in this 

decade.  I would take from those comments that 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2737 

they aren't particularly jumpy. 

 

And one of the concerns I have, Mr. Minister, with sort of 

ramming ahead by using the full impact of this legislation . . . 

which you may disagree with the members of my caucus, but I 

wouldn't hesitate to make the same comments in here.  Any 

time I see that "deeming" word after the performance of your 

government last year and I see provisions that allow your 

bureaucrats in a government agency like CIC to handle the 

arbitration process, the appointment of board members process, 

all those things, I get somewhat spooky. 

 

And I can't see it as being a very positive signal to my friends 

in the uranium business, my friends in the potash business, lots 

of people that deal with natural resources.  And they do get 

jumpy.  I mean just the prospect of government intervention in 

many areas makes they jumpy, Mr. Minister.  And there are 

many people in this province that would confirm that. 

 

So once again I say to you, and maybe you can explain to me 

how you plan on handling the federal presence.  What is your . 

. . give me some indication of once you have used this 

legislation, you bring it in, you appoint the arbitration process, 

you force that through with this Bill, what expectation do you 

have that the federal government is then going to come in and 

do your bidding? 

 

Obviously Justice Estey identified them as a very large 

component in any final solution on the bigger question of 

financing, the bigger question of getting the debt in line with 

that particular operation, handling not only the operating cost, 

the interest on the debt, but also principal payments to the 

province of Saskatchewan first.  What is your expectation after 

you have used this Bill and the arbitration procedures? Where 

do you see the federal government fitting in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The federal government have made it 

clear to us that until the two owners have decided how much 

they're going to inject, how much equity they're going to inject 

into this project, they aren't prepared to inject anything for their 

part.  So they're sitting on the sidelines waiting for us to work 

these things out.  And the major issue is not covered by this 

Bill, of course.  The major issue is the equity contributions that 

Estey talks about, and I think until that is done the federal 

government are not going to commit themselves to anything. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I think, Mr. Minister, you reinforce my 

point.  An agreement arrived at by the two major equity 

holders, CCRL and the province of Saskatchewan, that is 

mandated by the heavy hand of this legislation, I would suggest 

to you is going to leave a bad taste in the mouth of one of the 

partners. 

 

And I would also suggest to you that that bad taste will have 

some reflection, I would guess, on the bigger picture which the 

federal government has to play in, because not only do they 

represent 240,000 members in the province, they represent 

750,000 in Alberta, Manitoba, and British Columbia.  And any 

federal 

government worth its salt and any cabinet ministers 

representing those other three provinces -- which, whether it be 

Conservative or Liberal, will have people looking after the 

interests of that government in that province -- I suggest to you 

will receive a tremendous volume of letters, mail, phone calls, 

and protestation if the heavy hand of this legislation has one of 

the partners in an owly mood.  And that's why I don't like this 

process. 

 

At the end of the day, I don't think you really get yourself in a 

position other than maybe clearing the decks in a financial way 

for the next provincial election.  And Mr. Minister says that has 

nothing to do with it, but you take this down the road a little 

ways, and I can see that being about the only solution that you 

arrive at.  Because 750,000 western Canadians angry as all get 

out with you isn't going to be conducive to their federal 

government doing anything particularly agreeable.  And I don't 

know if you've got the wherewithal between yourselves and 

FCL to put that thing in a financial position all by your 

lonesomes. 

 

And I find it strange that neither minister of Finance, the two 

individuals in your government that are supposed to understand 

these things, have had any part of this Bill, that the poor Justice 

minister gets thrown in the breach to shepherd this piece of 

stuff through the House when in reality the agenda is a CIC 

agenda and a Finance agenda as far as taking away the burden 

of guaranteed debt that your government constantly complains 

about.  And you protest this too much sometimes, Mr. Minister 

-- if you want people to believe otherwise -- is the problem. 

 

So I think you quite honestly should look at the solution put 

forward on Friday because I think that solution will cause you 

less grief down the road if you want federal dollars and you 

want the agreement of 750,000 co-op members in western 

Canada to ultimately solving this.  If you don't want to solve it 

in an agreeable manner, well then you'll proceed on because 

there's a lot of other things at play here. 

 

I know that arbitration in a narrowly defined sense on 

pre-agreed-to matters with the weight of this Legislative 

Assembly behind it is something that people in this province 

understand because they know that you cannot mess with the 

process in a political way by doing that.  And I think it would 

put you . . . it might even open up other avenues that you 

haven't explored yet. 

 

Once those parties go through binding arbitration, as you know 

from being a deputy minister of Labour in this province, there 

are solutions found in that arbitration process that are used for 

many years down the road to make sure that it doesn't happen 

again.  And very seldom do you find the same two parties back 

into arbitration once they've been there.  And I think the 

minister knows, from his background, through all parts of the 

industrial sector that that's the case.  Arbitration is usually the 

finish of it for 15 to 20 years in most instances.  I think even 

our friend, Mr. Kancs, with the Grain Handlers Union, will tell 

you 



2738 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

that that is not something that they relish. 

 

And I don't for the life of me understand why you want this in 

its enormity on your head when you know full well that there's 

a process that may take you two or three steps more and it may 

take you two or three months or half a year more, but at the end 

of it you will more than likely have parties that are more 

agreeable to a final solution.  Because without the final solution 

you still are nowhere. 

 

And as the minister says, the final solution isn't here unless 

you're willing to use every last heavy hand that you have at 

your disposal.  And that, Mr. Minister, I say to you will get 

very, very ugly.  And you will not, at the end of the day, get 

what you want to achieve. 

 

And I would have liked somewhere for the Premier, for 

yourself, for one of your Finance ministers, anybody, to stand 

up and clearly outline to me, as they should to every taxpayer 

in the province, the process as it's going to walk through over 

the next six months, a year, whatever, that tells me that we 

aren't going to have just one heck of an ugly situation on our 

hands.  And no one has been able to do that. 

 

Your only salvation, I suppose, would be to have Audrey 

McLaughlin as prime minister.  And as the Premier says, you 

can't do anything with prayer.  And that's about the only thing 

that she would have on her side. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, it's a lot of ground to cover but I think it 

deserves a reply. 

 

(2200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well we have thought through these 

issues very carefully and have discussed them at great length in 

our cabinet, in our caucus, and with our advisers.  And the 

course that we're on is not pleasant; it's very difficult, fraught 

with dangers. 

 

There are some positive sides to it though.  The arbitration 

process has been unblocked and hopefully it will work without 

the legislation.  It is also a positive aspect that we all want the 

upgrader to work.  We want it to work well and we want it to 

function to its maximum capacity.  It is also a positive 

contribution that we, the government, are prepared to negotiate 

on the basis of the recommendations of Estey.  And if we can 

get our house in order with our partner, Federated, then the 

federal government have said the right things.  It is a positive 

element of this whole situation that they will be prepared to 

step in with a contribution to apply to the debt.  These are 

positive things. 

 

And all that we have to do to get at it is to start negotiating with 

each other in good faith on some of these issues, with these 

common objectives that we have that the upgrader will 

succeed.  So it's not quite as black a picture as we tend to paint 

it in debate in this House.  It would take very little to get the 

negotiating process actually started and going, and I think 

through that process we will learn to build upon little 

agreements and get bigger and bigger agreements as we go 

along. 

 

The arbitrations will proceed apace, as quickly as we can move 

them along, and they will make their contribution, as the 

member has said.  We can't wait with this legislation for as 

long as it would take for that process to play itself out.  It's too 

dangerous to do that. 

 

So here's the way I see it unfolding and I'll just take a moment 

more of the committee's time to do that.  The arbitrations will 

proceed as quickly as possible.  The Bill, I hope, will pass by 

this House.  And we will persist in our efforts to negotiate; we 

will not let up at all.  And it just seems to me impossible that 

negotiations have not yet begun.  What can be the problem?  

What can be the hold-up?  Why aren't they taking place?  I 

have no answer to that, and it's incredible that I don't, but I 

don't.  But it seems to me that cooler heads will prevail, or 

wiser heads will prevail, or the situation will mature to the 

point where everyone will see that it is in their best interests to 

try and discuss these things to a conclusion, to negotiate a 

conclusion. 

 

And we on our part will do everything we can to encourage 

that.  Now I know that doesn't answer with any precision how 

the thing will play out but that's about the best that we can do.  

Things will happen.  And those will require, of course, 

adjustments, and no doubt those will be reported on as time 

goes on. And they're difficult to anticipate, but in a general way 

that's how we see the world as unfolding in the next while. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well that's good, Mr. Minister, but what . . . 

You see, the problem is that once this Bill is through this 

House, then all the cards are on your side.  I mean we have no 

assurance that . . . You say this arbitration process is going to 

take place, and what if you lose?  What if the calculations done 

by your friends over there at CIC are wrong, that there is no 

large windfall available?  What if FCL's right?  What if, you 

know, what if there's just pocket change available on this 

thing?  Now are you going to take that laying down after a 

whole bunch of folks have staked some political capital, I 

would suggest, on this thing probably that it's gone on this 

long?  And I'm just wondering what process, what process the 

public is going to have to know what's coming down here 

because you've got all of the cards.  This Bill gives it to you.  

You've got them all. 

 

And I think, Mr. Minister, there has to be some way for us in 

the opposition, for the average person out there, to understand 

this arbitration process, even if you don't use this legislation 

and how it comes down the pipe.  And if you do lose, that you 

don't decide to take your toys . . . And well I've got a piece of 

legislation here, I'm not going to take this sitting down.  What 

assurance do co-op members in particular have, Mr. Minister, 

that that isn't going to be the case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well the simple answer is, if we lose we 

lose.  And that's . . . the arbitration process works like that and 

we greatly respect it and the 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2739 

member has been more eloquent about this than I could be.  It 

is the dispute resolution mechanism in this agreement and we 

want it to work and we'll abide by the result. 

 

How that may impact on the future depends upon the result and 

you can't . . . It's so difficult to speculate about what if this or 

what if that, but we just take it as it comes.  I repeat, we want 

the project to work.  That is the fundamental objective of 

everybody.  And with that fundamental objective before us, 

surely we can iron out some of these disagreements and make it 

work. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, we're going to have to 

take your word on that.  There's not a whole lot of option.  I 

said to the Premier the other day, this legislature is always at 

the call of the government, and there are only 11 members in 

opposition here.  At any point in time, if your arbitration didn't 

work, you could call this Assembly in and you wouldn't even 

have to send most of these guys a letter.  Your cabinet alone 

could show up in here and in one day's time have whatever you 

wanted in the way of legislation through here and you know 

that.  That is a simple fact of this House.  You have that large a 

majority. 

 

And that's why I've always wondered about the haste here to 

have the whole shebang in your hip pocket, because it does 

cause us some concern to be part of this process, even standing 

in our places and voting no, to know that you have this.  And I 

guess if someone could give me a good reason why -- and I 

haven't heard it yet -- of why this thing has to go tonight or 

tomorrow or this week even, in order to achieve the end results, 

I guess I would be far more agreeable.  And your heavy hand 

of your majority is going to pass this Bill, there's no question 

about it. 

 

I guess if we wanted to go to the extreme and use closure, we 

could have that forced upon us and get it done.  But I just don't 

quite understand the haste, given what the minister says about 

no agenda, no other ramification here because every time an 

offer is made to, in my view, help the process . . . because if all 

parties in this Legislative Assembly see the process as 

reasonable, it has far more impact with the public than it does 

with the simple NDP majority carrying the day. 

 

And I still haven't heard those assurances.  And then we have 

no option but to vote against this Bill and its clauses because 

no one can give me that reasoning.  And the minister's had 

ample opportunity, the Premier had it, and the answer I get at 

each and every instance is that Justice Estey says that it has 

financially run aground and it's imminent.  But no one can tell 

me how imminent, or when imminent, or imminent with who, 

and that is the problem, Mr. Minister.  I'd like to be part of the 

solution, not strictly opposing a solution.  Your government 

doesn't seem to give us much opportunity but to oppose. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 

Clause 17 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to move a 

House amendment to clause 17, and it would read thus: 

 

 Amend clause 17 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) In subsection (1) by deleting the words "This Act or any 

provision of this Act comes" and substituting "Parts I, II and 

V of this Act come"; 

 

 And 

 

 (b) By adding immediately after subsection (1) the following: 

 

 "(1.1) Where, at least 9 months after the coming into force of 

PART II of this Act, the Lieutenant Governor in Council is of 

the opinion that dispute settlement through arbitration 

conducted pursuant to PART II has failed, PARTS III and IV 

shall come into force on a day or days to be fixed by 

proclamation of the Lieutenant Governor." 

 

I so move. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:12 p.m. until 10:13 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd Haverstock 

-- 8 

Nays 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Shillington Cline 

Anguish Scott 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Mitchell Knezacek 

MacKinnon Keeping 

Upshall Kluz 

Hagel Carlson 

Bradley Renaud 

Lautermilch Langford 

Murray Jess 

Trew  

-- 23 

The division bells rang from 10:15 p.m. until 10:16 p.m. 

 

Clause 17 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Shillington Cline 

Anguish Scott 



2740 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Mitchell Knezacek 

MacKinnon Keeping 

Upshall Kluz 

Hagel Carlson 

Bradley Renaud 

Lautermilch Langford 

Murray Jess 

Trew  

-- 23 

 

Nays 

Swenson Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd Haverstock 

-- 8 

 

Preamble agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill on division. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, although the officials are not 

here, having left during the conduct of the vote, I would like to 

take this opportunity on behalf of the committee to thank them 

for the assistance that they were able to give us when they 

came on the previous occasion and again tonight. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 90 -- An Act to protect the financial viability of 

NewGrade Energy Inc. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:21 p.m. 

 

 


