




















































Hansard: April 15, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 997 

 April 15, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — Before we recessed this evening we were on 

the orders of the day. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, before 

orders of the day I have a point of order, and my point of order 

relates to the promptness necessary for raising points of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Speaker properly ruled that a point 

of order must be raised promptly. And that does lead to a 

separate point which is this: some points of order are based on 

the contents of a Bill. At first reading the contents of the Bill 

are not known and therefore cannot be challenged for being 

outside the rules. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the case is that a point of order on the 

contents of a Bill must be raised at first reading of the Bill. The 

Assembly effectively finds itself unable to challenge the 

contents of any Bill which clearly is not the intent of the rules 

nor am I sure was it the intent of Mr. Speaker's ruling 

yesterday. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that you rule that points of 

order relating to the contents of a Bill can only be raised at 

some time after the Bill has received first reading. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the member from Moosomin raises 

a good point of order. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 7:03 p.m. until 7:13 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

— 8 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Murray 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Goulet Whitmore 

Kowalsky Flavel 

Mitchell McPherson 

Upshall Crofford 

Hagel Harper 

Koenker Carlson 

— 18 

 

MOTIONS UNDER RULE 42 

 

Hospital Closures 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, prior to orders of the day and 

pursuant to rule 42, I seek leave to raise a matter of 

urgent and pressing necessity. As required by that rule, I will 

now explain the matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this week the government announced the 

elimination of acute care funding for the hospital at Arborfield. 

This is creating a crisis in that community. There is a great deal 

of fear and we are being told that old people will have nowhere 

to go. This is an urgent and pressing matter and I therefore ask 

leave of the Assembly to move a motion regarding the crisis in 

Arborfield. 

 

I now ask leave of the Assembly. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, could I ask for 

clarification on the issue? 

 

The Speaker: — No. Order. Order. Before . . . I need to see 

the motion that the member moved. Have we any extra copies? 

 

Order. The problem that I have here is the practice of this 

House has always been under rule 42, that the member explains 

and then moves his motion and asks for leave of that motion. 

Otherwise the members don't know what the motion is, then 

they have problems to give leave. So if the member wishes to 

ask leave for the motion he must move his motion and ask for 

leave and then the members can say yes or no to the leave. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 

my colleague, the member from Morse, that under rule 42: 

 

 That this Assembly give time for debate on the closing of the 

hospital at Arborfield. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, under rule 10 of the 

rules of the Assembly, I want to quote: 

 

 A motion for reading the Orders of the Day shall have 

preference over any motion before the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would move: 

 

 That we now move to orders of the day. 

 

An Hon. Member: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — What's your point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, it's abundantly clear in our 

legislative rules here that a motion such as that cannot be made 

before we reach the orders of the day. This is still prior and 

before orders of the day. So the member's point of order is not 

well taken at all. 

 

The Speaker: — The explanation as to why the member's 

motion will not be accepted is that there is no motion before 

the House, and rule 10 clearly states there must be a motion 

before the House before this 



998 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1993 

motion on rule 10 can be moved. 

 

Therefore I will not accept the motion from the Government 

House Leader. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Are you still debating the acceptance of 

that motion? 

 

The Speaker: — No. The problem I had . . . that two members 

in opposition were standing, and I didn't know which one to 

recognize. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I apologize for that. In our eagerness to be 

active here, Mr. Speaker, for further consultation and so on, I 

move that this House now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 7:21 p.m. until 7:31 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

— 8 

 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Koenker 

Tchorzewski Murray 

Lingenfelter Johnson 

Anguish Trew 

Goulet Whitmore 

Kowalsky Flavel 

Mitchell Crofford 

Upshall Harper 

Hagel Carlson 

— 18 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, pursuant . . . before orders of 

the day, I'll ask leave regarding rule 42. I seek leave to raise a 

matter of urgent and pressing necessity as required by that rule. 

I'll explain some of the details of the matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this week the government announced that they 

were going to eliminate acute care funding for the town of 

Beechy in a community that is almost isolated on two sides of 

it, and I think that this matter is of great importance to the 

people of Beechy and to the community there. It's adjacent to 

my constituency. In fact, I only live a little ways from it. 

 

There's a great deal of fear, and we are being told that old 

people will have nowhere to go. This is an urgent and pressing 

matter, and therefore I ask leave of this Assembly to move a 

motion regarding the crisis in Beechy. And the motion reads: 

 

 Due to the urgency of this matter, this Assembly move to 

debate the elimination of hospital funding for the hospital at 

Beechy. 

 

I ask leave of the Assembly to do that, seconded by the 

member from Thunder Creek. 

Leave not granted. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 7:34 p.m. until 7:44 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

— 8 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Koenker 

Tchorzewski Murray 

Lingenfelter Johnson 

Anguish Trew 

Goulet Whitmore 

Kowalsky Flavel 

Mitchell Crofford 

Upshall Harper 

Hagel Carlson 

— 18 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of 

the day, a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — What's the member's point of order? 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My point of order 

regards decorum in this legislature. A few days ago you 

properly served rule that members should not refer to other 

members commenting from their seats nor include remarks that 

indicate the presence or absence of a member. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday in Hansard on page 981, you will find 

the Premier said, and I quote: "And the former premier 

confirms that right now from his seat . . ." Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier makes a very regular and frequent practice of referring 

to the comments of other members from their seats and using 

language that indicates their presence or absence in the 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that you rule the Premier also must obey 

your earlier ruling and that he stop this unparliamentary 

behaviour in this legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I don't recall the exact reference 

that the member is referring to, so I will take his point of order 

under advisement and report back to the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 7:49 p.m. until 7:59 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 



April 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 999 

 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

— 8 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Murray 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Anguish Whitmore 

Goulet Flavel 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Upshall Harper 

Hagel Carlson 

Koenker  

— 17 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of 

the day and pursuant to rule 42, I am going to ask leave to raise 

a matter of urgent and pressing necessity. As required by that 

rule, Mr. Speaker, I will now explain the matter. 

 

This week the government announced that the funding for 

acute care and for long-term care was going to be reduced in 

various communities in the province, and I raise this as a part 

of a problem that is coming to my constituency. We just 

opened a facility in the town of Cabri, and Cabri has a 

significant location problem in isolation related to other 

communities. And with this urgent and pressing matter, that I 

raise this matter today and ask that the Assembly give us leave 

to discuss the hospital funding for the hospital at Cabri. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker, ask for leave, seconded by the member 

from Thunder Creek. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognized the member from Morse. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, from Rosthern. I 

move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 8:02 p.m. to 8:12 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

— 8 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Lyons 

Tchorzewski Murray 

Lingenfelter Johnson 

Anguish Trew 

Goulet Whitmore 

Kowalsky Flavel 

Upshall McPherson 

Hagel Carlson 

 

Koenker 

— 17 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of 

the day and pursuant to rule 42, I am going to raise a motion of 

pressing and urgent nature. And I will say to the Assembly that, 

because the announcement this week in the town of Vanguard 

seriously impaired the role of senior citizens to have care in a 

hospital that they helped build, therefore I move, seconded by 

the member from Thunder Creek: 

 

 That due to the urgency of this matter, this Assembly do now 

debate the elimination of hospital funding for the hospital at 

Vanguard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 8:15 p.m. until 8:25 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Toth  

— 7 

Nays 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Anguish Whitmore 

Kowalsky Flavel 

Upshall McPherson 

Hagel Harper 

Lyons Carlson 

Murray  

— 15 

 

Mr. Martens: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, pursuant to rule 42, I seek leave to raise a matter of 

urgent and pressing necessity as it relates to the elimination of 

funding for the hospital at Kincaid. 

 

The area around the city of Swift Current is known as the 

health care district rolling hills, and in this area all of the 

hospitals except one have had their funding for hospital care 

reduced to zero. And that, Mr. Speaker, is going to be a serious 

concern, and it's a serious problem to me and to the 

constituents that I have. And therefore I move, seconded by the 

member from Thunder Creek: 

 

 That due to the urgency of this matter, this Assembly do now 

debate the elimination of hospital funding for the hospital at 

Kincaid. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave of the Assembly and then I'll 

present the motion as of. 



1000 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1993 

Leave not granted. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move the 

House now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 8:29 p.m. until 8:39 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 Swenson Britton t 

 Neudorf D'Autremont t 

 Martens Goohsen t 

 Toth t 

— 7 R 

Nays 

 Van Mulligen Lyons t 

 Tchorzewski Murray t 

 Lingenfelter Johnson t 

 Anguish Trew t 

 Goulet Whitmore t 

 Kowalsky Flavel t 

 Upshall McPherson t 

 Hagel Harper t 

 Koenker Carlson t 

— 18 R 

MOTION UNDER RULE 41 

 

Extension of Sitting Hours 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would move, 

seconded by the member for Regina Dewdney, that pursuant to 

rule 41: 

 

 That this Assembly shall, following the adoption of this 

motion, sit until 1 a.m. Friday, April 16, 1993. 

 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — What's the member's point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to the 

rules of the House it is my understanding that there is no 

avenue for the member to get the floor in that fashion to make a 

substantive motion and therefore it's got to be out of order. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I'll recognize the mover of the motion 

and then I want to . . . That's frequently done in this House . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . It's frequently . . . Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the reason for moving 

this motion is as a result of the rules of the Assembly that on 

many occasions allow for the extension of hours to complete 

the work of the House. We have stopped the clock on many 

occasions in the past to allow for the business of the Assembly 

to be completed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under rule 41, and I want to quote the 

total section because I think it's relevant: 

 

 Forty-eight hours' notice shall be given of a motion for first 

reading of a bill, resolution or address, for the appointment 

of any committee or for placing a question on the Order 

Paper; but this shall not apply to public bills, after their 

introduction, or to private bills, or to the times of meeting or 

adjournment of the Assembly. Such notice shall be laid on 

the Table and be printed in the Votes and Proceedings of that 

day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm not here asking, or believe that the rules or 

that the hours of the session should be set for long periods of 

time in this manner. But I would make a strong argument that 

rule 41 does allow by motion without leave, for the extension 

of hours in any given day to complete the work of that given 

day. And I would therefore ask you, Mr. Speaker, to look 

seriously at allowing us to extend the hours to 1 a.m. of the 

following day, that being Friday, April 16. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Point of order for the second time. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. Traditionally it has been tradition in the 

House to extend the hours to 1 o'clock to 2 o'clock to 3 o'clock. 

That has been a long-standing tradition in this House and that 

has occurred on occasions where the opposition has agreed 

with the government that valuable business could be done by 

extending the hours and so-called in quotation marks "stopping 

the clock". That has always been done by unanimous consent 

of the House. 

 

For the Government Leader to stand up now and continue to 

ram down the throat on the opposition unilaterally, a move to 

extend the hours beyond its normal hours without the consent 

of the opposition, without giving notice, there's no notice and 

the same 41 that he read, Mr. Speaker: "Such notice shall be 

laid on the Table and be printed in the Votes and Proceedings 

of that day", has not occurred either, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So obviously this a usurpation of the business of the House in a 

blatant attempt for the Government House Leader to ram down 

further legislation down the throats of the Saskatchewan people 

by usurping the order of the House, the timely, orderliness of 

the procedures of this House, Mr. Speaker. The point of order 

cannot be well taken. 

 

The Speaker: — I think I've heard sufficient on these points of 

order. I want to consult with the Clerk. 

 

Order. This is a very, very important decision that I have to 

make. I do not want to make it lightly, and I ask the House . . . 

or I will inform the House that I am going to recess for a short 

period of time so I can consult with my Clerks on this matter. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Adjourn and go home. 

 

The Speaker: — No, I said I would recess this House for a 

very short period of time, and we will inform 



April 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1001 

the members when the House shall begin again. We will ring 

the bells to inform the members when the House shall 

reconvene. 

 

The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 

 

The Speaker: — Could I just ask the members . . . do we need 

a little more time for members to . . . We'll take a little more 

time for members to get here. 

 

The Government House Leader, before we recessed, moved a 

motion, seconded by the Deputy Premier, pursuant to rule 41 

that this Assembly shall, following the adoption of the motion, 

sit until 1 a.m. Friday, April 16, 1993, to which a number of 

points of orders were made. 

 

The Opposition House Leader on a point of order stated that 

the member had no right to get the floor to move the motion. 

Superseding motions cannot be moved at this point, that is on 

order of the day because no motion is on the floor. However 

this is not a superseding motion, but rather is the kind of 

motion that is moved before orders of the day, that is one 

dealing with ordering the business of the House. 

 

The important question here is whether the motion is 

permissible under rule 41 without leave or notice. On the 

surface rule 41 seems very clear. A motion for fixing the times 

of the adjournment of the House does not need notice and 

therefore can be moved without leave. 

 

However, a review of the Journals can find no evidence of rule 

41 ever having been invoked to move a motion of this type. 

Instead, as the Opposition House Leader has pointed out, 

extended sittings on a particular day have traditionally been 

accomplished by unanimous consent. This is the practice of 

stopping the clock. 

 

But what would be the effect of allowing a motion under rule 

41 to extend the sitting hours on a daily basis? The effect 

would be extremely severe. This would in effect allow the 

government to extend the sitting hours every day on a daily 

basis although the motion is debatable under rule 33 . . . or 

pardon me, 32. Given that the effects of allowing motions of 

this kind under rule 41 are so serious to the traditional 

operation of the House, I find that our practices regarding 

extensions of sitting hours by leave or notice should be 

maintained. 

 

Well obviously the members . . . The ruling is that the motion 

will not be allowed and the practice of the House as has 

traditionally been the practice shall be maintained. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would move that 

this House now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 9:55 p.m. until 10 p.m. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The adjournment motion, because it is 

10 o'clock, lapses, and therefore this House stands adjourned 

until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 

 


