




















































Hansard: April 19, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1017 

 April 19, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:02 p.m. until 2:12 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Devine Neudorf 

Boyd D'Autremont 

— 4 

 

Nays 

 

Van Mulligen Thompson 

Tchorzewski Lingenfelter 

Teichrob Koskie 

Anguish Solomon 

Goulet Atkinson 

Kowalsky Mitchell 

Cunningham Upshall 

Hagel Bradley 

Lyons Calvert 

Murray Hamilton 

Whitmore Sonntag 

Roy Cline 

Scott Wormsbecker 

Crofford Stanger 

Knezacek Haverstock 

— 30 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 

deal of pleasure this afternoon to present petitions on behalf of 

the people of Saskatchewan. It's a health petition, slightly 

different than the others have been, and I'd like to read the 

prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

The mayor, Ron Folstad, of Nipawin. 

 

Please be advise the council of the town of Nipawin strongly 

opposes the process of health reform as being presented to 

us. We have common-sense, creative alternatives that we 

would like to include in the reform. However this process 

eliminates our input. Please continue to defer the 

implementation of any legislation which would support this 

process and replace it with a process allowing input from the 

bottom up. 

And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by Ron Folstad, 

mayor, on behalf of the town of Nipawin. And it gives me a 

great deal of pleasure to present this at this time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I move that the House now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:15 p.m. until 2:25 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Swenson Devine 

Neudorf Boyd 

D'Autremont  

— 5 

Nays 

 

Van Mulligen Thompson 

Lingenfelter Anguish 

Solomon Goulet 

Atkinson Kowalsky 

Cunningham Upshall 

Hagel Bradley 

Lorje Lyons 

Calvert Murray 

Hamilton Johnson 

Whitmore Sonntag 

Roy Cline 

Scott Wormsbecker 

Crofford Stanger 

Knezacek Haverstock 

— 30 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

gives me pleasure to present petitions on behalf of many people 

on the west side of the province of Saskatchewan who are upset 

with the government's plans in health care. And I'll just read the 

prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, they are people all up and down the 

west side of our province who take a great deal of issue with 

this particular item. I table and ask, Mr. Speaker, that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:29 p.m. until 2:39 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following record division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Swenson Boyd 

 



1018 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1993 

 

Neudorf Boyd 

D'Autremont  

— 4 

 

Nays 

 

Van Mulligen Thompson 

Lingenfelter Teichrob 

Anguish Solomon 

Goulet Kowalsky 

Mitchell Cunningham 

Upshall Hagel 

Bradley Lorje 

Lyons Calvert 

Murray Hamilton 

Johnson Whitmore 

Sonntag Roy 

Scott Wormsbecker 

Crofford Stanger 

Knezacek Haverstock 

— 28 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

present on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. I'll read the 

prayer. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

The petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from Alida, Eston, Madison, 

Saskatoon, Eatonia, Macklin, Denzil, and various places both 

in the south-east and the south-west corner of the province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I would also like to move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:42 p.m. until 2:52 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Devine Boyd 

D'Autremont  

— 3 

 

Nays 

 

Van Mulligen Thompson 

Lingenfelter Teichrob 

Shillington Anguish 

Solomon Kowalsky 

Mitchell Cunningham 

Upshall Hagel 

Bradley Lorje 

Lyons Calvert 

Murray Hamilton 

Johnson Whitmore 

Sonntag Cline 

Scott Wormsbecker 

Crofford Stanger 

Knezacek Haverstock 

— 28 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 

present to the Assembly on health care, and I'll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these people are from Swift Current, Vanguard, 

Hazenmore, various places across western Saskatchewan, 

including Saskatoon. And I will table this, ms. 

 

And I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:54 p.m. until 3:04 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Devine 

Neudorf Boyd 

D'Autremont  

— 5 

 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Lingenfelter 

Shillington Anguish 

Solomon Kowalsky 

Mitchell Cunningham 

Upshall Hagel 

Lorje Lyons 

Calvert Murray 

Hamilton Johnson 

Whitmore Sonntag 

Cline Scott 

Wormsbecker Crofford 

Stanger Knezacek 

— 24 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition that 

I'd like to present to the Assembly this afternoon, and I'd just 

like to read the prayer. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition comes from the west side 



April 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1019 

 of the province. There are a number of names on if from the 

Eston, Plato, Elrose, Kindersley area. Mr. Speaker, I also move 

that this house do now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:07 p.m. until 3:17 p.m. 

 

Yeas 

 

Swenson Devine 

Boyd D'Autremont 

— 4 

Nays 

 

Van Mulligen Teichrob 

Shillington Anguish 

Solomon Kowalsky 

Mitchell Upshall 

Hagel Lorje 

Lyons Calvert 

Murray Hamilton 

Johnson Whitmore 

Sonntag Cline 

Scott Wormsbecker 

Crofford Stanger 

Knezacek  

— 23 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, to present a new petition. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to draw the member's attention 

to the ruling made by former Speaker, Mr. Tusa, on May 16, 

1991. 

 

A Member wishing to present petitions will be recognized 

only once during routine proceedings for that purpose. 

 

Therefore, no more petitions will be received today. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — According to order, the following petitions have 

been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read 

and received: 

 

Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on the Environment 

 

Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of my brief 

comments, I will be moving a motion that the first report of the 

Standing Committee on the Environment be concurred in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that the standing committee 

enjoyed a very good and productive 

working relationship. 

 

The committee, as instructed by the assembly, conducted 15 

public hearings across Saskatchewan and received 71 written 

submissions regarding environmental rights and 

responsibilities. This committee has focused on the issues and 

worked diligently and effectively together to generate this 

report. The committee is optimistic this report will be used to 

further environmental rights and responsibilities legislation in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public meetings were very successful, and the 

people of Saskatchewan welcomed the opportunity to express 

their views on the environment. The summary recommendation 

that was agreed to by all members of the committee is as 

follows. 

 

it is recommended that the minister should use this report as the 

foundation for further consultation and preparation of new 

environmental rights and responsibilities legislation. The 

committee recommends that existing government structures by 

used, wherever possible, to implement the recommendations in 

this report. Bill 48 of 1992 should not be reintroduced. 

 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 

Regina Elphinstone: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on the 

Environment be concurred in. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 

congratulate the committee for the excellent work they have 

done. 

 

And I would move: 

 

That the House do now proceed to government orders, 

adjourned debates, item number 17. 

 

Seconded by the member for Regina Churchill Downs. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. What's the member's point of 

order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe it was the 

member from Qu'Appelle-Wolseley . . . Indian Head-Wolseley 

that made a motion that this report be concurred in. And I don't 

believe we've dealt with that issue yet, so we have two motions 

on the floor. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to draw all members' attention to 

rule 44 in the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan. 



1020 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1993 

The motion that was originally moved by the member from 

Indian Head-Wolseley and seconded by the member from 

Regina Elphinstone was under debate and the rule 44 simply 

states the following: 

 

When a question is under debate, no motion shall be 

received unless to amend it; to postpone it to a day certain; 

for the previous question; for reading the Orders of the Day; 

for proceeding to another order; to adjourn the debate; or . . . 

(to) the adjournment of the Assembly. 

 

So the member from Regina Elphinstone has moved a 

superseding motion which takes precedent over the motion that 

was before the House and that is a non-debatable motion 

according to rule 32 of the Rules and Procedures. 

 

So the question before the Assembly is the motion that is 

before us right now, moved by the Government House Leader, 

seconded by the member from Regina Churchill Downs: 

 

That the House do now proceed to government orders, 

adjourned debates, item number 17. 

 

And that's a non-debate motion. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:26 p.m. until 3:36 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Tchorzewski 

Lingenfelter Teichrob 

Shillington Anguish 

Solomon Kowalsky 

Upshall Hagel 

Lorje Lyons 

Murray Hamilton 

Johnson Whitmore 

Sonntag Cline 

Scott Wormsbecker 

Crofford Stanger 

Knezacek  

— 23 

Nays 

Swenson Devine 

Neudorf Boyd 

D'Autremont Haverstock 

— 6 

 

CLOSURE MOTION ON TIME ALLOCATION 

MOTION 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member from Regina Churchill Downs: 

 

That debate on the motion regarding allocation of time for 

proceeding to Bill No. 3, An act respecting Health Districts, 

or on any amendments or subamendments proposed thereto 

be not further adjourned. 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Swenson: — To speak to the motion. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. On closure I would like to draw 

members' attention to rule no. 34 where it says that: 

 

. . . and shall not further be postponed; and in either case 

such question shall be decided without debate or 

amendment . . . 

 

So there is no debate. 

 

Order, order. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:40 p.m. until 3:50 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Thompson 

Lingenfelter Teichrob 

Shillington Anguish 

Solomon Goulet 

Kowalsky Mitchell 

Upshall Hagel 

Lorje Lyons 

Murray Hamilton 

Whitmore Sonntag 

Roy Cline 

Scott Wormsbecker 

Crofford Stanger 

Knezacek  

— 25 

Nays 

 

Devine Neudorf 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Haverstock  

— 5 

 

The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. The debate 

continues on the allocation of time motion, pursuant to rule 34. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Motion for Time Allocation 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we've 

noticed that members of the government are not prepared to 

stand in their place and defend their cowardly actions of 

providing closure on closure. And they sit in their place and sit 

on their hands as people are in panic across the province of 

Saskatchewan because of their communities, the closure of  



April 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1021 

hospitals, 52 closures of hospitals. And these so-called New 

Democrats are not even allowing us to debate in the legislature 

without closure, which means that it's limited to 20 minutes. 

And the people don't even get a chance to have input. 

 

And it's the opposite to what the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

said that the they were all about and what they believed in in 

terms of democracy. Every single sitting member that was here 

in the last Legislative Assembly said closure was the wrong 

this to do. And now on health care closure they believe that 

they're doing the right thing by closing hospitals across 

Saskatchewan even when the people say: we didn't elect you to 

do that; there's no mandate to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason that this motion is to abhorrent is the 

fact that the NDP promised in fact that they would do the 

opposite. I want to read into the record what the NDP leader 

said to a letter to the people of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg when 

he was campaigning in 1989 . . . '88. And this is exactly what 

the NDP have campaigned on: they would help people 

maintain their health care, help them maintain hospitals, help 

them in rural Saskatchewan as well as urban, look after senior 

citizens. And this is what the NDP Leader said at the time: 

 

Dear Friends: 

 

The central issue of this Assiniboia-Gravelbourg by-election 

is the record of the PC government in Regina; a record 

which is hurting average families. 

 

These are tough times for many of you. The waste, 

mismanagement, and warped priorities of the PC 

government in Regina are making these problems worse. 

 

The most glaring examples, of course, have been the 

cutbacks in health care. 

 

I notice that the opposition member . . . or the government 

members didn't say "right" that time. 

 

Families all across this constituency are saying that the PC 

cuts to the Prescription Drug Plan and the Children's Dental 

Plan were unjustified. 

 

This is what Mr. Romanow is saying at that time. 

 

And the latest PC proposal to close down all five hospitals in 

this constituency is unacceptable. 

 

So the NDP leader, Mr. Romanow, is saying that a proposal to 

close down five hospitals in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is 

unjustified and unacceptable, and that the prescription drug 

plan cuts and the children's dental plan cuts are unacceptable, 

according to the NDP. This is what he says in a letter to 

thousands of constituents. And he goes on to say this: 

Families are also being hurt by the unfair PC tax increases. 

 

It implies that he wouldn't do this. 

 

They are saying that tax breaks to big corporations mean 

unfair income taxes for ordinary people. 

 

He'd never provide taxes to ordinary people. 

 

And PC cutbacks to our municipalities and schools have 

caused an unfair property tax burden on rural families. 

 

He talks about an unfair tax burden on rural people in terms of 

property taxes in this letter. 

 

The people of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg are telling me (that's 

what he says) they want to send a message to the PC 

government in Regina (and I quote) to stop its attacks on 

health care services, its waste, and its unfair tax increases. 

 

Then Mr. Romanow writes this: 

 

In this important provincial by-election I invite you to 

support the New Democrats, working together for quality 

health care services for all Saskatchewan families. Let's send 

them that message, and let's make it count. On December 15, 

let's elect Allen Engel, New Democrat. 

 

Yours sincerely, Roy Romanow, Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Now I read this letter into the record, Mr. Speaker, so that 

people would know this closure motion, which does the very 

opposite to what the NDP promised as far back as 1988 under 

the leadership of Roy Romanow, this closure motion . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I remind the member to refer to 

the members in this legislature either by their constituency or 

by the portfolio they have. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was signed by the 

leader of the opposition at that time and now the Premier of the 

province. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You can quote his name. 

 

Mr. Devine: — And I just quoted his name because it was 

signed there, but I accept your suggestion and your advice and 

your ruling. 

 

The point is, Mr. Speaker, is that the Premier of Saskatchewan, 

who is head of the NDP Party, promised the people of 

Saskatchewan that he would not close hospitals, that he would 

not raise taxes, that he would not cut the children's dental plan 

— he would put it back in place — he would not charge people 

for prescription drugs. And he's done all of that, Mr. Speaker. 



1022 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1993 

And he won't even allow adequate debate by the people of 

Saskatchewan, either in this legislature or outside. People are 

resigning from boards, people are turning up by the hundreds, 

and now by the thousands, and they're going to be here in 

Saskatchewan in front of the Legislative Assembly on 

Wednesday by the hundreds, and perhaps by the thousands, 

saying you never promised this. You never said you were going 

to cut like this. You promised the opposite, Mr. Leader of the 

NDP. You promised the opposite. 

 

And in this letter to the people, he signed it and he said, oh 

shame on the Tories for even charging $50 deductible. That's 

no good. What is it today, Mr. Speaker? It's up over $800 per 

quarter for senior citizens. 

 

And they are bringing in closure to cut off debate because they 

think they have the support of the people to do this? Mr. 

Speaker, I contend here today that they don't have the support 

of their own caucus, for heaven sakes. 

 

As it was on television last night, the NDP leader said, I grant 

you there is problems in our caucus and there's problems in our 

party. And he said that on television. Well I guess there's 

problems when he tells a fib like this. He doesn't campaign . . . 

He campaigns saying one thing and then he turns around and 

gets elected and he does absolutely the opposite. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when they bring in closure on debate 

because they are too afraid to meet the people, too afraid to 

have members of the Legislative Assembly and the opposition 

speak up for the people, then they . . . it's a cowardly act. And 

there's nothing off debate in democracy. That's what this place 

is all about, is to be able to express yourself. And the big, brave 

heroes on the NDP side say no more debate, we don't want to 

hear your arguments, we don't want to listen to the people, we 

know best. And that is the common denominator in any 

democratic institution. You turn it into a non-democratic 

institution. It's totally uncalled for. 

 

(1600) 

 

If you had've campaigned on it, it's one thing. If you'd have 

said to the people: elect the New Democrats and we'll close 52 

hospitals; elect the New Democrats and we'll raise the PST 

(provincial sales tax); elect the New Democrats and the end of 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program); elect the New 

Democrats and we will raise the prescription drug costs — if 

you'd have campaigned on that, fair enough. 

 

Then you say, look it, the people voted for us, the opposition 

has no grounds to speak, cut them off. But you didn't do that. 

You were cowards during the campaign and cowardly now. 

You wouldn't stand up there in front of the people and say, I 

am going to raise the PST and I'm going to close your hospitals 

and I'm going to end GRIP because you knew the people 

wouldn't vote for you. They wouldn't vote for that and 

they're not going to vote for it now. 

 

As Senator Davey Steuart said, they won't vote for you in the 

future either because you haven't told them the truth. And you 

didn't have the courage to stand in your place and tell them in 

1991. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What else was said? 

 

Mr. Devine: — And what else was said, the hon. member said. 

I'll tell you what was said. You promised that you would take 

off the PST and balance the budget. Do you know what the 

PST is worth? Two hundred million dollars, the way it starts 

with; and fully implemented it's $400. 

 

You promised the people of Saskatchewan a $400 million tax 

cut, and then you said: whoops, I guess we can't do that; I guess 

we have to add 1.6 billion to the deficit that's already there. 

And that's what you have — $800 million deficit, a $590 

million deficit, and now a $300 million deficit. You've added to 

the debt 1.6 billion because you couldn't even begin to manage 

the province without some sort of taxation mechanism. And 

then you finally said, well I guess it was a mistake that you 

made; you promised them something that you couldn't keep. 

 

And it's interesting on television last night, even when you 

watch it, you say, well the promises that were made in the '80s 

. . . Somebody should've asked the NDP Premier did you make 

any promises to get elected? Did you make any promises? Oh 

yes, I happened to say no PST harmonize. 

 

Well what was that promise worth? What was that promise 

worth? It was a couple of hundred million dollars the way it 

was and a couple of hundred million dollars if we did it on 

services. Oh, I just promised that. Mr. Speaker, he promised 

$400 million break to the people of Saskatchewan, knowing it 

in the debate that the deficit was 14.2 billion, and he promised 

that. And then he says, I'll give you more money for health care 

and I'll give you more money for schools and more money for 

agriculture, the cost of production. 

 

And then when he gets into the Legislative Assembly because 

he won on a sham, he says no — the PST's got to go from 7 per 

cent up to 9 per cent. No — income tax, property tax, sales tax, 

and then the prescription drug costs got to go up. And I'll tell 

you what. Just to top it off I'll end your agriculture support and 

then I'll really get you — I'll close 52 hospitals. 

 

And he's running around the province now, saying: well they're 

not closing; the building's still there. Is the hospital open or the 

hospital closed? It's closed. There is no more hospital. That's 

what he said. So don't let anybody be fooled. Oh well, I'm just 

converting this building. The hospital will be no more. And no 

more debate. No more discussion. No more campaigning that, 

oh well I can fix all this and I'll be kind to you because I'm a 

socialist. This is on the backs of Tommy Douglas. Don't forget 

Tommy. He'd close all those hospitals and he'd tell you he'd 

give you a big tax break and he'd really, really rip into farmers 

like this. 



April 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1023 

Oh yes. 

 

Well no wonder they have to bring closure in, Mr. Speaker. 

Because they can't stand in their place and defend this kind of 

hypocrisy. It's awful what you've done. You've misled the 

public. You fooled them so that they would vote for you and 

then when you won you said, I'll cut you off at the knees 

because I can't really live up to it. 

 

And now what we see is people digging out these letters and 

said, you promised, NDP. You promised lower taxes. You 

promised more money for health and education. You promised 

a balanced budget. You said it would be easy. And you 

promised cost of production for farmers. And you have done 

none of the above. You've gone exactly the opposite. And 

when you get into trouble, what do you do? You shut down the 

Legislative Assembly and won't let us debate. 

 

What cowards. What hypocrisy. It's shameful. I mean you 

campaigned for this. You campaigned for this. This is your 

raison d'etre to be a New Democrat, to cut off this. And after 

all of these promises and after — imagine — after watching the 

1980s you say, well I could go with a bit of a $400 million kind 

of tax gift to your promise, and we'll get away with it. And then 

we'll come in and we'll really show them what we're like. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP who stood in their place in 

opposition and soundly criticized closure on something as — 

imagine — as sinful as welling share in an energy company. 

Can you believe that? Offering shares in an energy company. 

Get some equity rather than debt. And they said, oh it's such a 

big economic and social sin. 

 

I'll tell you what you could do right now. you've got share in 

Cameco. You've probably got $300 million-plus shares in 

Cameco. Do you know what you're going to save this year in 

closing 52 hospitals? You're going to save $5 million. And for 

$5 million you're closing 52 hospitals. You should be ashamed 

of yourself. You've got over $300 million in equity just in your 

shares in uranium company, and you're putting these rural 

people through all of that. 

 

And even fully implemented next year, it'll be up to 15 or $20 

million. That on a $1.5 billion budget is 1.3 per cent savings. 

And you have to bring in closure for a 1.3 per cent savings? 

 

Who's driving this? We went through this on GRIP, but finally 

the Premier admitted: I shouldn't have touched it; it was a 

mistake. Leave it alone. Why change the rules of the 

legislature? Why cut off debate? Why be so silly? He ended up 

firing the minister of Agriculture because he shouldn't have 

listened to him. 

 

Who's he listening to on this? You're closing 52 hospitals, the 

heart and soul of rural communities. Give me a hospital and a 

school and a church and you've got the basis of a community. 

And you just 

went in and you plucked it right out without asking, without 

consultation, and nothing else done. And then you can't even 

allow people like me or others to speak in the legislature longer 

than 20 minutes because you're so proud of it. For what? For $5 

million? 

 

And you walked out of there because you wouldn't allow 

people to trade shares in a . . . I mean the whole world is 

trading shares. 

 

I'll tell you today, you could take Cameco shares and you could 

supply the $5 million to keep those rural hospitals. And you 

could have all kinds of consultation with rural people on how 

to run them and to protect them and to keep integrated facilities 

working, and they would tell you. You don't have to ram it 

down their throats. 

 

Why don't you just go out and talk to them, visit with them? 

Have the courage to say, look, push it a little hard just like 

GRIP; we don't need to wreck this place. Allow people to talk. 

Let's get some ideas. Gosh, we've got alternatives. As 

somebody said on TV last night, there are choices. You've got 

choices. You don't just have to pick on 52 communities that 

didn't ask for this and didn't vote for this. 

 

I can't understand you. Are you so afraid of it that you've got to 

ram it through? There's no other logical answer. 

 

What in the goodness are you about? Why? Is this good for the 

towns that you're talking about? Is it saving you a lot of 

money? No. Do people support it? No. Well the hon. members 

can laugh in their places. I'll tell you, the people watching on 

television, the people are going to be out here in front of the 

Legislative Assembly on Wednesday. They'll want you to come 

out and laugh in their face, member from Humboldt. You be 

there. You be there, and you laugh in their face. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I won't laugh. 

 

Mr. Devine: — I'll bet you won't laugh. You talk about closure 

. . . And they will tell you, you had no mandate to do this. You 

had no mandate at all to do this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

And he said, the member from Humboldt just chirped up and 

said, well Devine created the deficit; well if that's true, why in 

the world would you offer a $400 million tax break on its 

back? Why would you do that? Why? Why would you offer no 

PST if you thought the deficit was that big? But you did. 

 

You offered people no PST if you vote NDP. And on top of 

that, you said I'll fund your hospitals, and I'll fund your health 

care, and I'll give you prescription drugs, and I'll reinstate the 

dental program. You offered all of that, and you and your 

leader knew that there wasn't money to do that. But you said, 

well we'll tell the people that; hopefully they'll vote NDP. And 

if they vote NDP, then we'll really stick it to them. And boy 

have we got it today . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And 

another member chirps up from Regina and says, 



1024 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1993 

gosh I thought I thought there was time allocation because she 

can’t stand to hear the truth. 

 

The truth is you didn’t campaign on this, and you have no 

mandate to do it. If you think you’ve got all the answers, you 

come out on the steps of the legislature on Wednesday, and you 

tell all the people. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I’ll be there. 

 

Mr. Devine: — You be there. You be there. And you can laugh 

at them. You can say, hey, go home; there’s closure. Go home; 

there’s closure. That’s what you can tell them. You don’t get to 

speak about it in Saskatchewan with the NDP in power. You 

can close hospitals because the NDP say go home, there’s 

closure. The democratic institution of the Legislative Assembly 

says there’s no debate in health care in –s. Really proud. Boy, 

you’ve got to feel good about that. You go tell all your 

constituents, vote for you. 

 

I hope you’ve got just as many answers when they come here 

to find out why you have closure on their communities. Why is 

there closure on their communities? 

 

Listen. Listen to this guy speak in here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. Order! 

Order! Will the member from Rosthern please just settle down. 

All I looked at him for is when the Speaker is on — Order! — 

when the Speaker is on his feet the member should sit down. 

That’s all. I will address the member from Regina Rosemont if 

you just give me a chance. Just give me a chance. 

 

I will ask the member for Regina Rosemont to either quit 

interrupting or leave the chambers. Quit interrupting, and give 

the member from Estevan his due to speak in this House. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. While the time is 

limited, I do plan to speak to the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

It’s members like that, Mr. Speaker, that campaign on no 

provincial sales tax harmonized with the federal government, 

but lots of money for health and education. And they ran 

around the province and they ran around the city of Regina 

saying, well I’ll tell you folks, there’s a $14 billion deficit but 

we’re going to promise you a $200 million tax break and we’ll 

give you more money for health and education. 

 

And do you know what happened? When they got elected they 

ran up a deficit of 800 million, 600 million, and now 300 

million, 1.6 billion on top of it. and then tax increases. And 

now when we go to debate it, they cut us off and say, well 

we’re going to close 52 hospitals but we don’t like you to 

speak up on behalf of people so we’ll cut you off — cut you 

off. And he shakes his finger at me and he says, just wait . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 

elapsed. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the limited 

time that’s available to me in this debate that the government 

has forced on this legislature, I want to talk about the issue 

before us, Mr. Speaker, and quote some of the members of this 

new-found democratic party over here who have sought to 

bring closure down in this Assembly for the sixth time in a year 

and a half. 

 

And I quote the member from Regina Elphinstone, the House 

Leader, who finally did the despicable act in here today, Mr. 

Speaker. And I quote. This is from August 7, 1989 in Hansard. 

 

Well I say that closure is the most despicable rule that this 

government could invoke . . . 

 

Despicable, Mr. Speaker, that’s the words of the member from 

Elphinstone, the House Leader, who is ramming through this 

legislature — ramming through this legislature a health Act 

that, Mr. Speaker, hundreds and indeed thousands of people 

around this province are finding despicable. 

 

They’re meeting by the tens and by the hundreds and by the 

thousands in communities all over this province because they 

say this government has not given me time, they have not given 

me the direction I need. They have not given us the ability as 

taxpayers in this province to determine part of our own future. 

And they are saying, in the words of the member from 

Elphinstone, that it is despicable. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this bunch of new-found democrats who so 

eloquently in this legislature just a short few years ago stood in 

their place for hours on end and talked about the use of closure 

. . . The member from Riversdale, August 4, ’89: 

 

. . . discredited and desperate, this government has no other 

choice. It resorts to the actions of a bully. It resorts to the 

actions of coming down and guillotining the opposition here. 

 

(1615) 

 

This same Premier that leads these new-found democrats in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This same Premier 

who now says that he will unilaterally change the way that 

health care is delivered in this province to people who took 

over three decades to build a system that makes them 

comfortable, that says that there are no second-class citizens in 

this province, a system that says that whether you live in the 

city or live in the country that you are a citizen of equal value, 

that you are a citizen who has access to the same quality of 

living standards no matter where you live. 

 

This party that today in this legislature, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so 

glibly takes away that right, this party who such a short time 

ago campaigned around this province on more for everything, 

particularly health care, who said that senior citizens under the 

previous 



April 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1025 

government were choosing between groceries and medicine, 

who said that children were dying in transport from Assiniboia 

to Regina because the former government only provided 

funding levels at the rate of inflation — and now we find this 

New Democratic Party, the party that always said that I care, 

when it came to medicare, is now the party of I don’t care, that 

our political agenda is more important to us, more important to 

us than half the citizens of this province that live outside our 

major cities. That’s what they say. 

 

And they say not only that. That because we have this large 

majority, that we will force it through this legislature because 

our political timetable is being interfered with. The political 

hides of some of these people that sit across from us are being 

threatened, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The promises made such a 

short time ago mean nothing to these people. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? People all over this 

province are starting to say the same thing. They meet by the 

tens and the hundreds of thousands and they say: what 

happened to those promises? What happened to those 

commitments? What has happened to this political party that 

based so much of its foundation on equality of access, of equal 

opportunity? What has happened to this New Democratic 

Party, this bunch of new-found democrats that now rule this 

province? 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they hid. They hide in this 

legislature; they hide behind closure. 

 

I’d like to quote again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the 

members of this government, a member of the treasury benches 

who now hides behind closure in this Assembly. And this is 

from Hansard, August 7, 1989: 

 

. . . I want to say to you that on this side of the House, 

democratic traditions do matter, the traditions of this place 

do count. Not once, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not once in all the 

years of CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) or 

New Democratic Party administration in this province, not 

once did we seek to stifle the free speech of this legislature; 

not once did we seek to limit debate in this House. Not 

during the heated debates of the late 1940s, not during the 

medicare crisis, not during that time when the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan was being formed, not once 

did we seek to limit the rights of the opposition to speak in 

this legislature. 

 

So, speaketh, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Associate Minister of 

Health, so speaketh the Associate Minister of Health, he who 

goes out now and so glibly closes rural hospitals across this 

province at the drop of a hat. 

 

And the same minister said on August 7, 1989: on this side of 

the House, Mr. Speaker, democratic traditions count. So sayeth 

the associate minister from this new-found democratic party of 

Saskatchewan, which now uses closure for the sixth time in this 

Assembly in  

a year and a half. 

 

The same cabinet minister quotes on August 7th: 

 

. . . for this motion, I would be absolutely ashamed to be 

counted in with the first government in Saskatchewan history 

to limit free speech in this House. I’d be absolutely ashamed 

to stand up with the front bench and do as they had beckoned 

me to do. 

 

Well it’s obvious, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this debate, that the 

front bench has beckoned. And the front bench has beckoned 

them all to follow along and do what their own democratic 

traditions as a party in this province has prohibited them from 

doing at the most extreme of times. And that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is to limit debate in this legislature. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we were talking about a privatization, if 

we were talking about a farm policy, we might have some 

latitude from these new-found democrats because they’ve 

always voted consistently against those things, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. They’ve always spoken out against those things. 

 

But on the issue of health care, of medicare, of one class of 

citizen in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have always 

stood firm in their place. They have never hidden behind their 

desks; they have never hunkered down like we see them today 

with this sixth introduction of closure in this Assembly. 

 

But now we see them hunkered down, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

this party of new-found democrats that now rules this province, 

these people that are the defenders of the rights of citizens, the 

defenders of equality. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s finish off with the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow, the Associate Minister of Health, 

August 7, 1989: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I stand to oppose this action to limit debate in 

the Saskatchewan legislature. I stand to oppose the silencing 

of an opposition. And I stand to oppose this motion, not 

simply because it is the means by which this government 

wishes to privatize . . . I stand to oppose this motion because 

it limits the freedom of speech. 

 

And I’ll put my name on record against this limiting of free 

speech in this Legislative Assembly. And when that day 

comes and I no longer have a right to sit in this legislature 

and to speaker here, when that day comes, I will at least not 

go away with the shame of knowing that I was a part of a 

group of men and women who sought to limit those rights in 

this House. 

 

There was a day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when words — spoken 

by the member from Wakamow, the Associate Minister of 

Health — like that would have meant something to the New 

Democratic Party in this province. There was a time, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, when a member of this legislature spoke thus, 

that 

 



1026 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1993 

when the contradictions stared him square in the face, he would 

have picked himself up and either crossed the floor or 

permanently removed himself from this Legislative Assembly. 

 

But today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we don't see that any more 

because we see a political party that is more interested in 

saving their political hides, of covering up for the promises 

made and the promises broken. We don't see that member 

moving his seat across this Legislative Assembly floor. We 

don't see that member saying, I can no longer exist in a political 

party that would do this. No, that hon. member simply does the 

heeding of his Premier and the front benches. 

 

He simply does — I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker — what the 

rest of them are doing. They simply hunker down behind their 

desks, they simply hunker down and hide from the fact that this 

political party that used to stand for so much stands for so little. 

And that is the sad fact of what we're debating here. 

 

No, we're not debating it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because after 20 

minutes, you're going to stand up and you're going to tell me to 

take my place, that I don't have the right to speak any more; 

that the constituents of Thunder Creek and the other 

constituents around this province who are upset, who see their 

towns being torn apart and destroyed, that they don't have that 

basic right any more. 

 

Even the people that came in their thousands to the steps of this 

legislature in 1962 were allowed to have their champions in 

this legislature. They were allowed to have the members of the 

official opposition come in and speak their piece, and not once 

did the then New Democratic Party stand and deny that access. 

They said, we don't agree with you, we don't agree with the 

thousands of people, we are going to proceed, but we are going 

to let you have your say. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fundamentals of our health 

system are undergoing massive change again. There isn't a 

person in this province who says that rationalization of that 

system is not on in the 1990s — not one. But that pioneers of 

this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people that have been a 

part of the auxiliary of every hospital in this province, the 

families that have contributed in every way that they could to 

those buildings, those structures and to their health care out of 

their pocket to see that equality and access were there, those 

people are feeling betrayed today. 

 

If this legislature stood and debated this issue for the next 12 

months, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would prove to the people of 

this province that its elected officials cared, cared enough about 

what the rest of Saskatchewan would look like beyond Main 

Street, Regina, and Saskatoon, in the next few years to stand 

and talk about it and work with them to come up with a system 

of health care in this province that will last another three 

decades. 

 

But what they are being told, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by this 

motion is that it doesn't matter 

 it doesn't matter what your town looks like, it doesn't matter 

what the landscape in rural Saskatchewan looks like because 

this bunch of new-found democrats is going to have their way. 

 

And they're going to do it in time to try and heal the political 

wounds so that they can be re-elected in 1995 or 1996, not 

because there is a reasoned debate taking place; not because 

people are having the time and the wherewithal to restructure 

the fundamentals of their life. No, that's not what's on the 

agenda. What's on the agenda is closure. What's on the agenda 

is that the member from Thunder Creek and the member from 

Kindersley and others in this opposition only get 20 minutes — 

only get 20 minutes. 

 

After these people get done with rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, you should hope that there is medical care 

within 20 minutes of your life. You should hope, as I do every 

day on my farm, that one of my children doesn't stick his leg in 

the auger, that someone in rural Saskatchewan isn't going to die 

because 20 minutes was too much for these people. 

 

And you say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you may say to me, you're 

being melodramatic. Well I can remember the member . . . the 

now Health minister, the member from Regina Lakeview, 

accusing the former government of a small four-year-old child 

bleeding to death on her way in from Assiniboia Hospital to 

Regina because we held our funding for health care at only the 

rate of inflation. The same member walked around 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg constituency and said that the 

government would close all five hospitals and what a travesty it 

was because people were being put at risk. 

 

That same member now says not only are we going to close 

three of the five, we're going to do it in six months, and that's 

it. There'll be no debate. There'll be no local people making 

those decisions. It's a done deal. 

 

Twenty minutes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is all that those 

communities are being given. And this bunch of new-found 

democrats here in this legislature says that's all they deserve. 

Because if they weren't saying that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 

wouldn't have brought this heinous motion in here to change 

the landscape of this province for decades to come . . . I say to 

you demands more than 20 minutes. It demands that people out 

there be given the opportunity to make their own choices, free 

of interference from government. 

 

(1630) 

 

Because they are taxpayers, just as we are. And in 

Saskatchewan in 1993 I don't see too many taxpayers making 

unwise decisions. It doesn't matter if you're on the farm or in 

the small town or if you're a Main Street businessman — today 

you know that the dollars are thinner than they have ever been 

before. 

 

And they are not making foolish choices. They aren't 



April 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1027 

allowing their politicians to make foolish choices, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And that's why they deserve more than 20 minutes in 

this Assembly. That's why they deserve more from this 

political party than what we're seeing today. 

 

They need a fair hearing. They shouldn't have to come to the 

steps of this legislature. If this government and these ministers 

were doing their job, they would have been in every one of 

those communities and they would have listened and they 

would have felt and they would gotten the message. And we 

wouldn't be into this situation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they had 

done that. 

 

Instead, it's ram, ram, ram. And as so many New Democrats so 

eloquently said in 1989, there can only be one reason for that 

and that is the salvation of their political hides. 

 

Well I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this deed will not 

be forgotten. There are people all over this province who in the 

future will be asked to make some choices. And they will 

remember the 20 minutes that their community got in this 

legislature. 

 

And if there is anything left of that community in two years 

time, anything at all, if there is even a community there to 

protest, I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the words of the 

associate minister, the Associate Minister of Health, who said 

before that he was ashamed to be part of this process, will 

come back to haunt him and this political party. And that 

shame, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that shame should be borne by all 

55 of them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

normally is an honour and in fact a pleasure to represent the 

public in debates in this province. But today's debate is 

somewhat different. Mr. Deputy Speaker, today's debate, unlike 

many of the others in which I have participated over the last 

year, has come under the pall of closure. And there is no pride 

nor any pleasure in cutting off debate in order to deny the 

public a chance to clearly make their objections known to the 

members' opposite proposed legislation. There is no pride in 

stifling debate on an issue of critical importance. Actions like 

this only feed public cynicism toward politicians and our 

political institutions. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find today's events ironic. Today we 

have a government that constantly preaches its allegiance to the 

principle of cooperation — cooperation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And I question their commitment to cooperation. 

 

I fail to see any indication that the member from Elphinstone 

and his colleagues are concerned about or committed to 

cooperation when they are using closure and time allocation to 

get a controversial Bill through as quickly as they can, to get 

this Bill through as quickly as they can in order not simply to 

avoid debate but in order to stifle debate in communities 

across the province. 

 

The members opposite and the Premier want to avoid further 

meetings, further protests, and the best way to do this, in their 

mind, is to avoid cooperating. The best way to do this is to get 

this Bill through as quickly as they can and to make our new 

health care districts a done deal. 

 

It appears that the members opposite believe if this means 

sacrificing cooperation with the people of Saskatchewan, then 

so be it. It appears, Mr. Speaker, that ensuring cooperation with 

the people of Saskatchewan is not important at all to the 

members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier is one who often refers to his lengthy 

stay in this House and to the many great debaters that have sat 

in this Chamber over the years. And I'd like to take this 

opportunity to refer to some of those people myself. And as a 

matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, one to whom I will be referring is 

the present Premier. 

 

On June 7, 1991, during a debate over the PST, the Premier 

stated — if not boasted — that he, quote: recalled many 

debates on many contentious issues in this House. The Premier 

went on to say that he recalled that the government, and I 

quote: of the late Ross Thatcher advanced on a matter of 

principle with the member from Riversdale on the opposition 

opposed to him. The Premier stated that, and I quote: there was 

no closure used by the Liberal Party or the Liberal government 

at that time. The debate ran its course. End of quote. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that quotation leads one to wonder what 

happened to the Premier in this Assembly today. Four years 

ago he sat in this House and touted the merits of following by 

principle. He argued that the noble thing to do was to, and I 

quote: let the debate run its course. End of quote. And to do so 

as a matter of principle. 

 

That is what the people find cynical about politicians — like 

the Premier and the members opposite. While they claim to be 

principled, they throw principles like cooperation in the 

garbage as soon as it suits them. The members opposite are 

showing that expediency or getting what they want by any 

means possible is what really matters. 

 

They don't appear to care about the families or health care 

givers in communities across this province — rural people who 

have been losing so much over the last 10 years and are 

frightened by more change and they want more time. By 

stifling debate they are showing just how much they really care 

about the concerns and opinions of the citizens of our province. 

They do not care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If they did care, they would let this debate run its course and 

they would give everyone a chance to voice their concerns to 

the point where they would even allow people, the people of 

this province, to come to a committee of the whole in a much 

larger 



1028 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1993 

chamber than this and really talk about these fundamental 

changes facing them. Let's talk about real democracy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It was the Premier and his colleagues that went across this 

province earlier this year, telling everyone what a crisis we 

had, all of the crises that we're in, and how we must all 

cooperate and make sacrifices together — together, Mr. 

Speaker — in order to get our fiscal house in order. Well that is 

a very noble and indeed a sensible claim, but how quickly 

people forget. The members opposite have forgotten what 

cooperation is. 

 

As I stated last week, if the government believes it needs the 

cooperation of the people in this province to survive this 

difficult period, it must first gain their trust. Stifling debate and 

telling the communities of this province that regardless of what 

they think the government will have its way, is no way of 

building cooperation and trust. By saying that they are in 

favour of letting the debate run its course and then gagging 

with time allocation and closure those who chose to speak as 

soon as they get in power, this is no way to gain the trust and 

the confidence of the people of the province. 

 

It is actions like these that make the public cynical. Mr. 

Premier, and the members opposite, the member from 

Elphinstone, and the member from Hillsdale must all remember 

that the people have had enough. Recent polls indicate that 

Canadians are more cynical about their politicians than any 

other people in the western world. And these members opposite 

are doing nothing to reduce the level of cynicism. In fact 

they're doing their best to encourage cynicism and the old-style 

political behaviour on which it thrives. 

 

They are responsible for their behaviour, Mr. Speaker. I will be 

responsible for my party in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Chretien can be responsible for his in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when in opposition the Premier made even 

stronger comments about the use of closure and time 

allocation. And he made the following remarks about gagging 

debate. The member from Riversdale four years ago said using 

cynicism-generators like they are using today, quote: 

 

. . . is an act of a government which knows it cannot win this 

debate with reasons, so it resorts to the only tactic that old, 

decrepit and decaying and soon-to-be-defeated governments 

everywhere in the world would resort to — gagging the 

opposition and gagging the people. 

 

Those are indeed powerful words, Mr. Speaker. They are from 

the Premier of Saskatchewan who is the Premier of 

-Saskatchewan today. And I'd like to know, Mr. Speaker, when 

will the Premier stop creating more cynicism? When will the 

Premier stop gagging the people? When will the members 

opposite stop gagging the opposition? 

And if the government refuses to step back from this 

despicable practice, what does that mean, Mr. Speaker? Does it 

mean that this government has become as the Premier says, old 

and decrepit, or is it soon to be defeated? 

 

I urge the members opposite to pay attention, pay attention to 

the meetings that are being held throughout our province, pay 

attention to the fact that three-quarters of the planning 

committee in Swift Current resigned because they opposed the 

way that the government was trying to force this upon them. 

 

Pay attention to the people of Saskatchewan. Just listen to 

them. That's all that they're asking people to do. 

 

I believe we need legislation to set up health districts, and I 

support legislation to set up health districts. We need 

legislation to allow the people of this province to move on. 

 

But should the government, Mr. Speaker, ignore the 

recommendations of the people who understand their own 

communities, their own set of circumstances best? Can the 

government be reasonable in its aims when it doesn't 

understand the intricacies of people's homes and how it is they 

work together? 

 

They are proposing a major overhaul, a complete 

reconstruction of the health system, and people are simply 

asking for more time. They aren't saying they object. They 

aren't saying they're against reform. They're saying, allow us to 

be part of the process of change — more time to adjust to the 

changes that lay ahead, more time to prepare for the future so 

that the people who will lose their jobs will have some 

alternatives in our communities. 

 

Some say it's government's job to present the future to the 

people in the present, and I agree with that idea. I agree with 

putting a vision before people, but I do not agree with 

government arbitrarily ramming the future down the throats of 

people while the people are gasping for air. 

 

I have alluded to the principle of cooperation during my 

remarks, and while cooperation is needed with the people and 

the communities of this province, cooperation is also needed 

with the health care providers that labour daily for the 

well-being and the health of Saskatchewan people. 

 

I had a letter, in fact I have dozens and dozens and dozens of 

letters, hundreds of them, regarding this topic. And there are 

many nurses from around this province who are saying they 

agree with health care reform, but what they want is an 

opportunity to fully participate, to ensure that some things are 

in place so that job losses will be minimal, that they in fact will 

know how they can participate in being able to bring some 

income to their families, particularly those who are people in 

farm families. 

 

Well health care is not an economic development project as has 

been used by governments in the past. 



April 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1029 

The impact of these closures and job losses is an issue which 

the government must and should have addressed with the 

communities that they knew were going to be earmarked for 

substantial changes. 

 

People deserve to know what will happen to them, whether 

they're care-givers or health consumers. And until the members 

opposite offer some substantive answers to the people and a 

detailed view of their vision, they can hardly justify stifling 

debate so early, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As the Leader of the Liberal Party, I believe, as the last Ross 

Thatcher once said, that the great tragedy is that we have not 

been getting our money's worth out of our health care dollar. 

And yes this is the person who stated in 1970 that if something 

didn't done, 20 years from now we couldn't afford medicare. 

Perhaps the New Democrats should have listened to him. 

 

The time has come for a change. But change, like everything 

else, must follow a process that shows respect for the people, 

respect for their opinions, and respect for their heartfelt 

concerns. 

 

(1645) 

 

Just prior to the war, Saskatchewan began to set up union 

hospitals. In 1947 the members opposite introduced health 

insurance. The introduction of health insurance, hospital 

insurance, provides a good example, Mr. Speaker, of why we, 

the people of Saskatchewan, deserve to know the government's 

plans in full before allowing them to move ahead. 

 

The implementation of hospital insurance demonstrates why a 

government launching program reforms like this — those 

before us today — should not be able to use such Draconian 

devices as closure and time allocation. 

 

When hospital insurance was introduced by the government of 

the day — that government of the day was led by Premier 

Douglas — the premier forecasted that this measure would cost 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan $4 million, a significant 

expense in that day. Not long after, the truth came to light. As 

noble a program as hospital insurance was, it cost $7 million — 

almost twice as much as expected. 

 

What will the changes that government wants today cost? We 

all want to make certain that we get value for our health care 

dollar, but I'm concerned about the cost to the quality of our 

health system, the human costs. How can we truly know what 

impact these changes will have on people unless we're given 

the details first? 

 

I urge the government to do as the Premier prophetically urged 

four years ago. Win your arguments with reasons, not be 

gagging the public and not by gagging the opposition with time 

allocation and closure. If your plans are the right ones, let the 

debate run its course. Let the public raise their concerns and 

objections. If their plans are the right ones, Mr. Speaker, they 

will win the argument with 

reason. 

 

I would like to refer to another comment that the Premier made 

some time ago during the debate over utilization fees. As a 

rookie MLA the Premier stated that, and I quote: democracy is 

based on the concept that man is rational; he can choose 

between good ideas and good men. 

 

What was true in 1968, Mr. Speaker, is still true in 1993. Why 

does the Premier and the members opposite not leg democracy 

prevail? Let the people use reason to judge between good ideas 

and good men. Give people a chance to use their reason. 

 

Why should any elected representative fear this? The answer to 

this, Mr. Speaker, is they should not. 

 

But unfortunately old-style politics continues to dominate in 

this particular Chamber. That old-style politics, Mr. Speaker, is 

the same attitude that took the rights away from civil servants 

and the rights away from farmers in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

That is the same attitude that is today telling everyone accept, 

accept the government's plans blindly without knowing what 

will happen to their local health services. It is the same attitude 

that is now telling people in 52 areas of our province that their 

hospitals will close and simply accept this decision without 

knowing what the overall plan will be. 

 

There are people in this province like the people in Weyburn 

who have family members in the Souris Valley Regional Care 

facility who are mentally challenged. They want to know 

whether their relatives will be uprooted and forced to more to 

Valley View in Moose Jaw because of the government's health 

care reforms. I think any question that any of us might have. 

People are wondering what will happen. 

 

And don't the members opposite who support time allocation 

and closure believe that these concerned families should at 

least be able to know how the health care reforms are going to 

affect their loved ones, their vulnerable ones in their 

communities? Is that not the morally right thing to do, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

I ask this government to show respect for the people of our 

province. They know what is best for themselves. And if they 

like your plans as government, they will support you and they 

will prevail. Cooperation will prevail. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that there is no mechanism in this 

Assembly to prevent the ultimate passage of Bill No. 3. The 

only tactic which opposition members can use ultimately is the 

power of public opinion. The longer we can draw attention of 

the media, the concerns of the public, and the lack of 

conviction of many of the NDP back-benchers for these 

changes, the better the chance of forcing the government to 

remove its deadlines, to implement a pilot project, and slow 

down the legislation. 



1030 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1993 

It is unfortunate that in a democratic process there are no tools 

other than stalling to make a point, which is critical. During 

debates on serious issues it is obvious that our system is not 

designed to develop good decisions on behalf of the people. 

Rather, it is designed to give government members an arm-lock 

on democracy where the sheer size and strength of their 

majority will override the arguments put forth however logical 

they may be. 

 

History is an excellent teacher, Mr. Speaker. It was a 

significant decision by the New Democrats many years ago 

when with the swipe of a pen thousands of mentally challenged 

people in North Battleford and in Weyburn were 

deinstitutionalized with the swipe of a pen. And as someone 

who has worked for many years in implementing 

normalization, one of the things that people will not forget is, 

as laudable as that was, nothing had been put in place in the 

communities in order to take these individuals in who were 

deinstitutionalized. And as much as people across like to deny 

these things, perhaps what they should do is actually go and 

talk to people who are not New Democrats. 

 

In the limited moments that I have left to speak, I urge the 

government to stop muzzling and ride out what might be 

indeed a stormy debate. Without a chance to voice their 

opinions, the people cannot feel part of this process, Mr. 

Speaker. This flies in the face o cooperation. It is the antithesis 

of openness. 

 

The closure time allocation motion we are faced with today is 

really a lethal injection to democracy — lethal injection — 

quick destruction of democracy with the most serious of 

long-term implications. And democracy is such a tenuous 

thing, elected official should do whatever we can to protect it 

and to strengthen it. The people must be encouraged to 

participate more fully, Mr. Speaker, not stifled, not gagged. 

 

As you have noted, Mr. Speaker, I do not believe in antics that 

hold up the workings of this legislature. I also do not believe in 

bringing forward closure a closure which stifles the debate of 

people in the province. All the things that have been transpiring 

here over the last week points out how much reform necessary 

if we are going to get down to the business of working for the 

people of this province. And if we are going to save our health 

care system, we are going to have to do it together. Not hide 

from debate or public scrutiny, but welcome debate. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's another 

sad day in this legislature when the government uses closure on 

closure to stifle debate in this province. The people of this 

province wish to have their voices heard, and yet the 

government opposite totally ignores what the people are trying 

to say to them. There are meetings going on, Mr. 

Speaker, across this province. There have been a number of 

meetings in the last week. There are three meetings tonight. 

There are meetings in Carievale, Macklin, and Gull Lake, 

where the people of this province are trying to send a message 

to the government opposite. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, the government opposite is not listening. 

They're not listening to the people, to the opposition. They're 

not listening to the people across this province. If they were 

listening, Mr. Speaker, they would hold up their legislation. 

They would not have used closure to force it through. They 

would allow the people to talk to their government — to their 

government, Mr. Speaker — because the people did elect each 

and every one of us in here. 

 

And yet the people, when they went to the polls in 1991, were 

not voting to close their hospitals. They were voting for all the 

promises that they had received during the election campaign, 

that for $4.6 billion the party opposite could run this province 

and would run it — in their words — better than it had been 

run before, and still provide more money for health care, more 

money for education, Mr. Speaker. And that's not what they're 

receiving. 

 

The government opposite, Mr. Speaker, does not have a 

mandate for what they are doing. They do not have the 

mandate to use closure on closure to end debate on this health 

care Bill. When you look back at closure being used in this 

province, in the last session, Mr. Speaker, it was used five 

times. In the previous nine years I believe, Mr. Speaker, it was 

used twice. 

 

It seems to becoming a regular habit with the government 

opposite. Either you tow the line for the government opposite 

or they simply introduce closure and eliminate debate. The 

opposition has very few tools left, Mr. Speaker, with which to 

try and hold the government accountable, because the 

government will do what it wants irregardless of what the 

people in this province desire. They're not paying any attention, 

Mr. Speaker, to those things that are being asked for by the 

people of the province. 

 

Instead of the members opposite going out to the meetings, 

they have to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Some of the 

members are saying they are. Mr. Speaker, this process, 

according to the Minister of Health herself, has been going on 

since August last year. The members of the opposition have 

been going out in the last week only, Mr. Speaker, to meet with 

the public. 

 

There have been a number of meetings across the province and 

the members opposite have not been there. They've simply sent 

their bureaucrats out. And those bureaucrats, Mr. Speaker, did 

not provide any information. The message was, form a steering 

committee to investigate the possibilities of forming a health 

care district. And that was their information that they were to 

go ahead and try and form a steering committee. But there was 

no real direction given as to what this steering committee was 

to do, how they were to operate, and how they were to be 

funded. 



April 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1031 

When the members of the public approached us to ask those 

questions, Mr. Speaker, of the government opposite, what was 

the government's response? The governments response, Mr. 

Speaker, was closure. We're not to talk about these types of 

things in the province of Saskatchewan. No, no, the 

government uses closure so that the people cannot get the 

answers that they need to make the proper decisions concerning 

health care. 

 

One of the suggestions that has come forward from the 

government that the people want more clarification about, that 

they were asking us about, is how many people, Mr. Speaker, 

should form a health care district. We asked those questions in 

question period. We asked them in the small number of hours 

of debate that we had, and there was no response, Mr. Speaker. 

And we needed the opportunity to continue to question the 

government on its plans. 

 

How many people do form a health care district? The Minister 

of Health would suggest 12,000. Her bureaucrats that are out 

running around would suggest 40. Mr. Speaker, the people 

need some answers and they're not getting them. And with 

closure in place, Mr. Speaker, they can't get them. 

 

Two of the hospitals in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, are 

slated for closure. Both of them are relatively new facilities. 

The fact is, the one was just opened up on April 2 of this year. 

Well the government is saying, well these hospitals are not 

needed because there's nobody in them. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I talked to the administrator of the Oxbow 

hospital this past week, and she said the hospital was full. They 

had more patients looking to come in the door. They were 

trying to move patients from Oxbow to Estevan; they were 

trying to move patients from Oxbow to Regina. And in both of 

these circumstances, Mr. Speaker, there was no beds available 

in either Estevan or Regina for the patients they wished to 

transfer, so they had patients stuck in the hallways. 

 

And the same thing was occurring in Redvers two weeks ago, 

where their hospital was full, they were trying to transfer 

people out, couldn't do it. They had to move, Mr. Speaker, a 

95-year-old lady out of a respite bed because they needed room 

for acute care patients. This lady had to be transferred to 

another hospital 50 miles away, so they could have beds in the 

Redvers hospital. 

 

And yet the government doesn't want people to talk about it. 

They want to bring in closure so that nobody can discuss these 

issues, so that the people who will be here on Wednesday will 

not be heard. The government will have closure in place. The 

health care Bill will have its limited amount of debate, and it 

will be done. 

 

We've had 12 hours, Mr. Speaker, 12 hours of debate on Bill 3. 

Other Bills have gone through this House that were 

contentious. The potash debate had a hundred plus — 120 

hours, Mr. Speaker, somewhere 

in that neighbourhood. The SaskEnergy Bill had about 90 

hours of debate. We've had 12 hours, Mr. Speaker, on this issue 

— 12 hours. Not even every one of our members has yet had 

an opportunity to speak. I believe we've had about three 

members up to speak on this issue, three or four. 

 

(1700) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province need to be given more 

opportunity to provide some input into the government's action, 

and they're being denied that. The government is forcing their 

agenda on the people even though the people may not wish to 

go in that direction. 

 

And because the government, Mr. Speaker, did not outline 

these plans during the election campaign, in fact has outlined 

totally opposite plans, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that the 

government opposite does not have a mandate to carry out the 

programs that they are now doing. 

 

It seems that these programs that they are bent on providing for 

the people of Saskatchewan, if I may use the word provide, is 

the dismantling of rural Saskatchewan. The closure of 52 

hospitals across this province is not a benefit to rural 

Saskatchewan. It is not a benefit to any of the people living 

within those communities that will be closed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you this is just the first 

step; that the government will proceed beyond this point with 

other measures of a similar kind. I can foresee it happening 

with education. I can foresee it happening with municipal 

governments, that the government is using the boundaries of 

the different hospital boards, the different home care boards, 

the various medical services, the ambulances within the areas, 

as being the reason for part of this need to amalgamate into 

super health districts. 

 

The same thing, Mr. Speaker, will happen in education where 

there will be forced amalgamations of school units. The same 

thing will happen with municipal districts where they will be 

forced to amalgamate into a county system. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this may happen some point down the road, 

but it should happen on the people's agenda, not on the agenda 

of the government opposite. 

 

The people in their own good time, if they wish to do this, Mr. 

Speaker, should be given that opportunity, but it should not be 

forced on them by the government opposite. If the people wish 

to form into a larger ambulance district, well then they should 

be encouraged to do so. But they should not have it forced on 

them, as the government is doing. 

 

If the people want to form larger education districts, they 

should be allowed to do so; but the government should not use 

closure to force it. And the same, Mr. Speaker, with the 

municipal districts. 

 

But the habit of this government, Mr. Speaker, is 



1032 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1993 

becoming a situation where any time a piece of legislation is 

the least bit controversial, they use closure. And then if the 

opposition raised a fuss about it, they use closure again so that 

the opposition cannot speak on it and so that the public will not 

get an opportunity to find out what is going on in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I'd like to read a quote to you from the member from Regina 

Albert North, and this is from Hansard in 1989, and it says: 

 

Here we are, Saskatchewan Day, 1989, and I'm wondering 

when the Conservative Party will start to issue as a matter of 

course to their candidates flame-throwers so that they can 

better follow the scorched earth policy that this government 

is so hell-bent on carrying out. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think there's only one word that needs to 

be changed in that, and that's Conservative to New Democratic 

Party within that quote to make it totally appropriate to what is 

taking place in this House today. 

 

And I think we can run down a list of issues on which the 

flame-thrower and the scorched earth policy that the member 

from Regina Albert North was talking about can be used for 

this government. Health care today. Last session it was GRIP. 

Earlier it was diabetics, the drug plan, dental health care, and 

the downloading onto the municipal taxpayers. That's the 

scorched earth policy that this government is following. 

 

It seems to be an attempt, Mr. Speaker, to depopulate the 

province of Saskatchewan, the rural areas of Saskatchewan, 

move the people out. The government's already been talking 

about the elimination of a number of rural constituencies. If the 

government can eliminate a number of people within the rural 

areas of this province, that means that they can increase the 

number of rural constituencies which will be eliminated. 

 

That seems to be what the ulterior motive is, Mr. Speaker, for 

this government. And that's why they're using closure, closure 

on closure, to implement their program, to stifle debate in this 

province. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, from the member from Regina Albert 

North, of August 7, 1989, in Hansard: 

 

The government might ask somewhat of a different question. 

And they would say, well why let democracy interfere with 

the goings on in the legislature? And that's I think the nub of 

this whole question. Why let democracy interfere with our 

agenda, the government says. 

 

And that's what the member from Regina Albert North t had to 

say in 1989. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, that direct quote can be attributed to what 

the government is doing today. They refuse to let democracy 

and free speech interfere with their 

agenda. They will pass this Bill no matter what, Mr. Speaker. 

That's the attitude. If it means they have to trample on the 

rights of every citizen in this province so be it, they will do so, 

irregardless of the consequences. They will stifle the debate 

and they will ignore the wishes of the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that when the time comes, the people of 

this province will have their say and they will be heard. And 

that time will come, Mr. Speaker, the next time the ballots are 

counted. And, Mr. Speaker, I know that the people of this 

province would rather that happen sooner than later. 

 

They wish to have that debate, the debate on Bill 3 take place, 

Mr. Speaker. They wish to have their voices heard. Mr. 

Speaker, they need to have their voices heard because it's their 

livelihood and the livelihoods of their children, and the 

well-being of their parents and grandparents that are at stake 

here. 

 

When you move people out of their home communities, they 

suffer. The well-being of those individuals suffer, Mr. Speaker, 

and the well-being of those communities suffer. 

 

Under the government's proposal you're looking at 120 to 140 

long-term care beds per thousand people — per thousand 

people, Mr. Speaker, over the age of 75. Not per thousand 

people living in the area, but per thousand people over the age 

of 75. Well that takes in a fairly large area, Mr. Speaker. And 

there are economies of scale, efficiencies to be had by having 

more than three or four beds in a particular location. 

 

So when the decisions are made, Mr. Speaker, as to where 

these beds will be placed, people are going to be moved from 

their home communities. They're not going to be allowed to 

stay with their friends and neighbours and their families in the 

community that they were raised in, that they lived in most of 

their life; they're going to be moved. And where are they going 

to be moved to, Mr. Speaker? That's a good question. Are they 

going to be moved into the cities? Because they will have the 

economies of scale with the large seniors' complexes and the 

nursing homes. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that the seniors in my area want to 

stay in that area. They don't want to be moved into Regina. 

And they're not being given the opportunity to transmit that 

message to this government because the government is putting 

closure on this issue right now. They're not being given the 

opportunity to send a message to the government because the 

government is completely ignoring what is happening in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, all 56 of them should be 

listening to what is going on in their own constituencies. And I 

say 56, Mr. Speaker, because here are 55 government members 

voting to allow closure to take place in this House and there is 

the independent member, Mr. Speaker, who was voting to 

allow closure to take place in this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, each 

and every one of them should go out into their communities. 

And if they happen to live in 



April 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1033 

Regina or Saskatoon, they should go out and visit one of the 

rural constituencies that is having its hospitals closed. 

 

Perhaps they should go and visit with the member from 

Bengough-Milestone because every one of the hospitals in that 

constituency are being closed, Mr. Speaker — every one of 

them. Not a single hospital left in that constituency when the 

Minister of Health gets her way. 

 

Perhaps they should go and visit with the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The guy that was going to build 

hospitals. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Yes, that's right, the man who was 

promising to build hospitals in his constituency. Mr. Speaker, 

there are three hospitals being closed in that constituency — 

three hospitals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, closure is wrong. The use of double closure is 

doubly so, Mr. Speaker. There are not words to properly 

express the indignation that the people of Saskatchewan feel 

with what this government has done today. It's a condemnation 

on the democratic process, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Like 

other members before me, I rise with no great sense of 

happiness or excitement to participate in the limited amount of 

time that we have in debate on this particular issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is well for citizens of this province to 

note that in the short period of one and a half years, this 

government has already seen fit to bring forward some form of 

closure and superclosure on no fewer than six separate 

incidents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I'm sure that many people would agree with me when I 

would say that the jackboots of authoritarianism are ringing 

louder in these halls than even that of the bells, Mr. Speaker. 

Dictatorship, authoritarianism — whatever you want to call it 

— democracy is in jeopardy in this institution. 

 

Now I could, as some of my colleagues have already done . . . 

we have a booklet here of quotes of many, many, many pages 

— dozens of pages — from members' opposite eloquent 

speeches when they were on this side as government members, 

and now are doing as the Premier does on a consistent basis, do 

exactly the opposite of what they always said that they would 

do. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I predict, and I tell members opposite, that 

these days will go down in infamy and their record will be one 

of dismay when they read back in times in the future, when 

they harken back to the past, to see the legacy that they have 

left. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is obvious to people in this province the 

reason why this government, in a panicky type of mode, 

decided that they had to put 

closure on; that they had to muzzle, muzzle this legislature — 

muzzle the members in opposition and thereby, Mr. Speaker, 

muzzle the people of this province so that their voice could not 

be heard. 

 

And there's a reason for that, Mr. Speaker, and the reason is 

simply this. They could not afford to let the people of this 

province speak out. They could not afford to waste any more 

time. Because, Mr. Speaker, they full well know the 

momentum that is building in this province — the momentum 

that began in rural Saskatchewan and is, even as I speak, 

spilling over into urban Saskatchewan — the momentum of 

opposition where people are crying out for that opportunity for 

their voice to be heard. And, Mr. Speaker, that voice has been 

stilled. That voice has been muzzled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this afternoon during the presenting of petitions I 

read into the record rather a unique petition, Mr. Speaker. That 

petition being that from the city of Nipawin — the town of 

Nipawin — where the mayor, simply in frustration, wrote on 

behalf of the citizens of Nipawin a letter to us as the opposition 

to pass on to the legislature, through the petition route, their 

objection to the mode operandum, the way which this 

government has decreed they want to get this legislation 

jammed through; the mode that this government has used, 

pardon me, in order to get their way stilled. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to assure the 

people of Saskatchewan, to assure the people of Saskatchewan 

that this battle is not over. We may have . . . or the war is not 

over, Mr. Speaker. We may have lost a battle; we may have 

lost a skirmish in this particular incident, Mr. Speaker, but the 

war that the people . . . that this government is waging upon the 

people of Saskatchewan is not over. 

 

(1715) 

 

And I will take this opportunity also, Mr. Speaker, to urge the 

people of Saskatchewan that while the voice of the opposition 

may have been stilled in this legislature, that the jackboots have 

won momentarily, that they still have the opportunity to make 

their voice beard. The people of the province still have the 

opportunity to come into Regina, to come into the steps of the 

legislature, to come into this legislature and personally deliver 

a message to Mr. Premier, to the Premier of this province, to 

the Minister of Health, personally come on Wednesday of this 

week — the day after tomorrow — to deliver a message to 

these unhearing, uncaring people. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that they can deliver that message 

personally because a message has to be delivered. We see the 

hypocrisy of this government, Mr. Speaker, the hypocrisy 

where we have just had the Minister of Health announce that 

the children's dental plan, as an example, is history. 

 

Oh, but not complete history, not complete history, Mr. 

Speaker, because there has been an exception made. There has 

been an exception made for the 



1034 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1993 

Premier. There has been an exception made for cabinet. There 

has been an exception made for government members, and all; 

in fact, members of this legislature, Mr. Speaker, where we all 

of a sudden are of special stature in this province. We will have 

our families protected in the new dental plan, but not the 

people of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The people of the province are going to be asked to foot the 

bill. I am now a person of special stature. I am an MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) and the Premier says all 

MLAs and their families will be covered, and we're going to 

ask the rest of the people of this province to pay for that dental. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that's double standard. That's a double 

standard, and that is also a multi-tiered health system right 

there. And I don't see and I don't think that the people of this 

province are going to stand for that. I think their voices will be 

heard. I don't think they're going to be muzzled. And I'm proud 

to stand in my place today, Mr. Speaker, and announce to you 

that this official opposition, the official opposition and our 

official opposition caucus staff, have unanimously agreed that 

we will not participate in a plan like that. We are not going to 

participate in double standards. We are going to refuse to 

participate in that stand, in that plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I hope that the Government House Leader will see upon it 

himself, and the Premier, to persuade his Minister of Finance, 

to persuade the Minister of Health to do away with such an 

ill-conceived plan. Because, Mr. Speaker, we will certainly, we 

will certainly not participate in that. And by leading the way, 

we hope the government will follow suit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I had an interesting weekend, Mr. Speaker. As you may be 

aware, I had an early exit on Friday from this legislature 

because I stood up for what I believed at the time. Now what 

happened to me when I got home around 4 o'clock or 4:30, I 

had a phone call waiting for me. And this phone call, Mr. 

Speaker, came from my party, my constituency president, as a 

matter of fact, and the message was this — listen: we the 

executive would like to see you at our meeting hall for 

breakfast on Saturday morning. 

 

By the time I got there on Saturday morning the meeting was 

almost ready to start and there were 22 of my inner executive, 

what we call, at the meeting already, and of course I didn't 

know what to expect. And when I walked into the door, Mr. 

Speaker, they started to clap. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Standing ovation. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Well I don't want to exaggerate. It was not a 

standing ovation, but they did clap. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I'm a political animal, as most of these 

people are here, so it did me some good to know that my 

efforts were appreciated. But then I said to myself: but this 

group of men and women here are also politically inclined so 

maybe their reasoning is a 

little bit off . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — I think so. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Ah, the Government House Leader says he 

thinks so. 

 

When I went out into the constituency, Mr. Speaker, I can say 

to you that not one individual that I met said, you shouldn't 

have done that. Not one. Not one. That was basically the 

message that was delivered to me. Somebody's got to stand up 

to these guys and gals. Somebody has to stand up to them. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, makes me all the more sure. And if that 

happens in my constituency . . . and the Minister of Education 

is there, she knows what my constituency is like — like many 

of the others, but maybe a little bit more so on the soft side, and 

why they have ever elected me . . . Sometimes I wonder too if 

that's the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But that was the reaction of the people that I met. And that 

convinces me more than ever that what we are doing as an 

opposition here is the right thing — delivering a message that 

the people of this province have asked us to deliver. Slow walk 

this they're telling us. Get the government to realize that they're 

moving too quickly, that they're offloading funding, they're 

offloading responsibility, and the people don't like that. 

They've asked us to deliver that message. We have done our 

best. We have done our best. 

 

And I am sure that when Wednesday rolls around when 

Wednesday rolls around, I say to the Government House 

Leader, the people will do the rest. The people will speak. They 

wanted that opportunity. They will get that opportunity. And 

this Bill will not, Mr. Speaker, and I say this again, this Bill 

will not be voiced, talked about in any manner, until the people 

have spoken on Wednesday. 

 

This Bill is history until next week Thursday . . . or this week 

Thursday. Because at this time, Mr. Speaker, I request, 

pursuant to rule 55(1), that Bill 3, An Act respecting Health 

Districts, be hoisted. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from . . . at the request of the 

official opposition, under rule 55(1), proceedings on Bill No. 3, 

An Act respecting Health Districts, are hereby suspended for 

three days' sitting, beginning immediately. 

 

The debate will continue on the motion before us. 

 

The division bells rang from 5:22 p.m. until 5:26 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Thompson Lyons 

Lingenfelter Murray 

Teichrob Hamilton 

 



April 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1035 

 

Solomon Johnson 

Kowalsky Whitmore 

Mitchell Sonntag 

Upshall Roy 

Hagel Crofford 

Bradley Stanger 

Lorje Knezacek 

— 20 

 

Nays 

 

Swenson Boyd 

Devine Haverstock 

Neudorf  

— 5 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:28 p.m. 

 

 


