




















































Hansard: May 03, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1401 

 May 3, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill 47 — An Act to amend The Farm Financial Stability 

Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: — I asked the question of the minister before 

the recess, and does he have an answer for me tonight? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, Mr. Chair, I certainly do. The 

question was regarding the lien rights. What we're doing is, we 

will ask the feedlot operators to sign a declaration forgoing 

their right to put lien on the cattle. This is basically what's 

happening in practice right now. The feedlot operators are . . . 

although the Act now requires them to collect the feed bill, 

they simply sign a declaration waiving their rights each month 

on the feed bill. So this will just allow us formally for the 

feedlot operators, if they so choose, to carry customers until the 

cattle are finished and sold. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well I think that's reasonably commendable, 

but that's easy to do when you've got the market moving up 

rather than staying flat. I think that probably you need to be 

pretty careful on that because I've seen it go the other way to a 

considerable length, and there are many times when the feedlot 

operator isn't going to get his money out of those cattle and 

then neither is the feeder association. It's a difficult one to call, 

but when the price is going up there is flexibility, but when it's 

flat or going the other way you don't have that flexibility. So 

the minister probably has to be aware of that. 

 

I'd like to have you comment on the amendments that clarify 

existing provisions concerning the purchase of members' own 

cattle on their behalf, and how you want that to work. I know 

how it works now but would you explain how you would 

anticipate it working? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Believe me, Mr. Chairman, 

nothing in this provision changes. It's a little wording change 

from "the" to "that". I think it's basically some clarification of 

the program. We anticipate it works the same as it has. 

Producers will be able to borrow 75 per cent of the value of the 

feeders or breeders, if they're using their own stock. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Then going on on that statement that you 

make. You talk about the release of equity when cattle are sold. 

Do you want to comment on that? You made those 

observations in your address here and I'd like you to clarify that 

for me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Again, Mr. Chairman, this is a 

clarification of basically present policy, or at least as we 

intended it to operate. What it will allow is if a feeder has two 

loans out and sells all the feeders from the first loan, he'll be 

allowed to retain or keep his equity in that even though the 

second loan has not been paid down, as long as the inventory to 

cover the 

second loan is still in place. 

 

Mr. Martens: — With that you don't change any of the 

zeroing-out dates, do you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No, we do not. 

 

Mr. Martens: — How does this relate to the breeder 

association? Or doesn't it relate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — This wouldn't relate to the breeder 

loans. They will still stay in a revolving type of a loan. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Did you change anything in how the licensed 

dealers can conduct the program? Are they involved in any 

adjustments because of changes you made in the Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The changes dealing with licensed 

dealers . . . As it is now, the licensed dealer, because of 

dealings with an association causes a default or is defaulted, 

can be assessed to activity of a dealer. The Act does not allow 

that dealer to deal with that association until this is cleared up. 

This is just expanded so that dealer will not be allowed to deal 

with any association until the issue is cleared up. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Explain to me a little bit about what problem 

the licensed dealer will have that will cause a problem to the 

program. Explain a couple of those kinds of scenarios. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — One example of that would be in a 

situation where a dealer may buy animals for an association, 

that are pledged to another lender or are not free and clear, and 

as a result of that the association loses these animals. That 

would be the sort of situation that we're dealing with. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Then that individual would have to have that 

through another feeder association because you don't . . . at 

least I don't know of any lender now that has an identification 

on cattle in dealing with any of the lenders that I know. I don't 

think there's any way that they have identified cattle to make 

that observation a valid one. I'm not aware of it and I think I 

would be, because I'm in the cattle business. So I don't know 

whether that causes a problem. 

 

I know that it would cause a problem if it was in dealing with 

other feeder associations and there was a guarantee that wasn't 

being adequately met until the payments were made, but I don't 

know where it would occur between a banker or a lender and 

another operator, and that would be very . . . Well I know that 

there are certain instances when there have been specific liens 

put against livestock and then they are made . . . that 

information is made available to individuals and then that 

money is held. For example, I know that even the Department 

of Agriculture holds money now that was taken in when brand 

inspectors did not approve the money going to the individual 

who sold the cattle. So if that's what you mean, then that's fine. 

I don't see where that would happen very 



1402 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

often. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Indeed it would be rare. There is 

an example of a case where the lending institution was able to 

identify that these were the only cattle that the producer had 

and therefore they were the security. And certainly it is . . . it 

would be rare. 

 

And we've had very few problems in anything with these 

association loans. It's simply an attempt to be sure that we don't 

have problems in the future, because it's not only a government 

guarantee at stake but also other members of associations who 

have insurance funds. 

 

Mr. Martens: — There's another item here that I'd like to ask 

about and that's the fee that you're going to charge. Is that for 

every association that changes their guarantee or is that for 

every association from now on, regardless of whether they 

already have their guarantee in place? Are they going to be 

charged and assessed a fee every year or what's your plan for 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — This fee will apply to any new 

guarantee that's issued or a guarantee that's increased that 

people apply, but not to those that are existing. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well if the government lowers the fee or 

lowers the guarantee, are they going to then charge back the fee 

to the individual when he asks for the guarantee to go back up? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — That is certainly something that 

we are concerned about because we've asked some of these 

people to voluntarily reduce their guarantee and we are in the 

process of discussing with the committee how we handle that. I 

don't think it's been set, but it's certainly, as you point out, a 

problem that could arise and we're trying to deal with it by 

talking to the committee of these associations. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well is the fee to offset the guarantee cost or 

is the fee to offset the cost of administration? What do you 

want the fee to do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — It's basically to offset, to some 

extent, the cost of the administration of the program. 

 

Mr. Martens: — How much do you anticipate the fee to be? 

How are you going to charge it — on a per-head basis or a 

per-dollar basis — or just how do you want the fee to work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Those fees have not yet been set. 

This is enabling legislation which allows us to set the fees by 

regulation. We're in discussion with the associations. But it 

would be one . . . it would be a fee charged to the association, 

and then would be just one fee to the association for the 

guarantees that are issued. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well when do you anticipate the fee to be 

set? 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We've had one meeting with the 

committee and we will be having another one at the end of 

June, and we expect at about that time to set those fees. It's 

certainly by before fall. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well I want to point out to the minister just a 

couple things that I think are of some interest, I think, to the 

people in the livestock industry. One is that almost every place 

that there has been an opportunity where government has been 

involved, there has been an increase of the fees. In pastures . . . 

got the notice the other day on your news release that said, well 

we're going to raise these community pasture fees because the 

rates on the lease land has gone up. Well you did the lease land, 

and now you did the pasture fees. And then you go . . . the 

bull's got to have a higher fee and all of the fees related to 

inspection and all of those kind of things, they're all going up. 

 

People in the province of Saskatchewan say, well I'm not going 

to . . . I'm just getting tired of all of this. It comes to the place, 

Mr. Minister, where people in the province of Saskatchewan 

will decide not to sell their cattle in the province of 

Saskatchewan if they have any option of moving them 

elsewhere to sell them. 

 

And I know that for ourselves, the difference between selling at 

one of the major auction barns in the province of Saskatchewan 

is almost twice as much as selling it to an independent. And 

that in fact is even less if we sell them in Medicine Hat at an 

independent rather than the cooperative in the province. 

 

Those are the kinds of things that farmers look at over and over 

again. If you have any kind of a sale of 25, 50, or 100, you're 

going to go some place else, because you can deliver them 

there and you can get a benefit that accrues, and then you don't 

have to pay for all those kinds of things. 

 

Well here's another example where you're saying: well looks 

like the cattle industry is going up or the market is going up; I 

can tax these guys a little bit more, and I'm going to. And I say 

to you that it's getting to be more and more difficult. That's one 

of the problems that there exists. 

 

I'm going to say that if you want to have the banks and the 

farmers work together with you to ensure that the opportunity 

is not missed for livestock to increase in this province, which I 

think we should be, then we need to give some flexibility — 

not tax them every time they move for the things that accrue in 

this kind of function. 

 

Because I'll point this out to you that the majority of livestock 

producers in the province of Saskatchewan are not large 

producers. The average is something like 50 or 60 head per 

farmer, and that's not a very big bunch. And yet for each one of 

these, that has been the balancing card that they have had to 

deal with on balancing their books to any extent at all. 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1403 

And so when you say, well the livestock industry is one place 

that I can get some money out of them, what you're really 

doing is taking it away from them in their grain side because 

they haven't been able to make any money on the grain side so 

then you take it away on the cattle side. So what has the guy 

got left to grow and to do? It gets to the place where he has 

absolutely nothing left, even after the cattle sell for a good 

price. 

 

When you take and add on $20, $25 every time you sell a calf 

— and most of these cattle go through the ring more than once 

— then each time you add a fee for the thing, it just keeps on 

going up. And it's included in every one of them. 

 

If you check the amount of times that a calf goes through the 

auction before he's butchered, you'd have him going through at 

least four times, and that each time he costs 25 bucks. So that 

by the time he's finally taken to slaughter, the thousand dollars 

that he brings, a hundred has been spent on putting him through 

the rings. 

 

And those are the kinds of things that farmers say, well I'm 

soon the last guy on the list here to get any benefit from it. And 

then you say here that you're going to raise the fees or you're 

going to put fees on. And I say to you, it's maybe time you stop 

and look to see where the benefit really is going. 

 

You can fee them all to pieces but it isn't going to help you in 

the long run because they're going to throw up their hands and 

say: well what the heck, I can't do this any more and just 

support somebody who earns more off of it than I do. And if 

you take a look at the livestock producer compared to the brand 

inspector, compared to the people who work in the auction 

barns, the farmer's probably still the one that makes the least 

amount of money in that situation. 

 

So I think that you need to take a very serious look at how you 

deal with this because you may in fact begin to drive people 

out of business pretty soon, and I think that that's important for 

you to consider. 

 

Now you're going to get up and say that the cow numbers have 

gone up. I know they've gone up. And that's because people 

didn't have any way to get any income other than through the 

cattle business nor through the hogs, or they went into the hog 

business as well in order to delivery more income for 

themselves, and especially in a year where there was feed grain 

all over the place. 

 

So we have to take it pretty serious that if this is the only area 

in agriculture that is going to generate income, we have to treat 

it very, very carefully. You can't tax it to death. And that's what 

I think you need to be very serious about when you take a look 

at this fee structure that you're going to put on here. And I'd 

like to have you respond to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can 

respond to the grazing fees and the community pasture fees. 

The auction market fees, of course, have little or nothing to do 

with government. The fact that 

auction markets charge $25 a head to put the cattle through is 

not something that we get to set as government. Certainly the 

livestock industry is something that we hope will grow. 

 

The lease fees on grazing land were set by a formula that was 

in effect from somewhere in the '70s and through most of the 

'80s until it was frozen sometime back in '88 or '89. We have 

moved back to that formula which takes into account the price 

of cattle and we hope gives a reasonably fair and cheap grazing 

fee. We set community pastures in line with that. 

 

We have added a small fee, or will be adding a small fee, to the 

feeder association loans. We are, in tough financial times, 

moving a little closer to cost recovery on all these services. But 

we continue to provide these services to the beef industry and 

we think that it will survive and it will prosper, and we 

certainly support the industry. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Mr. Minister, I understand what you're 

saying but I want to say to you that it soon gets to the place in 

the feeder association where it isn't recoverable or the cost 

benefit isn't there. The bank gives you a good rate and I agree 

that they give you a good rate because of the guarantee, but 

where does the government have risk? 

 

The individual has risk, first of all, in his assurance fund. He 

has risk covered in the whole of the feeder association, that the 

whole assurance fund is recoverable before you have any loss 

and risk. And then comes your turn at the risk. And so I'm 

saying to you that at some point in time, these feeder 

associations will become non-effective. 

 

Each one of them have a $5 fee every time . . . well not each 

one, but a lot of them have a $5 fee every time they buy the 

cattle. Any time a dealer comes on the yard he charges 5 bucks 

a head. So then you start adding this onto all of the fees that the 

association charges in order to be a member and all of the 

interest that accrues into the assurance fund from all of the 

money that the individuals have in the assurance fund, and you 

soon say: well when is this going to quit? When is the balance 

between a half a point difference on interest going to say to me 

that I don't need this assurance fund and all of this paperwork 

in order to deliver what the guaranteed benefit is for me? 

 

And there are many, many people already starting to ask that 

question. And you can't continue to do that or they'll say, I 

don't want to have anything to do with this program. 

 

And then I ask you this question: is that the reason why you're 

doing it? Because if you are, then the feeding industry is going 

to be in serious jeopardy because we're not always going to 

have the livestock industry going up. If it levels off, we're still 

going to have the problem because the difference between the 

fat cattle and the feeder is always at a constant . . . more or less 

constant basis. 



1404 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

So the people in the feeder associations are soon going to say, I 

don't need that hassle. I don't need all the paperwork. I don't 

need to pay the supervisor. I don't need to pay the secretary. I 

don't need to pay the annual levy for being a member of this 

association. Because they all cost on each one of them. If it's $5 

a head for the secretary, if it's $5 for the supervisor, $5 a head 

for the individual who buys the cattle, that's $15 already. And 

then you go to sell it, that's another 25. And if you're only 

getting 35 or $40 or an average return on your investment 

anyway, on a per-head basis, you'll say, forget that, I don't need 

that hassle when I can deliver it for 25 or $15 to the packing 

plant. 

 

So you make that fee too high and you run the risk of the 

program not doing what it's supposed to do. You need to have a 

balance there, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well certainly, Mr. Chairman, I 

agree that there does need to be a balance, and if the fees are 

too high obviously that will dissipate the advantages that the 

program now has. I think it is a very convenient way to borrow 

money. You're right, it is a low risk to government. We don't 

expect a lot of these guarantees to be called on although we 

certainly know that undoubtedly some will be. There will be 

some cost to that. There is an administration cost to it; and 

you're right, the fee certainly shouldn't be exorbitant to the 

point where it's no longer an advantage to the producers who 

are buying these livestock. But we feel that we can set a fee 

rate that will help us recover some of our costs and this will 

still be an advantageous program to producers. 

 

Mr. Martens: — One of the things that is a concern — and I 

haven't read the last regulations that came out; I know we got 

the last ones in the mail, but I haven't read them yet — but one 

of the things I believe that's in there is the minimum of 10 

individuals who are active in every feeder association and 

every breeder, and you can't overlap the two. What that does, 

Mr. Minister, is cause a very serious problem as it relates to 

those that only maybe have 10 or 15 in their association. And I 

know that there are members of the department who would like 

to have everyone at 50 to 75 members in order to have the 

thing large enough so that it is maybe worthwhile for the 

government to be involved. 

 

But I want to make some significant points in relation to this. 

The fundamental point for a producer in all of this is that his 

assurance fund is in fact intact. That is for the producers the 

fundamental reason why they have the assurance fund and why 

they look after the association themselves. And that is the best 

means to have some what I would call policing in the system 

without you getting involved. 

 

And if you get them too big you don't know who the members 

are. You can have members in the association — and I would 

venture to say when I was involved there, the larger ones had 

far more serious problems than the smaller ones. And because 

of that the government has more risk on the big ones because 

there isn't that supervision within the framework of 

the association. And that causes me at least a serious concern. 

If you're going to start calling those people who have . . . have 

less than 10 active members into question, those associations, 

then you're going to have very serious problems. 

 

And I think those 10 probably can supervise their own 

administration at a reduced cost. And as a matter of fact, we 

have probably the majority . . . well we don't have the majority 

in our region, but we have a lot in our region of fairly 

large-sized ones. And they do have a $5 buying fee for their 

licensed dealer. They do have a supervisory fee of 5 bucks a 

head for their supervisor. They do have secretary-treasurer fee 

of 5 bucks a head. On those smaller ones, they don't have those. 

The supervisor is another one you've got to throw in there for 5 

bucks a head. On the smaller ones, you don't have them. 

 

And the reason you don't have them is because the proximity 

for the individuals to drive and do their work isn't driving 75 

miles or a 100 miles one way in order to have the functions 

completed. And you need to have those functions completed. 

And if there's any way to protect yourself, it's in the fact that 

there is very serious local supervision within the framework of 

these units.  And I think that if you had an ideal size, it would 

probably be about 20; that's what I would think an ideal size 

would be. 

 

(1930) 

 

And yet we get it from your staff — and not from Mr. Ross but 

from others in the staff — that they pushed for larger and larger 

and larger sizes. And the 10 component puts a lot of them at 

serious risk, especially when they're starting out. 

 

And if you put it into regulations, then you have to deal with it. 

Otherwise we have to ask you for a concession on that part, and 

I don't think that that's fair to those people who don't know that 

they have to ask you to . . . that you're not going to have the 

department come in and speak . . . address the issue with them. 

 

The other thing is that you could have a very serious effort on 

the part of individuals to deal with 10 when they shouldn't be 

dealing with 10 — 10 active members, that is. 

 

If you have the cattle price going for ever up, then you can 

hedge in margins pretty easily, but if you have it all of a sudden 

level off, you're going to put more risk on the provincial 

treasury by the very fact that you have those cattle in place on 

those farms, and you're going to put the assurance fund at risk, 

and all of the things, simply because they say, well we've got to 

have 10 active members. And that causes a bigger problem to 

you than it did before. 

 

And I say that what we should be doing is we should be in fact 

seeing if we could get these people out of borrowing, and using 

their own money in order to deliver that program. And then we 

would be doing the things that could be done. And when that 

gets to come 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1405 

to its conclusion, they still have the advantage of borrowing 

through the feeder association because they get it for less on 

the interest-rate scale and they get all those benefits. And they 

could use that. They could accomplish for the province, in a 

way, things that you can't and I can't sitting in here. 

 

And I say that if we get too rigid in the large size and the 

volume of numbers, we increase the risk of the guarantee; we 

don't reduce it. I know that you're going to probably come 

back, well the assurance fund is bigger. Well yes, the assurance 

fund is bigger on an individual loss, but you could have a 

disaster on four or five of them and you would have a serious 

loss. 

 

And that's what causes me a concern. When we should be 

saying if you can run this thing independently, have an 

association, and have the individuals run the association and do 

it on the basis that they would buy cattle and sell cattle with 

their own money, you would be better off. And that is where 

we need to get, not that we have to borrow. 

 

What will happen here is if you get serious with a problem, 

everybody will buy one steer, and then you haven't 

accomplished anything. And so I say to you that you need to be 

careful how you handle that because it just takes a farmer one 

trip around a field in order to understand the program 

completely and he will tell you how he's going to run it, and it 

will be within the framework of the rules but it isn't always 

going to be of a benefit to him, to you, or to the feeder 

association. 

 

And I think I'd like to have you respond to the point of this 10 

business. I really think that is a significant number and I think 

it's too big. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

minimum number being 10, we had a minimum of 6 which we 

increased to 10 in this Act. One of the reasons is that there 

were very few independent members in some of these 

operations because of husband-wife, father-son, brothers, 

whatever — one operation having four or five members in the 

association. It becomes not an association but really only two 

or three independent operations in it which is very small, and 

there's virtually no risk-spreading in that case, and so we did 

increase it to 10. 

 

The member makes some excellent points. There is provision 

that we will be able to provide exceptions to that for some 

members. Until quite recently I was a member of a feeder 

association that only had eight and it was, as you say, we didn't 

have to charge a fee because we did a lot of the supervision and 

the secretary stuff by volunteer so it worked very well. But I 

think that was the reason for going to 10, is that we had some 

of them with very small number of actual independent 

operations in them, and we were trying to expand that a bit. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

have a few questions I'd like to ask. Firstly, if I ask some 

repeating questions, I apologize because I wasn't here this 

afternoon — only for the last half 

hour — and you can correct me if I'm asking some question 

that's already been covered. 

 

We'll just take the feeder association, there's quite a few 

throughout the province. Are you or your official, Mr. Ross . . . 

could you give me an average of what kind of an average 

guarantee would be on the whole. Like what's the average that 

the government guarantees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The average feeder association 

would be around the $900,000 total authorized monies to the 

association. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Okay, let's use 

that figure then of approximately $900,000. Now do I 

understand the reason for this Bill? One of the reasons, and 

keeping in mind I haven't been through it real thoroughly, but 

going through it I understand that the government now . . . 

We'll say there's $900,000 and they're only using 4 or 

$500,000, that the government can lower that guarantee down. 

Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No, that's not accounted for in the 

Bill. What we did do in the Bill though is put a limit, upper 

limit on how much guarantees we can issue. And we are 

talking to the association. It would have to be by mutual 

agreement to bring some of them down. 

 

If an association has a million-dollar guarantee and they're only 

using a couple hundred thousand dollars on a regular basis, that 

shows in our books as loan guarantee and so we would like 

them to voluntarily reduce that if they have unnecessary 

amount of capital authorized. But there's nothing in the Bill that 

in any way impacts on that. It's strictly a voluntary downsizing 

that would happen on . . . Whether or not the Bill was passed is 

irrelevant to that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

So what you're saying is they have a guarantee of 900,000 but 

they're ongoing and they just use the 3 or 400,000 or whatever. 

You're just asking them but you're not demanding them to 

bring that down. 

 

Because I see a danger there, Mr. Minister, if . . . We'll just say 

that the grass is good this summer and they lowered their 

guarantee down to the 2 or 3 or maybe cut it in half to 4 or 

$500,000. Then all of a sudden there's good grass and the price 

of cattle is reasonable and there's a lot of people come in and 

quick, they want it. 

 

The question I'd like to ask you is: how long does it take to get 

that guarantee back up again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The guarantee is on an individual 

member basis. And if it's new members coming in, they have to 

apply. It has to be applied for. I think they're allowed 25,000 

the first year and 50 the next. I'm sure right now it's closed up. 

So for new members coming in, regardless of what's already 

guaranteed, it's by individual member. So they would 



1406 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

then have to go through the process anyway. 

 

One of the things in this Bill that we're hoping to do is to speed 

up the process whereby we can pass an OC (order in council) 

that allows the Minister of Finance to do these instead of each 

individual one, each time the increase is asked for, having to 

run through an OC which sometimes takes some time. 

 

So we're trying to . . . One thing this Bill does is hopefully 

speed up the process. And it should be a turn-around time of a 

week or two, I suspect, that we can get these slow increases . . . 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, no, you didn't 

quite understand what I was . . . I thank you for that 

information though. But what I was asking is, there's already 

members — we'll just say there's 20 members in an association 

— and only three or four of them have been using and that's the 

reason why maybe lowering the guarantee from the 900 down 

to the 2 or 300,000 and an already inactive member wants to 

bring in a hundred head of cattle, or he's eligible to do it and 

the guarantee isn't there. How long would it take to get . . . to 

raise that guarantee for the association? That was my question, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, that would be . . . we'd 

probably do that in one to two weeks with the new . . . We 

haven't tested the new procedure. We hope we'd do it in one 

week, but I would say one to two weeks it would take to have 

that increased. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, that's fine. 

 

Just the other question I'd like to ask and I don't know whether 

. . . I haven't got it clear in my mind whether it's the 

association's problem or the bank's problem here, actually the 

people that's lending the money or the guarantee or the 

government. I'm hearing some complaints where people . . . I'm 

going to use an example. 

 

I have a family in my constituency where they started the 

association. They're the ones that got it going and then when 

they actually come down to being accepted members, this one 

family, in fact there were two brothers, and they were turned 

down because they had been to, it was either section 20 or the 

Farm Land Security Board, but their affairs were all in order 

and they were turned down. Who turned them down, the bank 

or the government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — That would be a lender's decision. 

It would be the bank that would make that decision. They ask 

for financial statements from anybody applying and they 

approve members. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Is there any way . . . I'll give you this 

example, Mr. Minister, and there's lots of this out there, where 

a person, an individual . . . and I've seen their financial 

statements and they're maybe better after they've been through 

an insolvency or whatever and they're starting over again and 

they've been through the whole bit. They give some land back 

and they work out their problems and things are looking 

better for them, but they haven't got a real good name at that 

bank. 

 

And still I've seen people in the same association that are 

entering into that. They're really getting in bad shape. And I've 

seen their financial statements on an individual basis and I can't 

understand how they ever got into the association. But the bank 

maybe didn't know about their problems some place else or 

took it to be serious. It just seems to be exactly . . . and I'm not 

going to name the name of the bank — but it just seems to be 

what's happening if . . . it seems to be kind of policy. 

 

And I thought maybe the government — but you're saying it's 

not — that if they've been through any of these here boards, 

they just don't consider the financial statement right out. 

Because I know several families, there are like several, that 

have got good financial statements now and that's what this 

association is for — to try to help these people. And I was 

wondering, is there some way that we could be . . . that these 

people could come to government, because it's pretty hard to 

talk to big banks. If they say no and they put a number on you, 

you're gone, you don't get the help. 

 

Is there any way that the association could maybe . . . they 

could come to the department and have some help and 

guidance in something like this if they think that they should 

have that guarantee, instead of just saying, here you're out 

because you had a year or two ago or three years ago or four, 

you had a section 20, or you've been through the Farm Land 

Security Board — goodbye. That's the point I'm making. Is 

there any way we can help those people? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — I believe the decision is up, first to 

the association of course. They have to accept the member, and 

remember that these members have their money at risk, so that 

they will be concerned as well about financial capabilities of 

people coming in. 

 

The final decision is up to the lender. We have taken the 

position that, you know, we're the guarantors of it and we do 

not force lenders to take people in that . . . we've left that 

judgement up to them. I know the problem you're talking 

about. It doesn't apply only to feeder associations. I think that 

lending institutions in general have, on a lot of situations, been 

very reluctant to deal with people who have gone through a 

section 20, regardless of their financial statement at the time. 

And I don't know how we'd deal with that problem. But in this 

situation, it's the lender that makes that decision. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Yes, I understand that is what you're 

saying, Mr. Minister, but it just seems to be unfair. Still it's not 

the bank's program; it's the government's program. And it's the 

government that's trying to help farmers, and get into the cattle 

business, and try to help them survive. 

 

And in this particular case that I want to talk about in 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1407 

this . . . out of the association in Davidson, where it's the 

association that has come to me, saying that two of their 

members — and they accepted them with open arms and there's 

just no problem — but they happen to be . . . the bank that 

they're dealing with happened to be the bank that the 

association's financing through. 

 

And I know it can be a problem. It's easier for a bank to say, 

well out with you. But I know, and the association has told me 

that; that's where I got my figures from. Here's so-and-so. He's 

getting endorsed by that bank, and he's buying his cattle and 

he's not as good a risk as these other people. There should be 

some way that they could have a little negotiation to be fair 

about this; that just because that you had a bad name in the past 

— or had trouble in the past, not a bad name — I don't think 

people use bad names any more, it's whoever fell through the 

cracks and got into trouble. 

 

I'd just like to have your assurance that maybe if this 

association would like to talk to somebody . . . Let's put it this 

way, Mr. Minister, because I don't want to . . . this is not . . . I 

don't want to go on with this. Could I have the association meet 

with somebody, maybe the president or somebody, so they 

could talk it over and get some guidance for help. Because 

they're talking about even changing banks because it looks like 

if you go to another bank, maybe they might take them on. Just 

give me someone they could talk to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Certainly they can talk to 

somebody in the department. There are solutions, as you say — 

like going to another lender would be one alternative for them. 

The other alternative is for us to talk to the lending institutions 

on a general level about this problem because it is not only in 

this area but in others. We have an awful lot of people who 

have fallen on tough times through no fault of their own in the 

last decade and who are trying to get restarted. We would like 

the lending institutions to treat them fairly in all cases. But if 

there is somebody . . . They can certainly talk to Merv here or 

somebody in the department if they want to, and we can give 

them what help we can. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you. I'll do that and I'll pass the 

word on to them. They can maybe make an appointment with 

Mr. Ross. I thank you. That's all the questions I have. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

The Chair: — As the official is leaving, I think the members 

of the Assembly would like to thank the official. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I want to thank Mr. Ross and his staff for the 

way that they do the travelling around the country. It's 

appreciated by the members of the associations, and I hope you 

keep on doing that. 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Provincial Lands Act 

 

The Chair: — I'll ask the minister to introduce his officials for 

consideration of this Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the officials I 

have with me are Gloria Parisien and Larry Oberik. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: — Would you give me an overview of how you 

plan to deal with the improvements on leaseholds that you're 

selling? You make an observation, this Act clarifies the 

valuation of improvements for sale and removal from 

leaseholds. And would you provide for me how you're going to 

do that, if you've got a plan already in place and how you're 

looking at dealing with that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Basically the procedure will be the 

same as is done now. It will be done and appraised by the 

department at fair market value. What this amendment does is 

clarify what the lessee is entitled to which is a dollar value for 

the fair market value of leasehold improvements. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Have you got specifications if he decides to 

move those improvements off, what they're going to be? Is that 

calculated on the same basis of a dollar value or is there an 

attachment to the property that has a value to it too? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The lessee has to have agreement 

from the minister to remove any improvements. If they remove 

the improvements then that I guess releases us from further 

obligation and the improvements are moved off, and then we 

no longer have to purchase them. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Does that also include things like fences and 

those kinds of things too? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, the fence, in the situation . . . 

the case where the lessee had built a fence, we would be 

obligated to pay him for the market value of the fence. If we 

agreed he could just remove the fence, and then we would not 

have to compensate him for the fence. 

 

Mr. Martens: — What significance does the clay and silica 

sand and ceramic clays and all of that have to do with the 

provincial lands? What is that identified for in this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — This has to do with The Crown 

Minerals Act being amended to take sand and gravel out of the 

definition of a Crown mineral. And we are amending our Act 

to make it consistent with . . . the definitions consistent with the 

definitions of The Crown Minerals Act. 

 

Mr. Martens: — So where you have sand and gravel, that's 

identified in the Department of Highways? Or is that in Parks 

and Natural Resources, whatever you 



1408 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

call it? And why are you taking it out? Is it not considered a 

mineral right? Or is it considered a right of the individual to 

have that as a property? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — As it now stands, sand and gravel 

on private land is not considered a mineral, but if it's on Crown 

land it is considered a mineral. So when we get the Crown 

lands Act amended and this Act amended, it will treat sand and 

gravel on Crown land in the same manner that it treats it on 

private land. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I want to ask you about the sale conditions in 

a trust. How is that supposed to work? Is it supposed to be 

exactly the same now in this Bill? Does that make it exactly the 

same as it would be a transaction between two other 

individuals where the legal counsel holds the money in trust 

until all of the registration in the land titles office and all of 

those kinds of things . . . and with the department — is that all 

a part of this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes. It just brings it into line with 

the common practice in the private sector. 

 

Right now the purchaser is required to give us all the money up 

front, and that's not a standard practice in most legal 

transactions. So this will just bring us into line so that, as you 

say, the money can be held in trust until title is transferred and 

so on. 

 

Mr. Martens: — If the individual asks for 10 per cent down 

. . . like now if you have a person who has a lease and has 

deeded land, he can sell his deeded land and then transfer the 

lease. Is the trust conditions based on the fact that when the 

lease is transferred over to the new owner, that that is where it's 

supposed to be at, or how is that going to work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — This amendment only deals with 

the transfer of the deeded land. It does not deal with the 

assignment of a lease at this time. This amendment is strictly 

the trust money for a purchase which is . . . would then be held 

in trust the same as in the private. 

 

Mr. Martens: — So then if this does not include the 

improvements involved in the transaction that moves the assets 

of the deeded land of an individual to a new owner, and the 

lease portion, the transfer is . . . It has nothing to do with that. 

The individual has to have the transfer and payment of the 

improvements to the individual on a separate agreement. This 

doesn't attach itself to that at all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — This has only to do with the sale 

of Crown land from government to an individual, not with an 

individual selling deeded land and transferring . . . or signing a 

lease that he happens to have come up. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Now in the case of irrigation districts, and 

the problem that they have is collecting the water users tax, or 

water users fee, in Outlook and perhaps in other places — this 

is a long-standing problem — what kind of consultation did 

you have with the 

department, or the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) in relation to this? Because I know that they 

looked kind of sceptical at it for long periods of time that I was 

involved with that because they saw that as an erosion of their 

own personal tax base. And so that's one of the reasons why I 

never did it. But I wonder if you had any visiting with them at 

all about this. 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — This doesn't deal with the ability 

to collect tax. What this does is, if the tax is two years in 

arrears, that the government will then step in and . . . or the 

association would. 

 

We can cancel their lease and pay up the tax for two years. It's 

the same as a lease, Crown land. If a lessee gets behind in 

taxes, we cancel the lease. We will only . . . we pay up the 

taxes to within two years. 

 

Mr. Martens: — So this deals with the taxes paid to the water 

users' association and does not . . . Does that include water, the 

cost of delivering the water? 

 

Like I know that Outlook, some years it's $65 an acre and that 

sort of thing. Is that involved in this volume of dollars, that you 

will then take the privilege to irrigate away from these people? 

Or is it that you're going to take the land away from those 

people? And some of this stuff is not . . . is independently 

owned. It's not a lease. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — All this deals with is the lease 

land. If somebody has lease land that's irrigated, if they get two 

years behind in their water fees, then we can cancel the lease 

and pay up the fees. 

 

Mr. Martens: — What if this water is Sask Water's water and 

the . . . no, PFRA's (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 

Administration) water, and the land is . . . and you own the 

land? What happens then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — If there's a tax that's applied and 

has not been paid, then we have this Act. This gives us the 

authority to cancel that lease. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

The Chair: — There is an amendment and the minister would 

like to move that amendment now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I move to: 

 

 Amend section 3 of the printed Bill by striking out clause (c) 

and substituting the following: 

 

 "(c) by striking out 'clay' in clause (f) and substituting 'silica 

sand, ceramic clays and any other clays that have an 

industrial use except any clay required for the construction of 

an earthen dam or road grade'". 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1409 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 4 to 36 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

The Chair: — Before we move out of committee, would the 

members like to thank the officials. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to thank 

the minister and his officials for their answers, and hope that 

the concerns that he has addressed here work out well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, Mr. Chair. I would like to 

thank the members opposite for their questions and patience for 

all three Bills, and thank you very much. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 46 — An Act to amend and repeal The Farm 

Purchase Program Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend The Farm Financial 

Stability Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

now be read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Provincial Lands Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — I move the amendment be now 

read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, I move that Bill No. 50 be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Leave for Member to Attend Symposium 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave I move, 

seconded by the member for Arm River: 

 

 That leave of the Assembly be granted to the 

hon. member for Morse from Tuesday, May 18, 1993 to 

Wednesday, May 19, 1993 to attend in Ottawa, on behalf of 

this Assembly, a symposium on the subject of accountability, 

committees, and parliament, sponsored by the Canadian 

Study of Parliament group. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 

 

The Chair: — Order, order, order. I would ask the minister at 

this time to introduce his officials to the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have with 

me Pat Youzwa, the deputy minister; behind her is Dan 

McFadyen, the assistant deputy minister of resource policy and 

economics. Beside Dan is Bruce Wilson, the executive director 

of petroleum and natural gas. Directly behind me is John 

Mitchell, the president of the Saskatchewan Energy 

Conservation and Development Authority. Behind John is Don 

Grey, the director of human resources management. And next 

to him is Phil Reeves, the director of mines, geology and 

minerals. 

 

(2015) 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

appreciate the package you gave me which answers most of the 

questions and it will certainly speed the process up. I have a 

couple of other questions that I would like to ask you. In the 

meantime, could I have a survey of your travel? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — For the fiscal year from April 1,'92 

until March 31, 1993, I have taken three trips outside of the 

province. And I would inform the hon. member that between 

February 16 to 18, I was in Calgary to attend meetings with a 

number of representatives from various oil and gas companies. 

On March 23, for one day, I departed in the morning, came 

back that evening. I went to Calgary and attended a joint 

venture association conference at which I was a guest speaker. 

Then from March 28 until the 31st I was in Toronto and at that 

time attended the international prospectors and developers 

conference which had some 30 countries represented and some 

3,000 delegates. That would be my only travel outside of the 

province in the year under review. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I 

guess what I should have said, send me a copy of that, and 

would you also send me a copy of the travelling of your staff, 

please. Just send a copy 



1410 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

over unless you want to read it into the record yourself. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I'm not exactly . . . what you mean by 

that. The three trips that I mentioned to you, the sheet that I'll 

send over includes who travelled with me on those occasions. 

The first trip to Calgary in February, Dr. Robert Loewen and 

Pat Youzwa travelled with me. On March 23 when I went to 

Calgary, Pat Youzwa, the deputy minister, travelled with me. 

And when I went to Toronto at the end of March, Ingrid Reid 

from my office, and Pat Youzwa, the deputy minister, travelled 

with me. And I'd be happy to send this over to you. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister, when you brought the package over, you mentioned 

something about there was some legal questions that you 

couldn't answer. Could you send me a list of all the legal 

actions that involves your department — you as a minister and 

the department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I'm not personally involved in any legal 

actions that I know of; I would inform the member of that. And 

as soon as I have a list of the legal actions that the department 

may be involved in, I'd be happy to send those over to you. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister, I understand you're expanding into Alberta with some 

gas holdings. Could you tell me what the cost is for that 

expansion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — The question which you ask I think is 

directed more appropriately to the Crown Corporations 

Committee. It involves a potential acquisition of the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation whereby they wish to secure 

some long-term gas for security of electrical generation within 

the utility. 

 

I can tell you that the long-term plan of the Crown corporation 

has within it monies that have been approved by Crown 

Investments Corporation to make natural gas acquisitions. 

 

But I do think that that's more appropriate to the Crown 

Corporations Committee. It's specific to the Crown corporation 

SaskPower. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess we can 

do that. I was going to ask . . . but maybe we'll leave that too. 

 

There's one thing I want to draw your attention to in the 

auditor's report, and that is a payment of $1,428,781 to the 

NewGrade upgrader. He is suggesting, in his opinion, that they 

didn't have legislative authority to do that. Could you tell us 

what you're doing to correct that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — As you would be aware, hon. member, 

there has been a commission, the Estey Commission who just 

recently filed its report. It is now a public report and I'm sure 

the member has a copy of that. If you don't, I'm not sure we 

have a copy tonight. 

 We could provide you with a copy of the Estey Commission 

report. 

 

You will know that the NewGrade upgrader did not start under 

our administration. It in fact started under your administration. 

And the obligations that we have there are long-standing with 

the arrangement made between in fact your government, sir, 

and the federal government and the Federated Co-operatives 

Ltd. And that's an ongoing discussion. 

 

We do not know for sure where it's going to lead to, other than 

that the report has been filed, the Federated Co-operatives have 

examined it, the federal government has examined it, the 

provincial government has examined it. And through the 

Crown Investments Corporation which has been taking the lead 

on this for the provincial government, we have committed 

ourselves to the recommendations of the Estey Commission. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Mr. Minister, you might have misunderstood 

what I was after. In the auditor's report, chapter 13, item .08 — 

it's under order in council — in section 60 he is saying that he's 

not sure that you have the authority to make those payments. 

 

Now I understand what you're saying about the make-up of the 

deal but what I'm asking you, what are you doing, or are you 

doing anything to correct what the auditor seems to be 

suggesting? And I agree with you, sir, that section 60 may have 

been there before you became minister or before you became 

government. What, if anything, are you doing to correct that 

and bring it under what the auditor might consider as being 

proper authority? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I thank the member for that 

clarification of his question. The department takes the position 

that order in council 7/89 provides the authority for payment, 

and our position is supported by a legal opinion from the 

Department of Justice. This has taken place over quite a 

number of years and we've communicated our position to the 

Provincial Auditor. 

 

I would hope that that would satisfy his concerns as to whether 

or not the government had the legal authority to make this 

payment to the NewGrade upgrader. We believe it does and 

we'll have to wait and see whether or not the Provincial Auditor 

agrees with us that this actually gives us the due authority. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister, we're not talking . . . I think the point the auditor's 

making is this, that section 60 does not give you the authority 

to make grants. And I think the question is, is this a payment or 

a grant? 

 

The way I read it, the part that you're reading under .08 gives 

the authority to make the payment. But over here on .13, it 

seems to me the auditor's saying that it's not a grant . . . that it's 

not a payment; it is a grant. So I think you need some 

clarification on that. So it sounds to me like maybe you aren't 

doing anything to clear that up. 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1411 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well there is another opinion, and I 

would communicate to the hon. member, in the description of 

what is a grant and what is a payment, as the auditor lays out, 

as is his role to point out, whether or not the government had 

due authority to make a particular payment. 

 

We do not in the department view it as either a grant or a 

payment. What it actually is is a remission of royalties. And if 

there's further clarification needed, I'm sure the auditor will 

again bring that to our attention in the following report or 

reports that the auditor would make. But at this time we do not 

view it as a grant or a payment. It is in fact a remission of 

royalties. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If that's . . . you 

know, if that's what you're saying . . . It's in here. And I guess 

that's what we have to decide; maybe we'll do that at a later 

time. 

 

I have one or two other questions I'd like to ask you, sir. On 

page 37 we see administration, and I think we . . . I take that to 

be advertising and all that sort of thing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Specifically to page 37, I'll send over to 

the member a couple of pages. To my knowledge, this does not 

include advertising of any kind. But the member can peruse 

these sheets for himself and make his own determination. 

 

The administration services would include salaries and 

operating expenses. Page 1 outlines the total amount of salaries 

and operating expenses. The second page I'll send across to the 

member details what those particular operating expenses are, 

and I'll pass those across to the member. 

 

Mr. Britton: — I thank you for that, Mr. Minister. I had one or 

two more questions I wanted to clear up with you. 

 

I guess because we're not going to talk about the expansion into 

Alberta, that just about covers all I wanted to say at this time. 

 

So while I'm looking it over, Mr. Chairman, I'll allow one of 

my other colleagues to ask some questions. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, do 

you become or does your department become involved at all in 

the surface rights in leased land in the province of 

Saskatchewan as it relates to Crown-held pasture leases and 

leases that are currently under lands branch? Do you become 

involved in that at all, in the surface leases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Not directly. The surface rights Act is 

administered under the Department of Justice and we certainly 

wouldn't have any official role in becoming involved in surface 

leases or surface lease disputes. Sometimes there are people 

who contact me as minister, but usually it's referred on to the 

appropriate minister. 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Martens: — I was interested to know on the volume of 

dollars that accrue to the Consolidated Fund through the 

surface leases that are on lands branch land. Would you in 

Department of Energy and Mines know anything about that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — We would not accrue any funds within 

Energy and Mines from surface lease agreements. 

 

Mr. Martens: — How many wells are you anticipating coming 

into existence with the . . . in this coming year? Have you got 

an estimate of . . . You had the land sales. I believe you had 

some dollars coming in from land sales. Have you got any 

anticipation on how many wells in gas and in oil that you'll be 

drilling? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — This year we expect oil to be pretty 

well stable as to what it was last year. We anticipate some 600 

wells being drilled in the province this year. Gas wells we 

expect to be up somewhat. We expect there to be at least 300 

wells drilled. 

 

However, these projections have been skewed a little bit, I 

think most recently in that there is some movement by the oil 

and gas companies to intensify their activity in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And we had a very successful land sale in March, I believe it 

was, which rounded out the year to making it a fairly 

acceptable year to us. We expect that the next land sale in June 

will be one of the larger ones that we've had in quite some 

time. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Are those land sales in any of the significant 

gas areas? And I'm thinking of the north-west. Are there any of 

those sales in that area where there's significant volume of 

opportunities for gas? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Yes, the lands that we have so far, the 

indication . . . You would know the procedure. Companies 

request that we post certain lands; those lands have been 

posted. There's a significant number of lands spread across the 

province wherever there is oil or gas. 

 

We would guess at this time that the predominant request for 

land sales would have to do with the oil play in the province at 

this time. However, because of the rising price of gas and the 

supposedly short supply of gas that's coming up in the future, 

that we might expect that to change somewhat between now 

and when the land sale actually takes place. 

 

Mr. Martens: — In the Sand Hills, is there horizontal drilling 

going on in the Sand Hills? Is that a way to allow an 

opportunity for development from one site rather than for four 

or five sites per quarter section? Is that a way, or a significant 

environmental control method, of providing an opportunity for 

exploration in the Sand Hills? 



1412 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — If you're referring to the Great Sand 

Hills in around Hazlet and that area, it's my information that 

there's no horizontal drilling taking place there at this time. 

 

There is a procedure whereby some of the companies that are 

doing work in there . . . or the work that is being done there, I 

should say, they will tend to use a slant well where they will go 

directional off of one pad instead of moving it around to give a 

minimal of disruption to the sensitive environment that's within 

that area. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Do you have many of them in the Sand Hills 

there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Some of the companies that have done 

work and are doing work in the Sand Hills, like Ocelot and 

North Canadian Oils, have been doing some activity in there. 

 

Companies tend to get a little bit sensitive when environmental 

concerns are raised, and to this point this year, we've only had 

about 30 gas wells drilled in the province. So I don't have an 

exact number for you what would be drilled in the Sand Hills 

over this current year, but since all of the play within the Sand 

Hills has to do with gas, shallow gas, I would expect that the 

number is very small. It's certainly less than 30 because the 

number over the whole province is only 30 to this point. 

 

Mr. Martens: — In establishing, Mr. Minister, establishing the 

price for crude that the Department of Finance uses, does your 

department provide that estimate through the historical pattern 

to the Department of Finance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — The figures that are given to the 

Department of Finance are given by the Department of Energy 

and Mines. The Department of Energy and Mines are the 

experts in that area in terms of the public interest. And yes, 

they would provide those projections to the Department of 

Finance. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I'm just going from memory on there, but I 

think it was . . . $20.80, I think, was the price. If that's not 

correct, would you provide that to me? And then I've got 

another question after that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — The price for '93-94 that's been 

projected is $20.35 a barrel West Texas Intermediate price. 

 

Mr. Martens: — And how close are we in the price of the 

barrel and our royalty that we receive off of that? How close 

are we to that price? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — The officials tell me that we're very 

close on that. On Friday it closed — West Texas Intermediate 

— at $20.55 a barrel. So if that was taken over the course of 

the whole year, we'd be about 20 cents a barrel out, and I think 

that's very close. There is actually more guesstimate in the 

setting of oil prices, as you would know from your time in 

government, than there is actuality because of the many world 

events that affect or may not affect the price of oil. 

 

Mr. Martens: — What did you set for the price on a cubic 

metre of gas? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — At the well-head, we projected a price 

of $1.16, mcf (thousand cubic feet). 

 

Mr. Martens: — And how close are we to that on what your 

projections are in a similar case as you just suggested with oil? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well we can't tell the long-term price of 

that as well. There's a lot of pencil work that needs to be done, 

but the last time that I checked the spot price it was something 

like $3 an mcf. How that will project over long-term contracts, 

because of supply and demand, it's really hard to determine 

what that's going to be over the course of a year. But certainly 

the spot price is much higher than what we had projected. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Does the Department of Energy and Mines 

provide a monitoring service to how much Saskatchewan 

fertilizer company uses in relation to the gas supply? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Yes, we would know that. Some of the 

information is confidential. We would know that because we 

have to supply a gas permit to any user of natural gas within 

the province. Although we sometimes have that information 

available within the department, the professionals in the 

department use that for internal use, and it's certainly not to be 

provided because of the commercial interests of the companies 

involved. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Do they buy the supplies from SaskEnergy, 

or do they have producer wells that are supplying the majority 

of the natural gas to them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — In the case of Saskferco, if that's what 

you're referring to and that individual company, they buy direct 

from producers; they have direct contracts with producers. It's 

my understanding they do not buy through SaskEnergy. 

 

Mr. Martens: — In the volume of production that they had 

this year, did they reach the . . . in the start-up and now, have 

they reached their running capacity in taking natural gas? 

 

The Chair: — Why is the member for Kinistino on his feet? 

 

Mr. Roy: — Mr. Vice-Chair, I'd like to present some guests. 

Thank you. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Roy: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and to 

the members of the legislature, five constituents of mine. They 

are, Mr. Pete Cishecki, his brother Alex; Fred Werzak, Mr. 

Mike Werzak, and Maurice 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1413 

Werzak. They were in this evening to partake in the baseball 

game between the Blue Jays and the Canadian baseball 

institute, and they decided to stop in and take part in . . . or 

view the proceedings of the legislature. 

 

So I welcome them to the legislature and to Regina. And it was 

nice to see them this evening. And I give them the best here 

tonight and in the future. 

 

And I ask all members to give them a big round of applause. 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 

 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — In regard to the member's last question, 

we would not know exactly where Saskferco is in relationship 

to their start-up and what they're using now. We don't track the 

amount of consumption, but we do in fact issue the permit. We 

would know for example what they're paying; we would know 

how much they anticipate using. 

 

But in terms of tracking it month by month or day by day or 

quarterly, we don't do that, so I can't answer that question. It 

would be a commercial interest between the producer of the 

natural gas and the consumer, in this case being Saskferco. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, just a 

follow-up to that line of questioning. The thought crossed my 

mind: is this all Saskatchewan-produced gas that's going into 

this fertilizer plant or is there Alberta gas being pumped into 

that project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — No, it's not all Saskatchewan gas. There 

is Alberta gas that's sold within Saskatchewan to consumers, as 

well as Saskatchewan gas. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Now just the way you phrased that, I take it 

that that doesn't just hold true for Saferco, that perhaps the 

entire province uses a lot of Alberta gas. Is that a fact? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — A number of the large industrials such 

as Saskferco, other large industrial users, would use a high 

percentage of Alberta gas. That's correct. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Minister, do we have enough natural gas 

production in the province to serve all of those markets? 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Yes, if you took the situation in 

isolation. It's hard to take the situation just in isolation, but if 

we took just the Saskatchewan consumers, whether they be 

residential or commercial or industrial, and looked at all of the 

gas that we had capable of bringing on to production in 

Saskatchewan or as being produced in Saskatchewan, we could 

in fact serve all of our needs within the province because of 

export by some companies out of Saskatchewan, some import 

into Saskatchewan. It's a mixture of natural gas. And 

sometimes, in fact, it's hard to say that we do produce all our 

own needs because we don't, even though we have the capacity 

to do that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — But in theory, Minister, we are self-sufficient 

in natural gas at the present time. Is that what you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — We could be, yes. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — When you say we could be, does that imply 

that because we are presently buying natural gas from other 

provinces that we have some wells perhaps shut in or wells not 

being drilled or developed because of a lack of a market, or do 

we have a market for all of the gas that we are presently 

producing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well if it was a pure and simple world 

and a government chose to interfere with the market-place, we 

currently have enough production in Saskatchewan to provide 

for all of our needs within the province whether it be 

residential, commercial, or industrial. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well I'd like to explore, Minister, a little bit 

this pure-and-simple-world concept. Obviously people buy in 

the free-market system from where they get the better deals and 

the better opportunities. Is there any plan by your department to 

try to orchestrate a direction for our province in this sector that 

would make us competitive with the other provinces or other 

suppliers, so that in fact our producers could capture these 

markets? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well currently within the province we 

produce about twice as much natural gas as what we consume. 

Some of the producers within Saskatchewan choose not to sell 

into the Saskatchewan market. They choose to sell into the 

eastern Canada market, which provides them with a much 

higher price for the natural gas they produce. 

 

And some of our consumers choose to buy their natural gas 

from Alberta and ship it through the pipeline system into 

Saskatchewan because they can get a better price, in view of 

the fact that Saskatchewan producers are getting a better price 

by shipping it export out to the eastern provinces. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — I'd like to talk for a minute about oil 

production. Do we presently have a home for all of the oil that 

we're producing in the province or do we have a surplus? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I'm told by the officials that anything 

that we can produce in Saskatchewan in 



1414 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

terms of oil can be sold within the province. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That leads me to 

wonder if we have a home for all of the product that we are 

presently producing and can produce both in gas and in oil. 

Would you have any incentive kind of ideas or proposals to 

offer, to try to stimulate the industry to provide jobs and that 

kind of spin-off? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well the department has just been 

through an extensive review with representation from the 

industry. It's a task force that has looked at the regulatory side. 

It's a task force that's looked at the fiscal regime within the 

province of Saskatchewan. They have made recommendations. 

It's my understanding that that report is going to be presented to 

me sometime later this week. I'll meet with departmental 

officials and industry officials. And a major emphasis on that 

report is to what we can do to look at the regulatory burden to 

the industry and to also look at the fiscal regime as to whether 

or not there is stimulation necessary, and if it's necessary, 

what's the best way in which we go about it so that 

Saskatchewan can realize the potential benefit of increased oil 

and gas activity. And we can of course attract the companies 

into Saskatchewan, or to expand in Saskatchewan, so that their 

bottom line is such that they would want to develop within the 

province. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

appreciate that kind of an approach and I'm glad that you're 

doing that. I wonder if you would be willing to commit to 

sharing the results of that inquiry and report with us when it 

shows up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — You can have a copy of the report the 

day that I receive it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. We will look forward 

to having that. 

 

Under the energy and conservation department of your 

department, I'm wondering what exactly do you perceive as a 

necessity in the area of conservation? What types of 

conservation do you see that we have to promote in your 

department? Why would we be promoting that and how would 

it benefit Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well Saskatchewan, as I understand it, 

is one of the largest gluttons of energy anywhere in the North 

American continent. There are some explanations of that 

because of our cold winters and our hot summers. We need to 

take an overall look at the demand-side management within our 

province of not only our electrical consumption but our overall 

energy consumption, and there are many ways to do that. 

 

We can look at alternate forms of energy. We can look at better 

using and integrating the energy sources that we have now, and 

of course the net benefit to that, if you look at electrical 

generation, is that we do not have to spend large amounts to 

produce new generating capacity within the province. We can 

try 

and reduce the amount of energy that we gobble up within 

Saskatchewan. And the experts tell me that demand-side 

management provides far more jobs than expanding bigger and 

bigger and better and better plants. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Now that you've mentioned the co-energy 

subject, Minister, perhaps you could elaborate. I was reading 

an article in the paper here just from today or yesterday, 

whenever it was, about the plans that you have for some 

co-energy development using natural gas and spin-off of the 

heat and all that into steam and all those kinds of things. 

 

How much energy will that produce? How much gas do you 

think it will consume? And what would be the dollar benefit to 

the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well co-generation is one of the topics 

that the government is looking at. The policy of the 

government currently is to have 100 megawatts of 

co-generation on stream by the end of this decade. The benefit 

to that, of course, is that in co-generation you usually have a 

situation where a large amount of the energy is given off into 

the atmosphere. 

 

For example, the Boundary dam down by Estevan, that 

generating station would give off about 65 per cent of its 

energy into the atmosphere because we only get the initial 

thrust for coal. If you can recapture some of that heat in a 

situation like that, it's of greater benefit because you're utilizing 

to the fullest extent the Btu's (British thermal units) that you 

put into the situation or into the generating capacity, and are 

able to get some other benefit out of that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well I think that sounds good in theory, 

Minister, but I'm wondering if it's going to work out quite so 

simply in practice and I guess we'll have to wait and see how 

that develops. 

 

You mentioned earlier that you had spent some time in 

Calgary. I was wondering if you could give us an idea of who 

you met with and what the discussions were based on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well the first, I guess, and second trip, 

there was a component of meeting with people in the industry, 

in the oil and gas industry. The Canadian association of 

petroleum producers, which is the main governing body of the 

oil and gas industry in Canada, I met with them. I have spoken 

at a couple of different events in Calgary. 

 

The purpose of the trip is to let the oil and gas companies in 

Alberta, that are mainly centred out of Calgary, to let them 

know that we want them to be partners in terms of the 

development of the economy in the province of Saskatchewan. 

I don't think it's any secret to the hon. member that we're kind 

of limited in terms of the revenue we can raise through taxation 

measures in the province. 

 

We're certainly limited in terms of what we can do by cuts of 

government expenditure. Therefore there's a third way of 

having a revival of our economy and that 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1415 

is through expansion of our economic base within the province. 

And I wanted oil and gas companies to know that they can be a 

very important part of that expansion of our economy. 

 

We welcome those companies. We certainly want them to pay 

their fair share. We want them to know that there won't be any 

surprises to them when they come to Saskatchewan to do 

business, and that we'll be a predictable government that wants 

to form partnerships in a number of innovative ways to discuss 

the problems that have faced the industry in the past and what 

solutions we may have to correct those problems in the future. 

That was the thrust of my trips to Calgary, Mr. Member. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

apologize for having just had to pinch myself here. I had to 

make sure I was really awake and that I was actually here 

because for a minute there it almost sounded like the former 

premier making one of his speeches. It almost sounded like 

open for business, going for Fair Share, and predictable 

government for the mines and gas and oil industries. It 

certainly sounded like one of his speeches not so very long ago. 

 

So I have to admit that it sounded like a nice line and approach 

for dealing with these situations and we hope that you can 

convince some of your colleagues of this kind of open-minded 

approach to development in our province. 

 

I want to talk to you just for a minute about the mines ends of 

your portfolio, Minister. I've heard various reports about 

diamond mining in the province and those kinds of adventures. 

How promising do you see the development of diamond mines 

in the province, and do you think that there is really any 

genuine economic future in that program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I first off would like to say how 

honoured I am or would normally be honoured that the member 

would refer my presence to that of a former premier, but 

looking back at the administration over the past 10 years, I 

don't take that as a compliment at all. 

 

In terms of the diamond play in Saskatchewan, there is a great 

deal of interest. There are at least three companies that are 

actively involved in exploration for diamonds in Saskatchewan. 

Two of them are joint ventures amongst junior companies; the 

other is a major play, involves a couple of major mining 

companies. 

 

I think there is some degree of seriousness when you look at 

the report by one of the companies last week that they had in 

fact discovered some diamonds in their 1992 drilling program 

and another company associated with them had their shares 

shoot up by $2 in one day and then had the Toronto Stock 

Exchange request that they give some validation of the 

exploration program. I think that's good news for Saskatchewan 

mining, in particular in this case to exploration for diamonds. 

It'll take some number of years yet in developmental . . . or 

sorry, in exploratory drilling before we can determine whether 

or not there is a substantial enough quantity of diamonds within 

Saskatchewan to actually set up a mine and mine the kimberlite 

pipes or the overburden that is around the kimberlite pipes to 

produce commercial or possibly industrial grade diamonds in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you, Minister. You almost 

tempted me to run out and buy some stocks which led me to the 

thought that when I was younger I heard about people who 

invested money in coalmines and found out later that they were 

flooded with water, and that by the time they could get the coal 

through the water, the money would all be gone and they were 

. . . basically had been defrauded out of their money. 

 

In these kinds of adventures like diamond plays, it does sound 

highly speculative. And I'm wondering what you and your 

department and your government is doing to protect the 

investors who might be caught up in this kind of a fever to 

make sure that there isn't an unnecessary bad name given to the 

province of Saskatchewan as a result of people perhaps getting 

drawn into the excitement of gold-rush fever — this time of 

course being diamond fever — to make sure that we don't lose 

credibility as a province. 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well it's not really the job of Energy 

and Mines to advise investors either to be in favour or to be 

opposed to an investment. I would say here today, without the 

prompting from the department, that anyone who plays the 

stock market should do so acknowledging that it's money they 

may potentially lose. 

 

And I do not as minister, and I would not encourage any of our 

officials within the department, to indicate one way or the other 

whether Saskatchewan people or others outside our borders 

should be investing in any kind of stocks that trade on the stock 

exchange. We think that people should make their own 

assessment. We know that there is a large amount of 

exploration activity. We have no indication at this point yet 

whether or not there will be a diamond mine in Saskatchewan, 

and people should in fact govern themselves accordingly when 

making such an investment. 

 

Investments without proven reserves are highly speculative and 

I'd be the first to acknowledge that here. I'd not want to see 

people invest in something that we cannot substantiate. We can 

substantiate that there has been diamonds found in 

Saskatchewan. We cannot substantiate whether or not there are 

diamonds in high enough quality and quantity, in fact, to have a 

mine brought onto production. That's some years down the 

road yet. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — I'd like to thank you, Minister, for clarifying 

that. Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the minister about his 

impression of the uranium mining 



1416 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

industry. Do you see new development in the next period of 

time? Will there be, in your opinion, some new mines started or 

will there be an expansion of the present mining system? What 

is your impression of the world market situation in uranium 

and will this sustain the kind of development talk that we've 

been hearing about through the media? Will you be 

encouraging this and what benefit would there be for the 

province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well the world demand in terms of 

uranium does seem to be stable at the present time. There is 

some interest by a number of mining companies to either 

expand or to develop new mines within the province. We have 

taken the position as a provincial government that these 

expansions will be allowed if they pass the federal-provincial 

review panel. That federal-provincial review panel is ongoing 

with a number of developments within the province. 

 

The federal-provincial review panel has, I guess, basically 

given the go-ahead for the McArthur River underground 

exploration project. It's an exciting venture at McArthur River. 

What's happening is that the company doing the drilling has 

done the vertical drilling from the top. They're now sinking a 

mine shaft and doing horizontal drilling to get a 

three-dimensional picture of the ore body to tell whether or not 

the economics are actually there to proceed with it. The 

companies are speculating that that mining venture will 

proceed but it totally depends on how the federal-provincial 

review panel rules. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

the question I want to talk about, I don't think you know 

anything about it but some of your officials I think will know 

for sure. Last year in estimates of Energy and Mines, we asked 

the hon. member from Swift Current — he was the minister 

then . . . and it pertains to a long going . . . I already see a smile 

on the face from one of your officials. It's the Watkins v 

Bakkens' appeal that went on for years. In fact it started back in 

1983. 

 

And last year we put all our cards on the table, the minister and 

myself, and we come to an agreement that that's the way the 

case sat. But to solve the problem, the minister said that this 

here problem was going to be something he was transferring 

out of the department to another department like Rural 

Development or something like that. But there has been so 

many changes in the departments now, I was wondering where 

this was at and if it did happen. 

 

I'm sure your staff can help you out on this one. Because I had 

taken Hansard out to this Mr. Bakken and he was very pleased 

with the minister's words from last year. And I just wanted to 

know if it happened or not, and where it's at. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I appreciate the hon. member's 

questions about gravel pits. I recall having quite a few 

questions about gravel pits myself when I was a member of the 

official opposition. 

 

I would inform the hon. member from Arm River that 

as of July 1 the administration of sand and gravel will be the 

responsibility of the Saskatchewan Department of Environment 

and Resource Management. So July 1 it will become that 

department's responsibility. Up until July 1, hon. member, it's 

still the responsibility of this department. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, thank you. I 

see they're having a conversation over there. Mr. Minister, are 

you getting some more information that you want to pass on to 

me, Mr. Minister? Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Just one minor correction. The officials 

inform me that the administration for sand and gravel in the 

northern part of the province comes under the Saskatchewan 

Environment and Resource Management. In the southern part 

of the province, which would include the area you're interested 

in, it would come under the Department of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That's all I had to 

ask. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

looked at the two pages that you sent over. What I'm trying to 

do is get a handle on the advertising cost and I can't find it. I 

find printing at forty-six five. Could you tell me where to look 

for the . . . where do I find the cost of advertising in the 

Estimates here, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I pointed out to the member that those 

two sheets I sent over did not have the advertising in them. The 

advertising does not come under the administration budget. 

 

I do have here, and I'll send them over to the hon. member, the 

details of the communications budget up to March 31, 1993, 

and then the actual budgeted amount for the '93-94 fiscal year. 

And I don't know, do you want me to read these into the record 

or would you just like me to pass them over to you? I'll pass 

them over to you then. If the page will take these over, please. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, I got a couple more things I want to talk to you about 

and it's on page 38. We're saying here that we're paying out 

mineral compensation, and then down on the same page we are 

saying payments to or on behalf of individuals. Could you 

explain the difference of those two to me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — If I understand the hon. member's 

question correctly, on page 38 where it has mineral revenue 

collection, that could be basically viewed as our cost of doing 

business for collecting the revenues. 

 

The line underneath that where it says: mineral compensation, 

$771,000, that would be amounts paid out to mineral-rights 

owners, hon. member. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you explain 

then what payments are . . . or the difference 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1417 

between that and payments to individuals? What is that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — It's exactly the same thing. It's just 

stated differently. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman; thank you, Mr. 

Minister. I have one more question. On page 40 under the 

heading of expenses by type, we see in '92-93, grants to local 

authorities and third parties, it was 625; and in '93-94 it's going 

to be 1.5 million. Could you explain that a little bit to me, sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — This is the grant that was and will be 

paid to the Saskatchewan Energy Conservation and 

Development Authority. In their first year of operation the 

$625,000 is the amount that was appropriated for the Authority. 

In '93-94 we expect that the work they're doing as the Energy 

Conservation and Development Authority will be much more 

extensive and elaborate than what they had done in their 

start-up year. Therefore they'll be receiving over the course of 

the year some $1.5 million in the year under review. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, what I would like to say in closing, much like my 

colleague from Maple Creek, I think with your new outlook on 

what makes industry wheels go around, I think it's going to 

make it a little easier for you and I to get along with each other 

in the next few years. And I want to thank you very much for 

your time and your consideration if . . . I guess my colleague 

has a question or two. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you. I wonder if the minister could 

provide a breakdown on the conservation and development 

authority? What portion of that allocation is in salaries and 

contractual work and what is actually done in the way of 

developmental work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — To the Acting Leader of the 

Opposition, I don't have that detail here right now. I'd be happy 

to provide that to you. I'm a little hesitant to provide what I 

have at this time. 

 

The Saskatchewan Energy Conservation and Development 

Authority are still in the process of appearing before Treasury 

Board in terms of getting the numbers into place to correspond 

with their grant of $1.5 million. 

 

One of the reasons why the line item still appears within the 

Energy and Mines budget is because of the start-up operation 

of the Saskatchewan Energy Conservation Development 

Authority. Next year I would fully expect that the Energy 

Conservation Development Authority will have their own line 

item in the budget. 

 

I do not suggest that you should wait until next year for the 

information you've requested. But I would ask that you wait for 

approximately, maybe, another two or three weeks and I can 

provide a more detailed breakdown of the 1.5 million which I 

think is what 

you're asking. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 23 agreed to. 

 

(2115) 

 

The Chair: — If the minister would like to thank his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Yes, I would like to thank very much 

the members of the official opposition for the questions they 

asked this evening. 

 

I'd also like to thank the officials from the Department of 

Energy and Mines and the officials from the Saskatchewan 

Energy Conservation and Development Authority for the very 

good assistance they've given me here this evening in getting 

me through my first estimates as a member of the Executive 

Council. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too would like to 

thank the officials for your time. And I would like to thank the 

minister for the questions and warn him that this . . . we 

understood it was your first time and it was also my first time. 

So maybe next year we'll get into some good debate. Thank 

you, sir. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 

 

The Chair: — I'll ask the Minister of Highways and 

Transportation to introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Seated to my 

immediate left is the deputy minister of Highways, Clare 

Kirkland; immediate to his left is Myron Herasymuik, senior 

assistant deputy minister; to my right is Ernie Anderson, 

director of rural transportation services; and immediately 

behind Mr. Kirkland is Don Metz, assistant deputy minister of 

operations; and Colleen Laing, director of finance and 

administration. Other staff are in the rear of the Chamber. I 

think these are the immediate ones that we will be needing. 

 

Mr. Chairman, if I might, I just want to briefly say . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon? Mr. Chairman, I would 

initially like just to highlight some of the initiatives taken by 

Saskatchewan Highways and Transportation in this past fiscal 

year. 

 

Most recently the government has negotiated a strategic 

highway improvement program with the federal government. 

This is a $70 million agreement that will improve six 

Saskatchewan highway routes. It is a five-year program. Each 

government will contribute 35 million to upgrade and 

rehabilitate the Trans Canada Highway, the Yellowhead 

Highway, 



1418 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

and Highways No. 7, 11, 12, and 39. 

 

Under this agreement four Saskatchewan highways will be 

twinned; the highlight of this — twinning of the Yellowhead 

Highway between Saskatoon and North Battleford. This 

government has long maintained that improvement of our 

interprovincial highway infrastructure is the necessary 

stimulant to our economic growth. 

 

The 1993-94 budget contains more than $75 million for road 

construction and $82 million for highway maintenance. 

 

The program addresses provincial highway needs but maintains 

emphasis on the high traffic volume highways. The 

construction program includes 56 surfacing, 20 grading, and 20 

bridge projects. Rehabilitation expenditures will exceed 37 

million and will improve 713 kilometres or about 6.8 per cent 

of the provincial surfaced highway network. 

 

The department also undertook the first reorganization in 20 

years in order to provide a greater efficiency, to improve 

customer service and make policy development a priority. Five 

divisions were combined into two; 21 branches were reduced to 

12, with new branches including the transportation and 

economic development branch, and aviation and northern 

transportation branch. 

 

Also this year, the transportation services of the Department of 

Rural Development were amalgamated in the Department of 

Highways and Transportation. Saskatchewan Highways and 

Transportation is now responsible for the ferry services, rural 

roads and bridges that were formerly under the Rural 

Development, which further widens the scope of the 

transportation mandate. 

 

With those few words as a background, Mr. Chairman, I'm 

prepared to entertain questions. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 

Minister, as critic for the Department of Highways, I want to 

say that I'm happy that you negotiated the deal that you've just 

outlined with the federal government. It's definitely a positive 

thing and a pat on your back certainly is in order for having 

accomplished that. We do have some questions, though, with 

regards to that agreement as well as many of the other things 

that are happening with our highways and our transportation 

system. 

 

The evolution of having a large part of Rural Development's 

responsibilities falling now under your portfolio also brings us 

to question how you're going to finance all of those things, and 

which areas of course are going to have to be financed, and 

how you've budgeted for that, and where those kinds of things 

are coming from. 

 

We'll get into that as we go along. We have several issues here 

that need to be talked about. I don't think 

they're real serious problems in terms of people needing 

transportation that won't be accommodated or anything like 

that, but we do have to clear the air on things like 

responsibility, how individuals get hold of the people they have 

to talk to. I'm referring now to the rural municipal structure. 

We've had several complaints that since the Department of 

Rural Development has been cancelled basically, or is no 

longer in existence, that the people who used to be available to 

answer the questions don't seem to be there any more because 

there is no department. 

 

So there is a considerable problem of trying to find out where 

to call to find out the answers to the questions that come up on 

a day-to-day basis in the municipal structure and the municipal 

system. We want, I think, perhaps to have you clarify that, and 

I'll just take my place and allow you to do that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Thank you for the question. I just want to 

say that this happened very recently as you know, just prior to 

the . . . well this spring actually the amalgamation took place. 

 

The one point that is positive is that the districts which the RM 

(rural municipality) had coincided with the districts that we 

have with the Department of Highways, other than one district 

of Regina where we have it housed in Regina for Highways 

and Rural Affairs had it located in Weyburn. We have 

maintained the operation for continuity. And for the use of the 

municipalities, we've maintained the office in Weyburn rather 

than consolidate it back into the Department of Highways. 

 

We've made some significant, I think . . . (inaudible) . . . also in 

that we brought across some very key people who have worked 

for a long time with the Department of Rural Affairs and then 

with the RMs; and of course Mr. Ernie Anderson, sitting next 

to me to the right also is very familiar with it. We have asked 

him and retained him to carry on with the coordination. 

Another engineer, Mr. Antonio, from the Department of Rural 

Affairs is also active in carrying on the continuity. 

 

I suppose there will be some adjustments but I'm sure that we 

are going to be able to coordinate and to provide excellent 

service to the RMs. In fact we want to meet sometime later this 

year. I think there has been a request from the head of the RMs 

to meet with us just to go over an evaluation of any concerns 

that they have. 

 

So while I admit that there is some dislocation, changing and 

moving it into the Department of Highways, every conceivable 

effort is being made so that it will be the best possible 

arrangement for the RMs and a continuation of a close 

association in providing them with information. 

 

That's generally what we have been doing, and certainly we 

want to provide them with the very best information. I want . . . 

(inaudible) . . . to say that my department indicates that a letter 

of contacts was recently sent out to all of the RMs so that they 

will 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1419 

precisely know who they should contact. So we're making 

every effort possible to coordinate that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. 

Minister. I appreciate the fact that you have sent that type of 

information out because we have been getting a lot of calls into 

my office asking for that information. And to be quite honest 

with you, I was having trouble tracking down who they should 

call. And I hope that this has cleared the problem up. If not, 

we'll get back to you, that's for sure, because we will soon be 

hearing about it. 

 

I think our staff provided — as they have to the other ministers 

— a list of questions that we have compiled, that we'd like to 

have answered, and delivered them to you prior to this evening. 

And we're wondering, of course, if you would provide us with 

that list of questions with the answers, and if we can carry on to 

the others areas if you've done that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I have . . . we have compiled it. I 

just want to indicate that it took a tremendous effort on the part 

of the department in complying with it. 

 

The total cost, by the way, has not been really documented but 

there was something like 398 hours that was consumed in 

putting together the answers to the questions and the 

information that you had asked for. But we made the effort and 

I'll have one of the pages deliver a copy to you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your 

compliance with our request. We will obviously take some 

time to go through this before we'll have an understanding of 

all of the answers. And we certainly assure you that we will do 

that. 

 

I guess we won't apologize really for the cost of putting 

together the material because it is for the purpose of helping the 

taxpayers of the province to ensure that their monies are being 

spent well and properly. And lack of efficiency in my role is 

something that no one will ever accuse me of, I suppose, after 

having challenged you in this way. 

 

So I want people to know that we intend on doing our job 

effectively and efficiently. And if it takes a little harder work 

on the part of your officials, well I guess that's just one of the 

prices you got to pay for being in this business. 

 

So we do thank you though, and your officials, for going to this 

effort. I think it is remarkable that you were able to get it 

together in this short a period of time. And we certainly do 

appreciate it on behalf of the taxpayers of the province. 

 

Now I have quite a few questions coming out of the Estimates. 

But the member from Rosthern, I believe, would like to ask 

you a couple of questions, so I want to bow to him while he 

asks his. 

 

(2130) 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And 

thank you to my colleague for giving me a few minutes here to 

get involved in the discussion. 

 

Mr. Minister, your opening remarks, you mentioned something 

about your $70 million deal that you have made with the 

federal government. Could you clear up for me some of the 

misunderstandings I think that some people in my area are 

having, in so far as the impact that the twinning of the highway 

. . . No. 14 I believe it is, north of Saskatoon, in the last couple 

of years it's been expanded to about Langham and so on. And 

what have you got in mind, or what's going to happen with the 

twinning of that particular highway, and then on to Battleford. 

What have we got to mind for this year and the following year? 

Could you bring me up to date on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Yes. I think if you look at the schedule 

that I provided to you, you will see in respect to — that's No. 

16 Highway — from Langham to North Battleford there's 

something like 90 kilometres that's left to be four-laned. 

 

And it is the intention of the department . . . This is part of the 

contract with the federal government. In order to enter into it, 

they designate certain highways as interprovincial, and 

certainly No. 16 is. And so what is proposed this year is to 

commence where the four-laning stops just out of North 

Battleford, and to proceed eastward. And I believe it's 30-some 

kilometres that is anticipated to be graded this year for 

four-laning. So it would be 30 kilometres. 

 

Then we'll take it on from that the following year, pending 

budgetary considerations. But it's 30 kilometres, I believe, this 

year. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I guess that begs the question then, Mr. 

Minister, why would you have twinned it or why did we twin 

it, I guess, would be a better question, from Saskatoon to 

Langham and now continue the twinning starting from 

Battleford and working in the opposite direction? That's one 

question. 

 

And the second question I would have: what are the long-term 

plans for the bridge at Petrofka, that bridge that is there? It's 

going to be a two lane over the bridge; is that going to be a 

bottleneck or are you having some plans to handle that 

situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — I think the department is looking at two 

options in respect to the bridge. One is the possibility of using 

the old bridge. That's the first possibility, and they have done 

an assessment as to the cost of putting that up into standard. 

And the other option is a new bridge which will give the 

double lane across the river. 

 

The reason I guess for starting from North Battleford this way 

is, I think, actually I think the department had done their 

surveying in that area and it was essentially ready to go. What 

we did is some hurry-up work in anticipation of getting the 

agreement. Because initially what the federal government had 

offered 



1420 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

earlier in the fall was a ten-year construction program which 

would have been approximately $17 million annually for 10 

years. 

 

And so what we did is to do some survey work in order that we 

would be ready to access some of the funds of the federal 

government. And I guess that's the basic reasons why we 

started there and I don't know what more to say. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — With respect to using the old bridge, Mr. 

Minister, I know that in the old days, before the new one was 

built, that bridge was a death trap. I think the main reason for 

that was that it was a very narrow bridge and traffic going both 

ways was just asking for trouble. I can see where you're 

contemplating using that bridge with traffic only proceeding in 

one direction, which of course would be much more acceptable 

under conditions like that. 

 

One of the reasons that I find that we were making that 

twinning from Saskatoon and then north, simply was because 

of the traffic flow with Dalmeny, Langham, and these areas 

where there was a high volume of traffic. 

 

And of course I don't know if you mentioned, or I certainly 

have failed to mention that this is of course part of the 

Yellowhead, and it's very significant that way. And I'm sure 

that's why the feds are interested in cost sharing with us from 

that respect. 

 

But talking about twinning, there's two other areas that I want 

to talk about. One is the Martensville release that you had in 

that same yellow sheet that you were just holding up, where 

you're contemplating twinning the highway at least as far as 

Martensville. Could you indicate to me what traffic flow is up 

to Martensville per day, and also north of Martensville, just to 

see how . . . so we have the figure, exactly, of how many 

people come in and out of Martensville in one day. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — I'll get that information provided to me 

on the count. 

 

I just want to indicate that north to Martensville and to Warman 

where they're allowing us to twin, that was a concession by the 

federal government. They allowed us to twin and to count that 

as our contribution of expenditures to equal 50/50 sharing. 

 

And I'll just give you the relative traffic counts here. They've 

got a map here that is just filled with numbers and I can't . . . 

I'll have to get that for you. They'll have that information as 

specific. But you can't read it off of this here. This is a map of 

complete account throughout the whole province. But you can't 

discern it on this size of map. I'll get that information for you. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, that will be good 

enough. I'm a little bit surprised at one of the answers that you 

gave me because I know that when we were in government, as 

the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for the area, 

we had trouble getting the federal government to agree to 

something 

like that, so I'm very pleased that you were able to accomplish 

that. 

 

And I say that on behalf of not only the residents of 

Martensville, but anybody from Blaine Lake and half of that 

whole area that comes into Saskatoon. It's always a hazard and 

you breathe a sigh of relief when you get by Martensville either 

going south or going north because there is a heavy traffic flow 

there. 

 

So the question that I would have, number one, is when are you 

contemplating starting and finishing this work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — If I look at the, again, the construction 

projects, Saskatoon to Warman . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — No, that's not the one I'm asking. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — No, that's on for this year. The one to 

Martensville is the one you're interested in. That is not on this 

year's . . . was not included. We'll have to do that next year. It's 

not on this year. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. You're putting 

a lot of effort or a lot of faith in that yellow little sheet of paper 

that you have there. So by that you seem to be indicating to me 

and the people of this province what is written on that yellow 

sheet of paper is to be taken as gospel. So that answers a lot of 

my questions then what you have in there. 

 

Pursuant to the one in Martensville, first of all, so we don't get 

sidetracked, how many kilometres are you going to be going 

from the overpass just north of Saskatoon, and what is the total 

cost anticipated to be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Yes, the closest information that I can 

get is 9 kilometres, from my assistant deputy minister. I don't 

know if that's accurate, but it looks like the apparent distance. I 

don't have it because it's not on this here sacred piece of paper 

that we're going to commit to and we'll complete this year. But 

I take it it's from the bridge right to Martensville that we will be 

completing. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — All right, Mr. Minister. Well just north of 

Martensville by about one mile, maybe one and a half miles, 

there's a normal junction there already — 306 or whatever it 

happens to be, the one that goes across to Warman. It would 

seem to me that that would be a natural place for you to end 

that. 

 

But another question that I would have, and this is very 

significant for the people in Martensville, and that is, what type 

of access are you going to make from this twinned highway 

now into Martensville? What type of access are the 

Martensville people going to have to the highway? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — That process has not been completed 

because it's not on this year's agenda on this yellow sheet. But 

what we will be doing is when we put that project into the 

stream, what we will want to do is to have consultation with the 

community in 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1421 

order to best assess the needs that they want for access. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Well that was a comment I was going to 

make, Mr. Minister, is that the town of Martensville is very, 

very concerned about this and they want to have consultation. 

And I can tell you already what they want, and that is to have a 

clover leaf. Now I know that a clover leaf is going to cost you a 

million bucks just like that, in order to do it properly, but you're 

doing this only . . . and I assume that the only reason you're 

twinning this highway is because of the safety factor. 

 

And I think that we would be very, very concerned about the 

method that you're going to use in order to establish . . . It's no 

point in twinning that highway and having the stream from 

Martensville heading west to turn south, crossing the heavy 

flow of traffic going north. So I mean this is a catch-22. 

 

You can have the perfect twinned highway, very, very safe, but 

at some point you have to have those vehicles getting onto the 

highway and you're going to have traffic crossing, and there's a 

whole host of problems involved with that type of access. 

 

So I take comfort, Mr. Minister, in your assurance that there 

will be consultation and that the people there will be kept fully 

informed and have input into the process. 

 

So now let's go to the section then that is in your yellow folder, 

and that is the Warman. I have a number of questions dealing 

with that particular section because there are potential 

problems as you twin the highway. How do you perceive . . . 

from the overpass, just north of Saskatoon, and it branches off 

to become No. 11, how are you planning to do that since the 

plans are in progress and you are going to be beginning work 

momentarily, I would assume, if you're going to be doing it this 

year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — I've just indicated by staff that there is a 

consultant doing some work in respect to that and that report is 

not complete at this time. So what we're doing is having a 

consultant look at the very problem that you're indicating in 

respect to Warman and how it's best to handle it. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — But, Mr. Minister, if you're expecting to get a 

consultant's report in and then have your officials make a 

decision and you're going to be doing the work this year, I 

would suggest to you that the time frame is very short on that 

kind of an operation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — We can't have it both ways. We can't 

have consultation and the best to serve the community, and at 

the same time rush it. So I mean what we have done is to take 

the process . . . what the department has done is to get a 

consultant just to take a look at it and to make the best 

recommendations in respect to that particular road to Warman, 

or the four-laning. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Well let's get one thing straight, Mr. 

Minister. I'm not rushing you. You're the one that said you 

were going to be doing the work this year, and I commend you 

on that. 

 

Now I just want to find out what are the details of the work that 

you're going to be doing this year. And you're telling me that 

you're waiting for a consultant's report as to what would be 

best. 

 

Has there been any work done on how you're going to be 

handling the situation because there's an east-west railroad just 

prior to the entrance into Warman? Are you going to be putting 

in another overpass over that railroad? 

 

And following that, my other question is: how are you going to 

access Warman? Now this is very similar . . . this situation is 

very similar to the one in Martensville. So my question to you 

is: how are you going to . . . what's the traffic flow north and 

the traffic flow south going to be in so far as being able to 

access the town of Warman? 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Yes. In discussing this with officials, 

they indicate that two things are happening. The department is 

in the process . . . engineers of the design that's undertaken, and 

they have a consultant also in respect to how best to handle any 

problems in respect to putting in the four-laning. That work has 

to be done first before this can proceed. And it's just in process 

at the present time, it's not completed. 

 

Many of these came on without our expectation, you have to 

remember, eh?  We're hopeful that we can get the design and 

the problems and the consultant's report, also the engineers' 

design, to the satisfaction . . . some communication with the 

community. 

 

But all I say to you is that we would have . . . if we had known 

that the federal government — we didn't know until 

mid-December I think, when Mr. Mazankowski, the Hon. 

Minister of Finance, brought down his minibudget in the fall 

and so what we had to do then in order to access the federal 

program is to start putting on to stream very rapidly. And so 

that's the problem that we have, and so what the department is 

doing now is the full design work; they have the consultant. 

 

And the best that I can say to you is that when that's completed, 

we'll want to have some discussion with the community. We'll 

make it available to you if that would help, and discuss it with 

you and go from there. But we're hopeful that that can be done 

and that we can get on stream with that. But that's where it's at. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Minister, but 

one thing I think we should be careful of and that is not to sell 

the department short. Your officials have lots of designs, lots of 

planning. This thing has been going on for the last 10 years. I 

know there's been lots of land bought up for the right of way of 

the twinning and so on, so this is not totally catching the 

department by surprise. 



1422 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

I think up until this stage they've had the luxury of saying, well 

maybe this, maybe that, and there was no sense of urgency of 

having to make a decision, I'll grant them that. And that has 

been thrust upon them at this time. 

 

One other question that I want, that I have some concern about. 

And that is from the traffic coming from Warman to Saskatoon, 

I would suggest to you — and this is just a figure that I'm 

picking out because I think it would be pretty close — but 75 

per cent of the traffic probably never goes to that other 

overpass in through Idylwyld but rather through the chemical 

plant, that road. Because most of the people coming from 

Warman during rush-hour traffic access Saskatoon through the 

chemical plant road. And there's another problem of having a 

twinned highway and having to cross medians and all these 

kinds of things. Is there any design that the department is 

favouring at this time, as to how that will be done? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Take the whole design of it, as I said. It's 

in the process of being designed and the various problems that 

you raise obviously are a part of what they're looking at. 

 

And I just want to say to you that this came on stream. I mean 

we just didn't have it in our budget, the possibility of being able 

to do this. And it was only under the negotiation with the 

federal government that they indicated that we could get those 

two. And I thought this would be tremendous assistance to the 

traffic volume both to Martensville and to Warman. I thought it 

was a significant concession. 

 

All I can say is that the department is working full speed. And 

the one that we are looking at first of all is Warman and then 

we want to get to Martensville. But all of those concerns 

obviously will be looked at and in detail, and we'll let you 

know exactly as our designed plan gets going. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Okay, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that. And I 

never thought I would see the day that the member from Quill 

Lakes and I would be both agreeing that well maybe the federal 

government isn't that bad after all. So I certainly . . . Just stay 

sitting until I'm finished now. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I guess I would only have one further 

question for you, and that is: with the implementation date of 

construction starting on that Warman part at least, what is your 

date of completion that you are anticipating? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Well we have it on the schedule this 

year. But just as you have indicated, whether or not we get all 

the design and everything in place, it's — matter of fact, 

whether or not we complete all that and get on with it . . . but it 

is our intention . . . We don't have a specific date for when it 

would commence because, as I said, we do have the 

engineering part and the design to do. That's important, and 

we'll take it accordingly. 

 

But it's one of the projects that we have in the 

schedule here this year and hopefully that we will be able to get 

the design completed and proceed with that. I can't give you a 

date as to when that might likely will be. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I just 

had three quick areas that I wanted to touch on with you: 

Highway 317, Highway 21, and an issue that just came up. I 

just spoke with a gentleman minutes ago, a constituent of mine, 

with respect to overloading of trucks, and maybe we could deal 

with that issue first of all. 

 

It's something that's becoming more and more of an issue in 

rural Saskatchewan all the time, I think, Mr. Minister, where 

we see people buying or upgrading farm grain trucks, hauling 

of grain. And quite frequently the trucks that are on the road 

today have boxes that will hold considerably more than the 

capacity of the licence that they buy. 

 

Now in speaking with the traffic police, they tell me that 

probably somewhere in the neighbourhood of 75 per cent of the 

trucks on the road today at any given time — farm trucks, that 

is — are probably overloaded. 

 

And this gentleman's question and concern was — he finds 

himself in that situation — and he's simply wondering whether 

the department has ever given any consideration to allowing a 

person to buy additional weight allocation for his truck so he 

can carry more product. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — I thank the member for the suggestion. 

I'm advised that that very discussion is commenced with 

SARM just this week I guess, to see whether or not special 

considerations can be given. We want to go and discuss it with 

SARM. We don't have a policy on it as yet. We recognize an 

increasing problem out there. And I might say that it's a basic 

concern to us too because as you indicated there are more and 

more larger and larger trucks on the farms, and that's one of our 

concerns as the federal government ploughs ahead in respect to 

the rail-line abandonment and the dismantling of the Crow 

benefit payment to the railways. Our concern there is very real, 

that a lot of the transportation then will be onto the producer, 

probably hauling further and further distances if the federal 

program goes into effect. 

 

What we have been doing also, not only in contacting SARM 

and discussing it in respect to weight loads and considerations 

there, we do have heavy hauls and permits in certain areas. For 

instance, in the timber area with Weyerhaeuser and so on, so 

we have allowed that and we work it certain periods of the day, 

so many trips and so on, but they can overload. So there is 

special consideration there. 

 

The other thing that we're doing is the Department of 

Highways and Transportation is looking at a complete plan, 

sort of an overall transportation plan, a visionary plan for the 

whole transportation system in Saskatchewan. 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1423 

One of the problems that we have, as you know, is that 

Saskatchewan is rather unique in that we got about 8,000, over 

8,000 miles, of thin-membrane highways. And it's going to be 

quite a chore to be able to maintain those if we get a lot of 

heavy trucks surfacing on those. 

 

So in respect to your overloading of a truck, we're looking at 

that, we're discussing it with SARM, and moreover we're 

looking at an overall transportation policy for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I guess 

that will suffice for that question. I just want to add to it a little 

bit though that this gentleman's suggestion was that during the 

winter months when the roads are froze up hard as rock, it 

would seem that it shouldn't be too much of a problem to 

extend a . . . or give a person an opportunity to buy a permit for 

additional weight restriction. 

 

Now I just wanted to move on to those two highways that I 

mentioned. Highway 317 — we'll deal with that one first of all 

perhaps. I'm aware that you've been invited to speak to the 

folks in that area about the highway. There's a possibility that 

they would like some indication from your department as to 

whether that highway will be upgraded from the, I don't know 

whether they still call them super grid or whatever you want to 

call it, to a paved surface. That's been an area of . . . and a bit of 

a concern with the folks in that area — Marengo area, north of 

Marengo is where we're looking at, on the west side of the 

province. I wonder if you might update me on that highway. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Well certainly we're open to discussions 

in respect to 317. You'll have to appreciate I guess, hon. 

member, that we are working with a pretty limited budget. We 

are . . . a fairly significant amount of the budget has been spent 

on maintaining the major arterial highways such as 11 and No. 

1 and No. 16, and some considerable work done on No. 7, or is 

in the works. Certainly any . . . we're prepared to take a look at 

that, to discuss it, but I don't think that we have anything 

immediate in so far as 317 is concerned. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 

 


