




















































Hansard: April 22, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1091 

 April 22, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

number of petitions to present today. I will read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from Cabri, Abbey, 

Portreeve, Lancer, from Moose Jaw, from Hazenmore — 

across the province, Mr. Speaker, from Wolseley. I'd like to 

present these now. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have as well 

petitions to present today on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

From the communities of Invermay, Margo, all up in that area 

apparently on both of those sheets. And this one is from Rama, 

Buchanan, Wadena, up in that Antler area. Ituna is represented 

in here. And it sounds like most of the others on this sheet are 

from that area as well. 

 

I'll present them now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 

would like to present some more presentations, lay them before 

the Assembly. And I'd like to read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the 

government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by individuals 

from the communities of Wawota, Maryfield, Kenosee Lake, 

Kelso, Fairlight, Moosomin, communities in that south-eastern 

part of the province. I so present them to the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I as well have petitions with 

respect to health care in the province. Mr. Speaker, I won't read 

the prayer, but just read into the record some of the locations 

from people that have signed the petition. There's Eston, Plato, 

Brock, Eatonia, Laporte, Macklin. More from Macklin area, 

Primate, Kerrobert, Kindersley, Coleville. Mr. Speaker, all over 

the western side of the province of Saskatchewan. I present 

those now. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to 

present some petitions relating to the health care and the health 

care concerns about the districts in the province. They come 

from many people in my constituency, from Cabri, from 

Pennant, from Abbey, from Shackleton, from Hazlet. And I too 

want to make these petitions available to the Assembly today. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure 

to read into the record this petition: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Honourable 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to do the 

following (and I shall just read the first of six): 

 

 1. Order SaskPower to facilitate the production of non-utility 

generated power in the areas of increased demand, namely 

Lloydminster and Meadow Lake. Several companies in this 

area have applied to generate power. Allowing non-utility 

generation of power in this area will make the construction of 

the power line and its attendant $42 million expenditure 

unnecessary. 

 

 And the petitioners will ever pray. 

 

From Alice Beach, several parts surrounding Regina — Dilke 

and so forth. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

The Clerk: — According to order, the following petitions have 

been reviewed and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read 

and received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act. 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable 



1092 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

Assembly may be pleased to urge the provincial government 

to provide proper funding to continue the operation of Souris 

Valley Regional Care Centre. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like 

to introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 

House a couple of constituents and good friends of mine who 

are down here in Regina today. They are Art and Bev Halushka 

who are sitting up in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They're down in Regina here today on a combination business 

trip and visiting some relatives of Bev's. 

 

So I'd just like to call on all the members to offer them a warm 

welcome at the House here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce 

to you and through you today to members of the Assembly a 

constituent who is president of the Saskatchewan Young New 

Democrats. She's seated in the west gallery — Stacey Scotten. 

She's just completed her university studies for the year and I'd 

like all members to warmly welcome her. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the east 

gallery I'd to introduce a gentleman who's taken time to come 

and visit the Assembly. He's the administrator of the RM (rural 

municipality) of Saltcoats, Mr. Ron Risling, and I'd like to 

welcome him to the Assembly and ask members to join me in 

welcoming him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I'd like to introduce to you and through you to the members of 

the Legislative Assembly Mr. George Bothwell who is in the 

west gallery. Mr. Bothwell is the chairman of the Provincial 

Library board and he's just recently received the Order of 

Canada, and I would like everyone to welcome Mr. Bothwell to 

the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to rise and 

welcome Mr. Risling to the Assembly here this afternoon. Mr. 

Risling is from my home constituency of Saltcoats and I wish 

him well with his business ventures here and wish him a safe 

trip home. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 

rise to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, 

sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Amy Manz and Vonda 

Kosloski, and company, 

wearing the white ribbons. They're here to observe the 

proceedings of the House today. And I ask everybody to join 

with me in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the House, I would like to introduce in the west 

gallery, Marilyn Klatt and her daughter from Steelman in my 

constituency. They're here to observe the proceedings of the 

House, and I would ask everyone to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Rural Hospital Closures 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, 

yesterday a thousand Saskatchewan people came to Regina to 

tell them that they have real concerns about your plans. When 

they went away their questions were still unanswered and their 

concerns were not addressed. 

 

Madam Minister, because their concerns weren't addressed, 

isn't that reason enough to postpone your plans to close their 

hospitals? Isn't that reason enough for you to realize that maybe 

your plans are infallible, that more homework needs to be 

done, and that more work needs to be done before you close 

out hospitals in these communities? 

 

Madam Minister, in light of yesterday's events, will you 

postpone the closure of 52 hospitals until these people's 

questions have been answered? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 800 

people who were at the legislature yesterday, I did speak to 

many of their concerns, answered many of the issues that have 

been raised. They have been answered in this legislature on 

numerous occasions. However that doesn't mean that people 

aren't concerned about converting their hospital to some other 

health care purpose than acute care, in-patient beds. People will 

still be concerned about that; there's no question. 

 

They are given six months to put alternate plans in place, to 

discuss this with their district planning committees, and the 

Department of Health will be meeting with them in order to 

help them move to the conversion. I will also be going into 

communities and talking to people about their concerns and 

dealing with many of their concerns out in the community. 

 

So it isn't a question of these hospitals having to change their 

roles and convert to health centres overnight. There is time to 

do this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1093 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, I 

remind you that I don't think you did answer their questions 

yesterday. You answered two questions, and then scurried off 

into the legislature before the people of that gathering 

yesterday were allowed an opportunity to ask you questions. 

 

This is not an academic argument, Madam Minister. This is a 

question of people's lives we are talking about. Madam 

Minister, you and I can sit here and throw facts back and forth 

all afternoon, but the fact of the matter is, is people are 

concerned about the closure of their hospital in rural 

communities. 

 

And if I'm wrong, I guess I'll pay the price in the next election. 

But if you're wrong, but, Madam Minister, if you're wrong, 

people's lives will be lost. If you're wrong, their lives will be in 

jeopardy in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

If your plan is so correct, Madam Minister, why can you not 

allow the people of this province an opportunity to slow the 

process down to allow adequate consultation with the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite's 

false concern about people's lives, when what they have done is 

created a $15 billion debt in this province that is crippling, 

crippling the province. It's crippling the province. And if there's 

anything that's affecting people's lives, it's what those members 

opposite did when they were in power. 

 

They are the ones responsible for the fact that today we have to 

make hard decisions and we have to reduce funding. And now 

they stand up and talk about concern for people's lives. Where 

was their concern three years ago? Where was their concern 

five years ago as they continued to throw money all over the 

place that we didn't have to spend? 

 

Now with respect to the member's opposite comments on 

health care, we have repeatedly assured people there will be 

access to emergency acute care. The arguments that they raise 

are reminiscent of the excesses of 1962. That's what they are — 

reminiscent of the excesses of 1962. 

 

We're asking communities to work with us so as we change the 

roles of hospitals we can ensure proper and adequate health 

care services in their communities. So quit . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, if you live in Saskatoon or Regina 

and your child has an accident or if your child takes a bad 

allergic reaction, you know that you are no more than 10 

minutes away from an emergency room and a doctor and 

top-quality medical treatment. And 

when every moment counts, that's pretty reassuring. 

 

Madam Minister, that's something that has taken years to build 

in this province and that's something that we can all be proud 

of. Madam Minister, people of Regina and Saskatoon deserve 

that type of top-quality medical services. But, Madam Minister, 

so do the communities of Eston and Dodsland and Vanguard 

and Frontier and Oxbow and a whole host of other 

communities around this province. 

 

Madam Minister, why are you telling people in these 

communities that their children's health is less important than a 

child living in Regina or Saskatoon? Why, Madam Minister, 

are you creating two classes of citizens when it comes to health 

care in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 

famous for trying to divide people in this province. They're 

famous for it, and that's why they lost the election in 1991. And 

they're trying it again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — And the member there from Kindersley 

thinks he's going to win the leadership of the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) Party by trying to build this on this urban/rural 

split that he is trying to create. Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that that is absolutely reprehensible. 

 

Rural residents will have access to high quality care. We will 

make sure that there are emergency services available. And 

with respect to the tertiary care centres in Saskatoon and 

Regina, 44 per cent of the use of those facilities — our base 

hospitals — are from rural residents. And they should use those 

hospitals. 

 

Those are provincial facilities with specialists, high technology, 

to serve all of Saskatchewan, not just Regina and Saskatoon 

residents. And our residents throughout Saskatchewan use 

those facilities. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, you 

keep accusing the opposition of spreading false fears among 

Saskatchewan people. Well, Madam Minister, there is fear 

being spread in Saskatchewan but that fear is being spread by 

the actions of you and your ministry. And unfortunately the 

fear is very, very real. 

 

The other night, the other night, Madam Minister, in Kincaid, 

the doctor was late in showing up for the public meeting 

because a farmer had had an accident with an auger and had to 

have 66 stitches to sew up the wound. Madam Minister, that 

doctor will probably not remain in that community once that 

hospital closes. 

 

Madam Minister, Madam Minister, will you tell that 



1094 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

farmer and his family that their fears are unfounded? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, on average 6 per cent of a 

doctor's income is in-patient acute care. I hardly think that 

doctor is going to leave the community because of 6 per cent. 

Do you think that doctor is going to leave the community 

because of 6 per cent? 

 

That doctor will also have privileges in hospitals within a 

district because what we will be doing is creating group 

medical practices and encouraging physicians to work together 

within a district. And we will be asking for physicians to have 

privileges in all hospitals within the district so they can work 

together in a cooperative fashion. I do not think a doctor is 

going to leave their community because of a 6 per cent 

reduction in income. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Madam Minister, 

you may not believe he is going leave that hospital, but that 

doctor says that without proper facilities and diagnostic 

services, he will leave. That's what he says. 

 

Madam Minister, last night on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation) there was a story about a family in Eston whose 

teenage daughter had suffered brain damage. Because she is 

able to stay in Eston hospital, her friends and family can visit 

her every day and provide volunteer help for her with her 

therapy. That won't be possible after October 1. 

 

Madam Minister, would you tell that family that their fears are 

unfounded? Or instead, maybe you could tell that family that 

your government is listening, that you need more time to think 

this through. Maybe you could tell that family that you intend 

to postpone the closure of Eston hospital until you have had 

time to work with that community and to ensure that all 

questions are answered before you close that hospital. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I've said on a number of 

occasions in this legislature that X-ray and diagnostic services 

will be available in the hospitals where we are going to convert 

them to different roles. The member opposite just said the 

doctor said he's going to leave if he doesn't have access to 

diagnostic services. I say it again: X-ray and diagnostic 

services will still remain available for the physicians. 

 

Now with respect to the specific case the member may be 

talking about, my suggestion is we have six months to talk to 

this family . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I've listened now for 

some time, and I haven't kept record of the interruptions from 

the member from Maple Creek, but it must be numerous. And I 

ask him to please give the minister the courtesy of answering 

the questions, 

rather than repetitive interruptions. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — There will be time, Mr. Speaker, to talk 

to families who feel pressure about the conversion of hospitals. 

There will be time. There will be time for the family the 

member refers to in Eston and for other families across 

Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Public Employees Dental Plan 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I find this 

really deplorable. And I find the minister being very 

hypocritical. Who was the individual who stood in this 

Assembly just about three or four short years ago and lamented 

the underfunding of health care while a four-year-old girl was 

transported from Assiniboia to Regina and died in transit. And 

that's what people on the steps were saying yesterday. People 

were . . . in fact they were lamenting the fact, where are they 

going to go when their hospital closes? 

 

And you know what the other question was, Madam Minister?  

Madam Minister, they were asking about the dental plan. And 

they said if you can expand the dental plan to include the 

public sector, some 30,000 families in this province, Madam 

Minister, how many dollars is that going to put into covering 

dental children . . . or dental services to families across this 

province? How many dollars are going to be put into that 

expanded dental plan for children up to 25 years? 

 

And, Madam Minister, if you looked at those dollars and took 

them, I believe you would be able to service health care 

throughout rural Saskatchewan and these small hospitals. How 

many dollars are you putting into that expanded dental plan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the dental plan the 

members opposite speak to is a dental plan put in by them for 

public servants. It's their dental plan. There's a clause in the 

plan that refers to services for children of public employees 

unless they're under the children's dental plan. So the clause 

that they put in becomes automatically operative, Mr. Speaker. 

It is their plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, the question was how much is 

this expanded dental plan going to cost? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — It's my understanding, Mr. Speaker, 

there is no cost because it is a question of the plan already 

being in place and money there to fund it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, the people of Saskatchewan 

don't buy that. In yesterday's Star-Phoenix, Madam Minister, 

the Deputy Premier says, and I quote: "the change in coverage 

is automatic and won't cost the taxpayers any more 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1095 

money." 

 

How is that possible? The old plan covered children from ages 

5 to 13; the new plan extends this coverage to the children of 

30,000 families. And it's not going to cost any more money? 

That doesn't make sense. People on the steps of the legislature 

don't believe that. 

 

Or is it that the government will break even by cancelling the 

old plan and replacing it with an enhanced plan for government 

employees. Isn't that the fact, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, it's my understanding with 

respect to this plan that there . . . that the clause automatically 

comes into effect and that there's no additional cost. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, I don't know how you can 

bring . . . expand a plan, bring it into effect, and not add 

additional costs. What is that cost to the taxpayers of the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 

thank the Minister of Health for letting me speak to this 

question. I spoke to it the other day. 

 

The member should understand, since he was on the . . . this 

side of the House when this plan was introduced. I'm not sure 

whether he was yet elected or not, but he had plenty of time to 

become familiar with it. It was brought in in 1982 under the 

former Progressive Conservative government. Quite frankly, 

Mr. Speaker, it was one of the few progressive things that that 

government ever did in that 10-year period of time. 

 

And the member should know also that within the provisions of 

the policy that is provided, when there is a removal of things 

like the childrens' dental plan, that automatically there is a 

coverage provided to cover that group of people that were 

covered by the childrens' dental plan. 

 

The briefing that I have received from officials is that there will 

not be incremental costs involved in that, because the plan is 

very well funded. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the minister for trying to 

answer the question that the Minister of Health couldn't 

answer, but we still would like to know what is the cost of the 

expanded plan to 30,000 families in the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the member should 

listen carefully to the answer, and then he won't have to take 

the time of the House to re-ask the same question. 

 

The reason that there is no additional incremental cost, Mr. 

Speaker, is because the plan is completely 

solvent, and therefore the funds are available to provide the 

coverage which is going to be provided because of the 

extension within the policy which has always been there. There 

has been nothing new, contrary to reports by some of the media 

who I believe made an error in their original reporting because 

of the comments by the member from Rosthern. 

 

But the plan is solvent, and therefore there is no additional cost 

that is incurred by the public purse. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, another question to the minister. 

Mr. Minister, a constituent phoned our office this morning and 

said he had phoned the NDP (New Democratic Party) caucus 

about this very subject. He was told by a woman in NDP 

caucus that 55 per cent of the cost of the dental program would 

be paid for by the employee, while the government picks up 45 

per cent of the tab. 

 

Again, Mr. Minister, if this is true, why is personnel and 

administrative services saying that the government is picking 

up all the costs? Which is of these statements is correct? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, let me just make it 

very clear for the member opposite that there is a joint funding 

of the plan by the employer and by the employees as there is in 

any plan of this kind, whether it's in the private sector or a 

Crown corporation or in the government proper. But the 

amount of that funding has not changed. It remains the same as 

it was in 1982 or 1983, as determined by the policy which is 

signed by the deliverer, the insurer, and the Government of 

Saskatchewan on behalf of the public employees as is stated in 

the contract between the employees and the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, another question to the minister. 

The minister just said that the cost is shared, and yet, Mr. 

Speaker, when we checked with personnel management, they 

tell us that the total cost is being picked up by the government, 

that nothing comes out of an employee's cheque to pay for 

dental coverage presently, and nothing will be taken out. They 

say the government is paying the whole shot. 

 

Which is it, Mr. Minister? Is the government paying the whole 

shot or is the employee putting something in? You can't have it 

both ways. People want to know who's paying for the shot. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I obviously don't 

have all of the specific information with me, but I think the 

answer to the member's question is that the cost of the plan is 

.45 per cent of the cost, and that is not a very big contribution. I 

think that is a credit to the plan as it is and the kind of contract 

that exists between the providers of the insurance and the 

people who negotiated with them. 



1096 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister, we've sat here this 

afternoon, we've asked the minister, we've asked the Minister 

of Health to give us what the cost would be to the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. The taxpayers of Saskatchewan would really 

like to know what that cost is. 

 

The minister says that it costs him nothing because it's already 

in there, but there still is a cost associated with the plan. And 

the people of Saskatchewan would know, the taxpayers would 

like to know because it's their tax dollars paying for it, and 

we're asking, what are those figures? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, since this is the last 

question the member will ask, let me put it very clearly to him 

so that there is no misunderstanding here. The cost of the plan 

is .45 per cent of salary. That is no different today, Mr. 

Speaker, than it was when the members opposite put the plan 

into place and set it up. That stays the same today as it was then 

and so that, as I have said at least three times now to the 

member from Moosomin, nothing has changed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Tendering Practices 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to respond to 

a question that I took notice of on April 13 with respect to 

tendering for photocopier equipment. And I'm pleased to 

respond to the members opposite that the tender was publicly 

advertised and was open to all suppliers interested in bidding, 

that the bidders were invited to provide options for supplying 

the equipment. 

 

And this was done because the government wanted to pursue 

purchase options, lease-purchase options, and outright lease 

arrangements, I indicate to the members opposite. There were 

about 2,500 options that were proposed and are being now 

considered by Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation. 

 

And I just would like to table this response and pass it on to the 

members opposite along with the invitation to tender that was 

published in the papers in Saskatchewan and I would want to 

indicate to the general public, Mr. Speaker, that another 

example of misinformation and half-truths and outright . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hospital Bed Costs 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to ask the Minister of 

Health a question. I have some statistics from Statistics Canada 

that say that Saskatchewan in general, hospitals have the least 

cost per bed in Canada at $320 per bed. The average in Canada 

is 416. Madam Minister, that is almost a hundred dollars 

cheaper in Saskatchewan than it is in Canada. And it is first and 

the lowest cost per bed in Canada. 

 

Would you provide to the Assembly the study that your 

department is doing on the utilization of hospital beds in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Will you release to the province of 

Saskatchewan that study that you have in hand? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan as usual is 

leading the rest of Canada with respect to health reform in 

attempting to contain health care costs, clearly. 

 

The department is not doing a study on utilization. The health 

research and utilization commission is doing that study. It is an 

independent commission that's headed by Dr. Stewart 

McMillan. And I do not have a copy of his report because he's 

in the . . . he will be finishing it off in the next few days and 

weeks, and when he does it will be made public. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Madam Minister, has the commission 

provided that information to you as of today? The people in the 

province of Saskatchewan know this: that Saskatchewan is the 

lowest per-bed cost in Canada. And you were saying all over 

the country that we have the most health care costs of any 

province in Canada. 

 

Madam Minister, we have $320 per bed in the province of 

Saskatchewan; whereas the next one is significantly higher, and 

the highest is 966 in the Northwest Territories. Madam 

Minister, will you tell us whether the utilization study has been 

reported to you already? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, we have the highest 

number of beds per capita here in Saskatchewan. And we have 

amongst the highest number of hospitals, I think, next to any 

province except Ontario. So, Mr. Speaker, the member 

opposite of course, as usual, is misrepresenting what I'm saying 

to the people. But that's what I've come to expect from the 

members opposite. 

 

Now with respect to the utilization commission's report, no, I 

have not received the utilization commission's report. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 52 — An Act respecting Culture and Recreation 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, I move The Culture and 

Recreation Act, 1993 be now introduced and read the first time. 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1097 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 53 — An Act respecting Natural Resources 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill respecting 

Natural Resources be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Theodore 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading of 

a Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Theodore. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:38 p.m. until 2:39 p.m.. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth Haverstock 

— 6 

Nays 

Wiens Hamilton 

Simard Johnson 

Tchorzewski Trew 

Lingenfelter Draper 

Shillington Serby 

Koskie Roy 

Solomon Cline 

Goulet Scott 

Kowalsky McPherson 

Carson Wormsbecker 

Mitchell Crofford 

Penner Stanger 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Upshall Harper 

Bradley Keeping 

Koenker Carlson 

Lautermilch Langford 

Calvert Jess 

Murray  

— 37 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Rockglen 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading of 

a Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Rockglen. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:41 p.m. until 2:42 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

 

 

Toth Haverstock 

— 6 

Nays 

Wiens Johnson 

Simard Trew 

Lingenfelter Draper 

Shillington Serby 

Solomon Roy 

Goulet Cline 

Kowalsky Scott 

Carson McPherson 

Mitchell Wormsbecker 

Penner Crofford 

Cunningham Stanger 

Bradley Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lautermilch Keeping 

Calvert Carlson 

Murray Langford 

Hamilton Jess 

— 34 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Lucky Lake 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 

the first reading of a Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Lucky Lake. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:45 p.m. until 2:46 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth Haverstock 

— 6 

Nays 

Wiens Calvert 

Simard Murray 

Tchorzewski Hamilton 

Lingenfelter Johnson 

Shillington Trew 

Solomon Draper 

Goulet Serby 

Kowalsky Roy 

Carson Scott 

Mitchell Wormsbecker 

Penner Crofford 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Upshall Harper 

Hagel Keeping 

Bradley Carlson 

Koenker Langford 

Lautermilch Jess 

— 34 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Leoville 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 

first reading of a Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Leoville. 



1098 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

The division bells rang from 2:47 p.m. until 2:48 p.m. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the Government House Leader 

should maybe just keep some of those remarks to himself. 

Order. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth Haverstock 

— 6 

Nays 

Wiens Hamilton 

Lingenfelter Johnson 

Solomon Trew 

Goulet Draper 

Kowalsky Serby 

Carson Roy 

Mitchell Scott 

Penner Wormsbecker 

Cunningham Crofford 

Upshall Harper 

Koenker Keeping 

Lautermilch Carlson 

Calvert Langford 

Murray Jess 

— 28 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Montmartre 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 

reading of a Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Montmartre. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:50 p.m. until 2:51 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth Haverstock 

— 6 

Nays 

Wiens Lautermilch 

Lingenfelter Murray 

Solomon Johnson 

Goulet Trew 

Kowalsky Serby 

Carson Wormsbecker 

Mitchell Stanger 

Penner Harper 

Cunningham Keeping 

Hagel Carlson 

Bradley Langford 

Koenker Jess 

— 24 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Fillmore 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 

reading of a Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Fillmore. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:53 p.m. until 2:54 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth Haverstock 

— 6 

Nays 

Wiens Murray 

Lingenfelter Johnson 

Solomon Trew 

Goulet Serby 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Carson Stanger 

Mitchell Harper 

Penner Keeping 

Cunningham Carlson 

Hagel Langford 

Bradley Jess 

Lautermilch  

— 23 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Radville 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 

reading of a Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Radville. 

 

The bells rang from 2:55 p.m. until 2:56 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth Haverstock 

— 6 

Nays 

Wiens Murray 

Lingenfelter Johnson 

Solomon Trew 

Goulet Serby 

Kowalsky Roy 

Carson Wormsbecker 

Mitchell Stanger 

Penner Keeping 

Cunningham Carlson 

Lautermilch Langford 

Calvert Jess 

— 22 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — What's the member's point of order? 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1099 

Mr. Martens: — The point of order is that, the last few votes 

we've taken there have been people moving around while the 

vote is being taken. There have been people moving through 

the doors and sitting in the back, and then moving back to the 

front. I wonder if the Speaker would bring to the attention of 

the Assembly that that is not a part of the decorum of this 

House, nor is it a part of the rules. And I would like to point out 

to the Speaker that that is my point of order. And I believe it 

should be addressed by the people in the Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I think the member's point is 

very well taken. 

 

And while I am on my feet, I must also remind all members 

that this constant running around when the votes are taken is 

very annoying. And it's contrary to the rules. But not only that, 

but the comments that are going across the floor is really . . . 

should be kept to a minimum. At least help the Clerks in taking 

the vote. So I think the member's point is very well taken, and I 

ask members to please abide by the rules that you yourself set 

down. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, the other day I took 

a point of order from a member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland-University. In fact on Tuesday, April 20, 1993, the 

member for Saskatoon Sutherland-University raised a point of 

order in regard to references made to Bill 38 by the member for 

Estevan while introducing guests. 

 

I have reviewed the record, and find the member for Estevan 

did refer to business before the Assembly in his introduction. I 

refer all members to rulings of the Chair dated July 31, 1989; 

August 3, 1989; May 15, 1991; May 30, 1991; May 31, 1991; 

and June 6, 1991, which state that members should not involve 

gallery guests in proceedings, nor should introductions provoke 

debate. Therefore I find the point of order well taken. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 

ask leave of the Assembly to make a statement which will be of 

interest to all members. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1500) 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Earth Day 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Earth Day is internationally recognized as a day to celebrate 

and encourage environmental 

activity in all areas of human endeavour. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan we can be proud of our relatively clean 

environment and abundant natural resources. Earth Day gives 

us the opportunity to reflect on the bounties of our land and on 

what we have accomplished to preserve it. It also gives us the 

opportunity to look ahead to find new ways to foster a healthy 

environment and preserve our precious natural resources. 

 

To celebrate Earth Day, the Department of Environment and 

Resource Management is issuing five new brochures in its 

Helping the Environment series. These brochures will assist 

Saskatchewan people to do what they can to help our 

environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join with 

me to recognize today as Earth Day and to join with the 

residents of Saskatchewan in finding ways to maintain our 

environment and preserve it for the future. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

join with the minister in comments on Earth Day. 

 

Earth Day is very significant to Saskatchewan. The people of 

Saskatchewan are indeed products of the land and the water 

and the sun. And in this province we are still dependent upon 

those precious resources. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the largest 

megaproject in Saskatchewan is about to renew itself. 

 

As the trees, flowers, and grasses come forth for another 

season, as the birds return and the animals shake off their 

hibernation, our farmers and gardeners are preparing the soil 

for spring planting. 

 

We depend on agriculture for our number-one export of 

products. We depend on coal, sun, wind, and water to generate 

our electricity, Mr. Speaker. We depend upon this earth for our 

very survival. 

 

Earth Day is a day to celebrate the people of Saskatchewan and 

to remind all of us how precious this world is to us. We cannot 

take our resources for granted. Instead, we must all do our part 

to ensure that Saskatchewan and the rest of Canada is kept 

clean; that our resources are protected and cherished and used 

judiciously. 

 

After all, the steps we take today we are taking for our 

grandchildren and our great-grandchildren in the future. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today our globe 

celebrates Earth Day. And for many not blessed with the 

privileges that we enjoy in Canada and in Saskatchewan, issues 

of the environment rank 



1100 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

far down in their list of things of importance. For people facing 

starvation or the terrors of war, the environment is something 

one struggles against rather than protects. 

 

Here under our clear Saskatchewan skies, we literally have 

unlimited horizons. We have a population which is relatively 

well-educated, and a population whose awareness of 

environmental issues is growing each year. 

 

As individuals we are learning about the three R's of 

environmental responsibility — reduce, reuse, and recycle. 

With guidance from our local and provincial governments, as 

well as good corporate citizens, people are taking advantage of 

facilities which allow us to recycle hundreds of tonnes of glass, 

plastic, and newspaper each year. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we can do much more. The ingenuity of 

Saskatchewan people has produced outstanding 

accomplishments in the fields of medicine and 

telecommunications and agriculture. That same ingenuity, Mr. 

Speaker, will continue to develop new inventions which will 

promote environmental responsibility in our province, 

innovations which can be shared with the rest of the world. 

 

The policy decisions made in this Assembly, decisions in 

which we must all participate freely and openly, should reflect 

our obligation to preserve and protect our fragile environment 

for the future. And I stand today in this Assembly to 

congratulate all of us and all of those citizens of Saskatchewan 

who are doing their very best to ensure that we have an 

environment for the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that question 

no. 110 be converted to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: — For return (debatable). 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 40 — An Act to amend The Municipal Employees' 

Superannuation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise to move second reading of Bill No. 40, An Act to amend 

The Municipal Employees' Superannuation Act. 

 

The Municipal Employees' Superannuation Act provides 

pension benefits to municipal employees, school board 

employees, and designated police officers and fire-fighters. 

One thousand employers 

and 7,500 employees participate in the plan. A nine-member 

commission representing major employers and interest groups 

oversees the plan's operations. 

 

The reasons for amending The Municipal Employees' 

Superannuation Act is for housekeeping purposes. The 

amendments will ensure consistent application of the pension 

plan rules to all members of the plan. The commission has 

reviewed and approved the amendments. These changes will 

not result in any additional costs to the pension plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, therefore I take pleasure in moving the second 

reading of Bill No. 40, An Act to amend The Municipal 

Employees' Superannuation Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I believe 

that there are many people across this province, especially 

municipal employees, who have been waiting for this Bill. I 

believe it just addresses a couple minor points in the Bill to 

address some inequities in the pension plan. And I believe as 

well that we would like to just take a moment to quickly peruse 

the Bill before we move to the committee. Therefore at this 

time I'll move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 46 — An Act to amend and repeal The Farm 

Purchase Program Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, at the end of my remarks I'll move second reading of 

The Farm Purchase Program Amendment and Repeal Act, 

1993. 

 

I rise in the House today to describe changes to The Farm 

Purchase Program Act. Mr. Speaker, the farm purchase 

program was established in 1982 to assist young farmers who 

wished to buy land. The program provided an interest subsidy 

to farmers for the first 10 years if they could make their 

payments on the land they purchased. 

 

For the first five years of a loan the farm purchase program 

paid interest rebates equal to the difference between payments 

at available interest rates and what payments would be at 8 per 

cent. During the last five years that the farmer is enrolled in the 

program rebate grants equal the difference between payments 

at available interest rates and 12 per cent. Total enrolment in 

the program from 1982 until present was 6,912 farmers were 

paid a total of $106 million. The average semi-annual subsidy 

to farmers was about $4,000 per year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in retrospect this program encouraged farmers to 

purchase land at the wrong time. These same farmers, if they 

had been able to make the payments on the land they 

purchased, have seen their equity erode as land prices have 

fallen. In 1987 the previous government terminated new 

enrolments in the farm purchase program. In 1991-92 these 

interest subsidy payments cost the province $4.4 million for 

about 3,700 farmers. Last year, 1992-93, 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1101 

approximately 2,700 farmers received interest subsidy 

payments under the program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, lower interest rates have reduced the number of 

farmers receiving benefits and have reduced the level of 

benefits being paid under the program. These two factors have 

lessened the need for the program. It has been calculated that 

the projected savings for the duration of the program, which 

would have been to July 31, 1997, the original termination date 

of the program, could be $2.4 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government honoured all interest rebate 

participants who are still within the first five years of the 

program. All interest rebates earned to May 31, 1992, were 

paid to those farmers enrolled in the last five years of the 

program. This government has also provided time for all 

participants to prepare the necessary documentation to update 

files in order to be eligible for interest rebates earned to May 

31, 1992. This documentation had to be submitted by October 

31, 1992. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all farmers enrolled in the farm purchase program 

were notified immediately after presentation of the May 7, 

1992 budget that this program was to be concluded. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge members of this House to support the 

amendments to the Act and I move second reading of The Farm 

Purchase Program Amendment and Repeal Act, 1993. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 

listened to the remarks made by the minister, I'm well aware of 

the fact that over the past few years interest rates indeed have 

begun to come down, in fact are probably as low as they've 

ever been in a long period in time. 

 

And the minister did allude to the high prices and the high 

interest rates of the early '80s and the difficulty the farm 

community was having at that time. And I'd like to mention to 

this Assembly that that difficulty in rural communities and in 

agriculture and the farm community certainly hasn't dissipated 

whatsoever. In fact it may have become worse as we look at the 

fact that the government themselves have looked at ways in 

which they can walk away from their responsibility. 

 

The reason for the farm purchase program amendment in the 

first place, Mr. Speaker, was because we had a government in 

the 1970s who felt it was more important to borrow money and 

to go out and invest in land and invest in property, instead of 

helping individuals find a way in which they could make the 

purchase of property and have access to long-term monies at 

low interest rates, guaranteed interest rates. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as we look back over the process that took 

place and we look back in the late '70s, and I can tell you in my 

area — and I think we're familiar with it across the province — 

that in many instances 

the price of land increased substantially as the government was 

out there attempting to buy the property. In fact individuals 

who were looking at selling the land used the land bank as a 

ways and means of driving up the prices for their land. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, as the prices of land increased, as the 

taxpayer indirectly was out there purchasing land, the young 

individual who was trying to get established on the farm found 

themselves in a situation which in 1978 and 1979 didn't look all 

that bad because the equity in your farm and your assets were 

increasing because of inflation. But by 1982, as the price of 

land had peaked, the interest rates had hit that 17, 18, and 22 

per cent, young farmers, farm families, middle-aged families, 

all of a sudden found that this high-priced land that they had 

paid overly . . . or too many dollars for, that had paid probably 

three or four or five times as much as they should have actually 

paid for the property, and then the high interest rates on top of 

it, they found that it was impossible for them to maintain 

payments on that land. 

 

Therefore the government of the day felt it imperative to at 

least utilize whatever funds they could come up with and try 

and subsidize this interest rate. And for many people 

subsidization of the interest rate made the difference between 

making payments and not making payments. 

 

Now for the minister to disband the interest subsidy and 

through this amendment today, Mr. Speaker, one has to wonder 

how many individuals in Saskatchewan are indeed being 

helped or how many individuals are still going to be left with 

high interest rates which the products that they are producing 

just cannot afford to maintain. 

 

And I wonder, has the government looked at a plan that would 

address maybe the individuals, because we all know people 

who have taken out loans, some loans were taken five years 

ago and maybe they took it out over a five-year period, and 

five, even three years ago, interest rates were still in that 12 and 

14 per cent range. Whereas today they're down in that 7 per 

cent range. 

 

Now a lending institution is not in a position where they're 

quite ready to write down interest rates if a person signed a 

note and if a person's making payments. And yet that payment, 

because of that high interest rate they're tied to, might make it 

difficult for them to continue to pay their bills, make the 

payments, so that at the end of the day they would own their 

property. 

 

(1515) 

 

So I would wonder, Mr. Speaker, what the government is 

indeed doing to address the individuals out there who are still 

stuck with high interest rates. I'm sure we'll hear ministers 

saying, well they can go and find money today at 6 or 7 or 8 or 

9 per cent interest, refinance that property, and get on with life. 

But I think if you take a moment just to drive around 



1102 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

rural Saskatchewan, you will find that there are many people, 

as much as they would like to refinance, as much as they would 

like to find a better interest rate, are not in a position to glean or 

gain that better interest rate. 

 

And so it would appear to me, Mr. Minister, that it would only 

be fair for the government to have an alternative and to give 

people that ability to finance their property. And we saw that 

for home-owners in Saskatchewan, and it was fine while we 

were there protecting home-owners. And then as interest rates 

lowered you encouraged home-owners to take advantage of 

lower interest rates and tie in long-term debt. And I think it's 

appropriate here as well. 

 

But in the meantime, those individuals, the young farm families 

who may be still tied in with some 12 and 14 per cent interest 

rates, I think it would be appropriate if the government at least 

took the time and assisted them, whether or not the government 

makes the money available, but gives them some assistance 

and maybe through counselling assistance or through mediation 

to deal with the lending institutions out there to give them . . . 

make available lower interest loans over a period of time that 

would give everybody the same accessibility, would allow 

people to make their payments and indeed build for the future. 

 

I think my colleague would have some more to say on this Bill 

as well, and therefore at this time I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend The Farm Financial 

Stability Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will move second reading 

of The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

It is my pleasure today to rise in the House to describe changes 

to The Farm Financial Stability Act. These changes affect part 

VI of the Act which deals with the production associations loan 

guarantee program for feeder and breeder cattle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, production associations are composed of 

producers who wish to diversify or expand their operation by 

feeding cattle. Under the government program, members of 

production associations receive a significantly lower rate of 

interest on loans to purchase cattle. Association members are 

not required to provide any additional collateral other than a 

minimum deposit and the cattle. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan, in its effort to promote 

diversification of farm operations, assists members of 

associations by guaranteeing the loans. The government also 

views these loan guarantees as an option in helping to resolve 

the farm debt crisis. The loan guarantee gives producers access 

to funding that otherwise might not be available. 

The production associations loan guarantee program is based 

on risk sharing between an association's members, the lender, 

and the government. When the association members sell their 

cattle, the loan is repaid to the financial institution. 

 

Livestock producers are finding this program to be of a benefit 

to their operations. I feel the proof is in the increased number 

of associations formed last year. At the end of 1992 there were 

110 breeder associations, an increase of 26, and there were 92 

breeder associations, an increase of 32 compared to the 60 in 

1991. 

 

There are about 4,000 livestock producers who are members of 

production associations. Last year feeder association members 

financed over 90,000 head of feeder cattle with a value of 

$54.6 million. As well, breeder association members purchased 

nearly 16,000 cows and 3,300 calves in 1992, with a value of 

$15 million. 

 

Since the program's introduction in 1984, total purchases of 

cattle for the program have amounted to about $320 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those involved in the program — producers, 

lenders, and government — have identified some 

administrative details which require changes. The amendments 

to part VI of the Act address these details and clarify the 

procedures to be followed. Some of the changes also streamline 

internal administrative procedures. 

 

The changes to the legislation are intended to improve the 

program for association members and to increase safety to the 

program for the lenders and for the government guarantee. 

These changes will result in efficiencies in administration and 

will subsequently save time and money. The changes are as 

follows. 

 

The procedure for issuing guarantees will be streamlined by 

eliminating the need for an order in council for each request for 

a guarantee. This change is positive for associations because 

the turnaround time for issuing guarantees will be reduced 

significantly. 

 

Cabinet will be given the authority to establish a limit on the 

amount of loans which may be guaranteed during the fiscal 

year. This will establish the government's maximum annual 

liability and will help to improve the government's credit 

rating. In the past government guarantee was open-ended, and 

this has impacted negatively on Saskatchewan's credit rating. 

 

Lenders have approached the government to ask what 

procedures they are to follow if they foresee a loss in relation 

to a loan. These procedures were not spelled out in the previous 

legislation. In this amendment the procedures and guidelines 

are clear. These guidelines will minimize risk and will ensure 

that the guarantee is not jeopardized by lack of action on the 

lender's part. 

 

Under the legislation, lenders will be required to 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1103 

provide information on security and account records for the 

association. In the event of a claim this provision will ensure 

that lenders have followed appropriate procedures. It also 

clarifies procedures lenders should follow to ensure the 

guarantee to the lender remains in place in the event of a loss. 

The amending legislation allows the lender to collect the 

shortfall on payments on a loan when it is in the public interest. 

 

The amending legislation recognizes the practice of custom 

feed-lot operators carrying the feeding costs for their customers 

until the cattle are sold. To reduce the risk to the assurance 

fund and the government guarantee, the amendment ensures 

that liens cannot be placed on such cattle. This procedure also 

reduces the administrative cost to associations and government. 

 

The amendments clarify existing provisions concerning the 

purchase of members' own cattle on their behalf, the release of 

equity when cattle are sold, and the conduct of licensed dealers 

involved in the program. 

 

There is also a requirement that every feeder or breeder 

association which requests a guarantee be required to pay a fee. 

This will cover some of the administrative costs and is in 

keeping with government's concerns about budgetary restraint. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge the members of this House to support the 

amendments to the Act, and I move second reading of The 

Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as the 

minister stood to introduce or give second reading on The Farm 

Financial Stability Amendment Act and we saw this Act 

coming before us, we were first of all wondering if it was just 

elimination of another Act, another program of protection to 

help diversify the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as I listened to the remarks by the minister, it appears to 

me that there is a fair bit of technical detail in this Bill that 

would be appropriate for my colleague, the minister 

responsible, to have a moment or some time to review. 

 

And I think in light of a number of the changes and the 

increased feeding of livestock in this province, the support that 

has been given to rural communities and rural members and 

farmers and encouraging them to look at other ways and means 

of bettering themselves and bettering their communities and 

having a solid impact on the economic activity and viability of 

this province, that certainly this Act has gone a long way in 

creating the ability for producers to gain access to the funding 

needed to transform some of their operations from strictly 

grain, say, into livestock production. 

 

And it's imperative, Mr. Speaker, that this province, with the 

number of cattle we have in the province, we look at not just 

shipping out a natural resource such as the calves to other 

provinces and allowing them to 

feed and then ship back the finished and processed product, but 

I believe it's very important that we as well continue to support 

our industry and encourage them so that we indeed can provide 

an avenue of sale for the calves that are out there and many that 

are being born at this time in this period of year. 

 

I therefore, Mr. Speaker, would move adjournment of debate 

for further consideration. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Provincial Lands Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I'm pleased today to rise to move second reading of 

the amendments to Act c.P-31, The Provincial Lands Act, 

1974. 

 

The purpose of these amendments is to update the Act to reflect 

the changes that have occurred over the last number of years in 

the administration of Crown agricultural lands. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to tell the House that we are moving 

forward on these long-overdue changes, and the passage of 

these important amendments will go a long way to help our 

government keep this important statute up to date and provide 

necessary authority for Agriculture and Food and the 

Department of Environment and Resource Management to 

operate in today's setting. 

 

This Act clarifies the valuation of improvements for sale and a 

removal from leaseholds. It makes clear the province's 

indebtedness to the lessee upon termination of a lease for any 

improvements consented to by the department. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a particularly important change is a provision for 

establishment of a trust condition for Crown land sales. It is 

common practice for the purchaser's solicitor to receive a 

transfer in trust to allow registration of mortgage documents. 

This legislation will allow the province to provide the same 

services on Crown land sale transactions. 

 

This piece of housekeeping ensures these holders are treated 

fairly and with dispatch when purchasing their leaseholdings. 

 

I'm also pleased to introduce changes that provide for expanded 

tax management on behalf of legally constituted local 

authorities. Irrigation districts have asked to be favoured with 

tax collection support under the lands Act similar to that 

provided to rural municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the changes I am introducing provide the 

framework for this authority. With those remarks, Mr. Speaker, 

it gives me great pleasure to give second reading of the 

amendment to c.P-31, The Provincial Lands Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, again as I was listening to 



1104 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

the minister I believe this Act is basically bringing up to date a 

number of changes in the Act, and bringing it up to date with 

the present requirements of our society and of agriculture and 

provincial land sales. And I don't think there are a lot of things 

that we as an opposition are really going to take a lot of time 

on. 

 

But just to give us a chance to review the Act, I will move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 51 — An Act to amend The Wildlife Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to move second 

reading of An Act to amend The Wildlife Act. This Bill is 

intended to ensure that Saskatchewan's unique and valuable 

wildlife resources are maintained and enhanced for the people 

of this province. 

 

The highlights of the Bill include: changes to the definition of 

wildlife so both native and exotic species can be properly 

distinguished and regulated; the one-year suspension rule of 

hunting rights following an infraction; the regulations 

regarding Indian and non-Indian people hunting together; the 

authority of conservation officers to inspect facilities that house 

wildlife; the rules for possession of wildlife; and the province's 

ability to regulate captive wildlife. 

 

To ensure Saskatchewan plays its part in the global aspects of 

wildlife conservation, the definition of wildlife is being 

changed so that both native and exotic wildlife are being 

regulated within the province. Wildlife everywhere is being 

threatened through trade in endangered species or parts of these 

animals. The change in definition also allows the Department 

of Environment and Resource Management to regulate exotic 

animals brought into the province. These animals may harm 

native species in their habitat, introduce unwanted diseases, or 

endanger people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, amendments contained in this Bill will allow the 

one-year hunting suspension for minor violations of wildlife 

laws to be replaced with fines. I want to make it clear that our 

stance on wildlife violators has not softened and the loss of 

hunting privilege will still be invoked for violations that impact 

on our wildlife resource. 

 

In the past, non-Indians have been restricted from hunting with 

Indian people to prevent non-Indians from abusing treaty 

Indians' special hunting privileges. This restriction meant, for 

instance, that a non-Indian father could not assist his Indian 

children who have a legal mandate to hunt and gather in this 

province. With this amendment, Indian and non-Indian family 

members may hunt together during the regular hunting season, 

provided the non-Indian is properly licensed and does not take 

animals for the Indian family members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill that I have introduced will provide 

conservation officers with the authority to 

inspect facilities and businesses that house wildlife or wildlife 

parts. These powers of inspection are consistent with the 

Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms and will ensure 

compliance with the laws governing wildlife. Our conservation 

officers will now be able to properly enforce the legislation in 

areas where there is a growing trade in animal parts. 

 

The Bill also addresses the rules under which people may 

possess wildlife and the powers to regulate the holding of 

captive wildlife in facilities such as zoos and mobile wildlife 

displays. I want to ensure that people have access to the 

province's wildlife resources, but also that wildlife is 

maintained in a humanitarian and lawful manner. 

 

The amendments contained in this Bill reflect the government's 

commitment to provide people access to the province's wild 

resources while conserving and protecting them. Mr. Speaker, I 

urge all members of the Assembly to support this Bill as I now 

move second reading of The Wildlife Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, after 

listening to the minister I can understand why the minister 

would want to pack the Act immediately, to protect wildlife in 

the province. But I would also like to make a comment 

regarding the Act, as I feel that there may be a few areas that 

are going to need some time and should be looked at. 

 

One of the things that I believe the minister had indicated, the 

fact that resource officers are going to be given added 

responsibility or powers to inspect game farms. I just hope that 

the government has taken the time to converse with the game 

farm producers across this province. I know that a lot of the 

game farmers are very willing and more than open to work 

together with Resource Management to develop regulations 

that would protect their industry, because they're very 

cognizant of the effect that diseases brought in by animals 

brought into the province, exotic animals, can have on their 

industry. 

 

In fact there are thousands of dollars tied up in the 

game-farming sector . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the 

minister is telling me that this one really doesn't affect the 

game farmers. And that's fine. That's one question we won't 

really worry about on this specific Bill then, and I appreciate 

that. 

 

The other thing, regarding hunting, and certainly that's a 

question that's been around, it's been a problem area for a 

number of years, especially when it comes to our indigenous 

peoples and their rights to hunt. And I think some of the 

indigenous communities that I've talked to certainly are in 

favour of regulations that they can abide with and controls on 

hunting so that indeed we protect the resource for future 

generations. And indeed the hunting community that we all 

represent out there want our . . . or have a very definite interest 

in protecting hunting and protecting wildlife into the future. 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1105 

Another area that I think needs to be looked at and addressed is 

how we address the problem of damage to crops. And that 

again, I believe, is not specifically addressed in this area and in 

this Bill; it's in another area. 

 

But I think it's a question that continually comes to the 

forefront that people are concerned, and it certainly isn't wrong 

to raise the question and ask the government and ask the 

departments what consultation process is taking place and what 

work is taking place at the present time to indeed compensate 

farmers for loss due to wildlife, as many farmers out there feel 

that wildlife are on their property and even in their crops. The 

hunting community of this province and indeed individuals 

who come to this province and the economic spin-off are a 

benefit of the property that they own and the crops that the 

wildlife indeed feed and salvage in. 

 

So I think at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, what we're 

looking for is indeed an Act that recognizes the responsibility 

of individual hunters, that affirms their responsibility; that 

gives conservation officers the ability to administer the rules 

without giving them undue powers that many people may see 

as being abusive powers. And I think through consultation this 

process can be reached. And I would assume that once we enter 

into further debate and committee, that we can indeed address a 

number of those questions. 

 

I therefore at this time move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 22 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 22 — An Act 

respecting the Manufacture, Sale, Use, Consumption, 

Collection, Storage, Recycling and Disposal of 

Ozone-depleting Substances and Products be now read a 

second time. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure 

for me to rise on this particular day and address Bill 22, an Act 

which deals with the ozone-depleting substances. It is a 

pleasure because today is Earth Day and this House is 

discussing a Bill which attempts to address one of the most 

serious abuses that we as human beings are inflicting on our 

home sphere — earth. 

 

As the minister noted, this Bill follows from the Montreal 

Protocol of 1987. That international agreement was signed by 

86 different countries around the world. It represents an 

important example of international cooperation to protect the 

earth and its environment, which we all must share and sustain 

if we are going to endure. 

Through that agreement, the use and manufacture of 

ozone-depleting substances like CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons) 

and halons will be eliminated by the end of 1995. And as we've 

heard so many times, these substances destroy our ozone layer 

— the only thing protecting us from harmful ultraviolet rays 

that cause not only health problems to humans and animals, but 

significant crop damage as well. All of these things bring with 

them untold economic hardship and a general reduction in our 

quality of life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill, although not without fault, is a step in 

the right direction. It is our commitment as a province to 

uphold our responsibility within the nation. It is our 

contribution to upholding our duties as responsible 

international citizens. And last of all, Mr. Speaker, this Bill 

represents our coming through, our fulfilling part of our 

responsibility to our children and future generations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while this Bill is a step in the right direction, 

many of the people involved in the handling and sale of 

ozone-depleting substances have already taken the real 

leadership roles in eliminating CFCs from our environment. 

People who have graduated from our schools — places like the 

Kelsey institute — in the last five years are experienced in the 

handling of non-CFC refrigerants such as ammonia. 

 

The fact that younger people are already trained to work in a 

world that does not have CFC refrigerants is a tribute to the 

foresight of these individuals, to their instructors, and the 

industry and firms which employ them. While government has 

a responsibility to provide leadership, it often finds itself 

humbled by the accomplishments of such people. 

 

I am delighted that Saskatchewan is fulfilling its 

responsibilities to curb the use of ozone-depleting substances 

but I still have some concerns, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Under this Bill, the government is proposing to ensure that all 

people handling, recycling, and disposing of ozone-depleting 

substances are certified. Most of those people are indeed 

certified and it is my knowledge that many people involved in 

the refrigeration industry have scurried to take their 

certification courses in anticipation of this Bill's very passage, 

in the last several months. 

 

It is good that many people are already certified before this Act 

ever comes into place. I am concerned, however, that other 

people graduating on courses from farm mechanics and 

refrigeration and automotive mechanics are not receiving this 

training as part of their course load. And I would like the 

minister to clarify later with his counterpart responsible for 

Education, Training and Employment whether this certification 

course will become an integral part of their training. 

 

The minister would probably agree that it makes much more 

sense for people to be trained automatically to receive this 

certification rather than having them go through the red tape in 

another course 



1106 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

to finally receive the rating they require. This is a small item, 

Mr. Speaker, but it would do much to ease confusion while 

allowing us to more readily achieve our aims of reducing use of 

ozone-depleting substances. 

 

I am also concerned that this Act may not do all it could to curb 

abuses. While I recognize the need to allow people the freedom 

to handle ozone-depleting substances for personal uses in 

health, handling of animals, and other uses, there isn't any 

significant point within this Bill to curb abuse at that personal 

level. An example of this may be a person who has a car with 

an air-conditioner that is leaking. Instead of repairing it, they 

simply continue to add more CFC-based refrigerant. Others 

who deal with refrigerants through some unregulated sideline 

work may also handle these kinds of materials in a less than 

acceptable manner. 

 

While I'm not suggesting that the potential for abuse at a 

personal level should be legislated in a Bill like this, there 

should be some means of encouraging the safe and proper use 

of these substances. I look forward to hearing from the minister 

and have him explain how the government intends to 

discourage this type of abuse, however minor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm also concerned with the economic impact that 

this Bill will have. By economic impact I am not talking about 

the cost of choosing alternatives to CFCs and Halons in 

industries like refrigeration, food services, and packaging. I'm 

talking about the economic opportunities that might arise from 

this, Mr. Speaker. And I know this change-over will cost a 

great deal of monies. I think the member from 

Souris-Cannington indicated in his address some days ago that 

this change will cost American business alone $36 billion. I 

imagine, Mr. Speaker, that this will cost Saskatchewan people 

a significant sum as well. 

 

This raises the question of what the members opposite are 

doing to capitalize on what can be seen as a significant 

opportunity. How does the Minister of the Environment . . . 

what has he done to encourage the development of additional 

business opportunities to create jobs through this conversion? 

What has the Minister of Economic Development done to help 

Saskatchewan firms gain a share of that $36 billion in 

economic opportunities? And what has the minister done to 

ensure that Saskatchewan firms can create badly-needed jobs 

and revenues from the change-over in this province and others? 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to getting some 

answers to these questions at a later point. This Bill is good in 

principle. It is good because it helps fulfil our duties and 

responsibilities, not only to ourselves and our children, but 

international and national community as well. It is a pleasure to 

see us making progress, especially on this particular day, Earth 

Day, but we must remember that we have a very long way to 

go. 

 

As a province we still need an improved environmental 

assessment process that is more 

impartial and examines all the ramifications of a project. We 

must realize that we have a long way to go to make many other 

government programs environmentally sustainable, especially 

as they relate to agriculture in our province. This is progress 

however, and while we all long for more progress we must 

remain thankful for what we've accomplished. I look forward, 

Mr. Speaker, to raising specific questions in Committee of the 

Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 26 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 26 — An Act 

to repeal The Saskatchewan Computer Utility Corporation 

Act be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 33 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 33 — An Act 

respecting Security interests in Personal Property and 

making Consequential and Related Amendments to Certain 

Other Acts be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1545) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley 

Authority Act 

 

The Chair: — Order. I would ask the Associate Minister of 

Health to please introduce the officials that are here with him 

and ask other members to, if they're not participating, perhaps 

keep their voices down. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm pleased 

to have with me today Mr. John Edwards, who is director of 

municipal policy and legislative services of the Department of 

Municipal Government. 

 

Clauses 1 to 5 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, by leave or 

agreement I would move that we would go to item no. 4, Bill 

No. 4, a local improvement Act, and then revert back to Bill 

No. 25, Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation, at the 

completion of Bill 4. 

 

Leave granted. 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1107 

Bill No. 4 — An Act respecting Local Improvements in 

Urban and Northern Municipalities and to Effect Certain 

Consequential Changes 

 

The Chair: — I would ask the Minister of Municipal 

Government to please introduce her officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Behind 

me and to my right is Marilyn Turanich from the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board. And to my right is John Edwards, director of 

municipal policy and legislative services. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wonder if 

the minister wouldn't mind explaining the purposes of this Bill 

and why it's been brought forward. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Very briefly, it's to streamline the 

process for allowing local improvements to go forward. It also 

provides flexibility in the financing, and also it provides more 

rights for the property owners. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Who did 

you consult with in preparing this Bill? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Consultations were held with the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, the Urban 

Municipal Administrators' Association, the Canadian Bar, 

Association of Consulting Engineers, Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation, all the city commissioners and clerks, 

Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency, the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board, Saskatchewan Justice, 

railways, and Saskatchewan Rural Development, now part of 

our department. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I wonder 

if you'd mind providing us with the dates and the people that 

you met with on those consultations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — We don't have the specific dates. Many 

of these amendments go back two or three years, and they 

came forward as resolutions out of the various municipal 

associations. And we have obviously provided copies of the 

Bill as we developed it to the municipal associations. But as far 

as the meetings, they've gone on over the past three or four 

years. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

you referred in your initial comments to the rights of the 

property owners. I'd like to know what rights have been 

extended or improved for property owners through this Act. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — The procedural changes in the proposed 

new Act include requiring delivery and mailing notices to all 

affected owners as well as publication and notices; formally 

providing for owners to petition for a local improvement; 

clarifying the application process to the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board and what the report on local improvement is 

to cover; setting out criteria for the Saskatchewan Municipal 

Board's approval of an undertaking as a local improvement, 

which is not now in the Act; strengthening the period for 

petitioning against a local improvement from 14 to 21 days; 

requiring the notice to advise when a council will consider a 

proposed local improvement; setting out the content of the 

notice rather than the actual notice form itself; and making the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board hearing mandatory for a local 

improvement initiated without the right for the owners to 

petition against it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Madam Minister, I wonder if other people 

are feeling a little misled, as I am here. You said that this Bill 

was generally intended to extend the rights of property owners, 

and yet one of the things that you include that I picked up on is 

the fact that petitions against improvements can now be 

allowed for 21 days instead of 14. Isn't that a bit of a 

contradiction of what you've said? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Not at all. What is says is an owner, 

instead of having 14 days to initiate a petition, now has that 

lengthened to 21 days if they want to petition out a local 

improvement. It gives them more time to look and consider if 

they want to petition it out. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — On page 10, section 12, the borderline 

comment is that the "Saskatchewan Municipal Board may 

override council." Would you explain that a little further. 

 

It says the "Saskatchewan Municipal Board may override 

council." Would you explain that further. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, what that section intends 

to say is where a council has overridden the local property 

owner's right to petition it out, the Municipal Board now has 

the right to overturn that decision by the municipal council. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — I'm really not sure that I understand that, but 

I think we're going to let that go. As we go through section by 

section later, maybe we can sort our minds out a little more 

quickly on it. 

 

Where the water and sewer works are involved, it says here: 

 

 (b) is eligible to be undertaken as a local improvement under 

this Act; 

 

 the work may be carried out as a local improvement pursuant 

to sections 11 and 12. 

 

Could you explain that a bit further? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, what it says is where a 

water or sewer work is required and the local property owners 

have determined . . . where council has overridden the right, 

then section 12 will apply, and the Municipal Board can ask 

that the work be undertaken, that the Municipal Board can 

overrule the council's decision if the work has been required as 



1108 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

a local improvement. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Who would make application for that 

overruling? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, the process is as follows. 

If the council decides to proceed with an improvement without 

the right of petition, then the local property owners can petition 

to the Saskatchewan Municipal Board, and the Municipal 

Board must hold a hearing. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Would there be any costs involved for those 

individuals that ask for that process, and who would pay those 

costs? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — There are no costs to the property owner. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — This board appeal process then operates 

under the jurisdiction of the provincial government and is paid 

for by the provincial government in full. Is that the case? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes, that's the mandate and the way the 

Municipal Board operates. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I note that in 

your preliminary discussion you indicated that now that Rural 

Development has become part of your jurisdiction with the 

amalgamation of the two departments, my question then leads 

to, in what way will this Act be applicable to rural 

municipalities? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — The Rural Municipal Act permits the 

rural councils to use local improvements if they want, but it's 

not mandatory. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — In other words, they have the option of 

whether or not they use the material in this Act, and that option 

is their discretion, 100 per cent? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes it is. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I think we'll 

allow you to go on through this section by section now. 

 

The Chair: — Can the members agree that we proceed 

through this section by section as opposed to clause by clause? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — It's agreed. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 71 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to thank 

the minister and especially her officials for 

being so cooperative. I'm sure that if there are questions 

arising, that the people in the country and in the towns will 

want to feel free to be able to contact you to clarify anything 

that's brought up in this rather lengthy document. 

 

I think it's probably necessary to have changes because times 

changes the things that we need and do. But there will be 

problems with understanding and comprehension, I'm sure, of 

some of these changes and we hope that you will be 

cooperative in that regard. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the members 

opposite for their cooperation in passing this Bill. The member 

opposite is right, that it is a comprehensive Bill and requires 

some dialogue and information and we're developing a manual 

to go out to all the municipalities so they will better understand 

it. 

 

And I would like to thank the officials from the department and 

the Saskatchewan Municipal Board for being here this 

afternoon. 

 

Bill No. 25 — An Act to repeal The Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation Act 

 

The Chair: — Will the minister please introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The officials 

with me today are Scott Banda, sitting beside me, and Yvan 

Boutin, just immediately behind Scott. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To start off 

with, I would like to welcome Mr. Yvan Boutin here today, 

who was a resident in my constituency for a good many years, 

lived just a few miles west of me. 

 

I'd like to ask the minister: what's the purpose of this Bill? Why 

was it brought forward? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I'll maybe give a little 

lengthy answer. I'll try and answer maybe a whole lot of things 

at once here for the member, sort of anticipating some of the 

questions he may ask. 

 

But we're doing this basically for administrative efficiency. The 

CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) staff 

currently does all the work that SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation) did before. We have no staff that is 

specifically assigned to the Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation. 

 

By repealing this Bill, we are eliminating duplicate annual 

reports. The report will be issued with the CIC report, so we're 

saving some money there by not having a second report 

especially for SMDC. We do not have to have special audits 

done for the SMDC because they will now be included in the 

CIC investments. 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1109 

And finally, the reason we're doing this is the Crown 

Investments Corporation is the agency of government that 

handles all the government investments, and basically what we 

have here is just a shareholding in the Cameco, which is strictly 

a government investment in one corporation. And that's sort of 

probably the overriding reason why we're doing this, that we 

hold the investments for all the government investments, and 

this is . . . that's all this is at this point. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Since there 

will no longer be an annual report for SMDC, will we still be 

able to ask questions in Crown Corporations dealing with this 

corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Yes. You'll have to ask the questions 

regarding these investments under the Crown Investments 

Corporation's period, not specifically with the SMDC. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe 

SMDC was the holder of the Cameco shares that were still 

retained by the government. Is that the case? And if so, what 

will happen with those shares? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — The answer to your first question is yes, 

SMDC held those shares. Those shares will now be held by 

Crown Investments Corporation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, what's the status of those 

shares currently? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, currently CIC . . . or 

SMDC, I'll refer to that until we repeal the Bill. SMDC holds 

roughly 33 per cent of the Cameco shares, and then there's an 

additional 6 per cent which are special warrants which have not 

been exercised to date. So we hold that 6 per cent as well. But 

those special warrants may be exercised by the holders of those 

special warrants in the near future. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — What would be the value of that 

investment, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, using the latest stock 

market value of those shares, they'd be somewhat in excess of 

$300 million. We don't have the exact figure but it's 

somewhere in excess of 300 million. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Is that an increase or a decrease in value 

from the same time last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — I think to put this in perspective to 

answer the question, I need to go back to 1991. If you take the 

1991 numbers and then compare them to 1992, the share values 

from '91 to '92 went down. The share values from '92 up to the 

present, we're using December numbers for each year, but the 

share values have been going up. And today the share values 

are higher than they were in December of 1992. And they are 

going up on a fairly regular basis. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Therefore the value of our investment 

within the old corporation of SMDC is becoming greater and of 

more value to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Does SMDC receive a dividend for those shares? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Yes, the dividend comes from Cameco, 

the Cameco Corporation, and it went to SMDC. When this Act 

is repealed, those dividends will simply flow into CIC, Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — What happened with the dividend that 

was paid last year? What was the amount of it, and what 

happened to it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — The dividends last year were around $10 

million, and those dividends went into CIC. They were paid 

back to Crown Investments Corporation; and Crown 

Investments Corporation's fund is used to pay down the debt of 

Crown Investments Corporation and also for the operations of 

the corporation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What effect 

would the liquidation of those shares have on the economy of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, the effect on the 

economy of Saskatchewan is not really measurable; it may not 

have any effect on the economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

If you're asking what effect would it have on CIC's balance 

sheet, then the balance sheet of CIC would be up by whatever 

amount we sold them for, and this money would then be used 

to pay down some other debts that CIC has. So the effect would 

be not on the province per se, but more so on the balance sheet 

of Crown Investments Corporation. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, if those shares were sold 

for the $300-plus million that you have valued them at, surely 

CIC would transfer that value over to the province as a 

dividend. And that, Mr. Minister, would pay off the deficit . . . 

not the deficit, the deficit for this year, yes — not the debt — 

the deficit for this year. So I think it would have a significant 

impact on the economy of this province because then there 

would not be the need for the continual increase in rates of the 

other CIC companies such as SaskPower and SaskTel, SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance), and all of those that 

are part of the CIC grouping that pay their dividends to CIC, 

which in turn hopefully is transferred to the provincial 

Consolidated Fund. 

 

And I think that is one of the areas, Mr. Minister, that you 

should be investigating with those Cameco shares is to help 

decrease the deficit in this province by the liquidation of those 

debts. I believe that would have an important impact on this 

economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — While I appreciate the suggestions from 

the member from Souris-Cannington, however, the sale of the 

Cameco 



1110 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

shares would not flow directly into the Consolidated Fund or 

the general fund of the government. Those shares, or that 

money, would flow into the Crown Investments Corporation. 

 

And I think it has to be understood that the Crown Investments 

Corporation carries a substantial debt of various projects and 

the total debt of the Crowns all put together is somewhere in 

the neighbourhood of $5 billion. So that even a 300 million or 

300-and-some-plus million cash injection into Crown 

Investments Corporation would go to liquidate some of that 

debt and would reduce the interest payments that we have to 

make. And obviously it would have an impact — a long-term 

impact — but I'm saying it wouldn't have an immediate 

short-term impact on the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I believe it was 

Allan Blakeney who stated that the debts within the Crown 

corporations such as SaskPower, SaskTel, are self-liquidating 

debt, that those corporations generate their own income to pay 

off that debt. 

 

If the shares of Cameco were sold, transferred to CIC — and I 

realize that it has to move through the CIC process — but CIC 

should be transferring dividends from their accounts to the 

province's Consolidated Fund. If they were to come into 

possession of $300-plus million from the sale of Cameco 

shares, surely they would transfer that money on to the 

Consolidated Fund rather than paying off some debt within 

another Crown corporation . . . that's cross-subsidizing of the 

different corporations. 

 

Is that what's happening within CIC? Is CIC taking the profits 

from SaskPower and paying off STC (Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company)? That's not what it should be doing, 

Mr. Minister. It should be transferring that funds to the 

Consolidated Fund. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — I think in answer to that question, Mr. 

Chairman, let me just go through this process this way. If we 

sold the Cameco shares, there would be . . . pick whatever 

number you want, $300 million just for the sake of a number, 

and the amount that we would gain over what the shares cost us 

originally to what we sold them, that would be considered as a 

dividend to CIC. And that could flow directly into the 

Consolidated Fund. That would be the gain on the sale. But we 

have to keep in mind that we have . . . this is an asset that has 

cost us some money and that asset has to be paid. 

 

Now you were mentioning that we should not be using money 

from the sale of Cameco, if that were to happen, to pay down 

the debt of SaskPower and SaskTel. Those are not the ones I 

was referring to. The ones that we would have to be paying 

down, where we could save interest costs, would be loans that 

we have for NewGrade, for Saskferco, for Crown Life, for 

Bi-Provincial, for Millar Western. There's a whole host of them 

where we had to borrow money in order to get . . . the 

government borrowed money to get into these projects. And if 

we were to sell Cameco shares, we could use that money to pay 

down that debt and 

consequently end up saving some interest. 

 

But it's not the total amount that would be used as dividends; 

it's only the gain on the sale. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, you could also save 

interest payments by paying off some of the deficit. 

 

I'm just wondering: how much debt is currently being carried 

by SMDC — SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation), I'm sorry — or SMDC? 

 

The Chair: — Why is the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview-Haultain on his feet? 

 

Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Chairman, I beg leave to introduce a 

guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and 

members. It gives me great pleasure, Mr. Chairman, to 

introduce to and through you to members of the Assembly, my 

son Darren . . . our son Darren, who's just finished university 

for the year. And he's an officer in the navy and we're very 

proud of him for that. He was down to Moose Jaw air base 

doing some business today and has just popped over to have 

dinner with me before he heads back to Saskatoon. 

 

So I would invite all members to join with me in welcoming 

Darren here and see you in a few minutes. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 25 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to the question 

from the member from Souris-Cannington, SMDC currently 

has an investment in Cameco valued at $351 million. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No, CIC has. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — I'm sorry. CIC has an investment in 

Cameco valued at $351 million. So the sale of those shares 

would simply be put up against this investment, and if the sale 

of the shares was beyond that then that would be a gain on the 

investment and that would go into the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would just 

like to thank the minister and his officials for coming in today, 

and for answering our questions. 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1111 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the 

members of the opposition for asking the questions and I trust 

that the answers were satisfactory and cleared up any problems 

they had. I'd also like to thank the officials for assisting me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I would ask that we 

go to item no. 7, then back to 5, and then 6, and that we follow 

that order. 

 

The Chair: — Is that agreed with the members? That's agreed. 

Proceed in that fashion. 

 

Bill No. 9 — An Act to Amend The Emergency Planning 

Act 

 

The Chair: — Would the Minister of Municipal Government 

please introduce her officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right 

is John Edwards, director of municipal policy and legislative 

services. Wayne Marr behind me is director of the EMO 

(Emergency Measures Organization). Jo-Anne Harrison, senior 

policy analyst, is on the far right; and Jill Carson, administrator 

of the provincial disaster assistance program. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 

Minister, I'd like to ask you: what's the purpose for this Bill? 

And particularly I'd like you to address the question of the 

name change. Why? When you change the names, it's just a 

matter of going through a whole bunch of paper shuffling and 

you throw out scads of paper and you bring in new paper with a 

different name on it. What's the purpose of it? Why change the 

name? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — It's a matter of organization. It had at one 

time been under . . . as a separate agency, separate. And then it 

was put into the Department of Environment. And now it has 

been rolled into our department, Municipal Government. So we 

had to make changes on the organizational structure and 

rename it under the Department of Municipal Government. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, surely even if 

the organization was moved from department to department 

within the government structure, surely the name Emergency 

Measures Organization could have remained in place rather 

than changing the name to Emergency Planning. 

 

Everybody understood and knew what EMO was and did. You 

had all your letterhead made up with EMO. I don't know what 

it cost you in your department to have letterhead for this 

organization, but it's going to cost you a significant amount of 

money that could have been saved for the people of 

Saskatchewan by leaving the name remain as Emergency 

Measures Organization, EMO. Why did you have to change it? 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, what we have here is a 

more distinct definition of what the organization actually does. 

It's the provincial planning, and that is what is done at the 

provincial level for emergencies. And at the local level it's to 

assist those people who are in the organization at trying to cope 

with disasters as they might occur at the municipal level. But 

what we do at provincial level is in the area of assisting and 

planning. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I don't believe 

the function of the organization has really changed that much, 

but that you've changed the name of it. How much money will 

it cost to change all the letterhead, all the business cards, 

everything from EMO to whatever you will change it to now? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — There are no incremental costs. There 

are a number of housekeeping amendments to this Act and it 

does nothing as far as adding costs in any way to our 

operations. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, do you have 

letterhead with the name Emergency Measures Organization on 

it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — No, we don't. Our letterhead is either . . . 

was Community Services; now it's Municipal Government. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — So the Emergency Measures 

Organization had no letterhead whatsoever with its own name; 

there was no business cards with that name on it, there was 

nothing within government that used the name Emergency 

Measures Organization? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — The Emergency Measures Organization 

is a local organization under the municipal government. They 

still continue to use that. Under the provincial government, 

Emergency Planning falls under our department, and the 

letterhead and all the operations comes under Municipal 

Government. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, the costs 

my colleague was referring to, I think he didn't realize aren't at 

the provincial level but are at the municipal level, at both 

levels, rural and urban. How much money is it going to cost 

those governments to make these changes in all of the 

letterheads and changes that are necessary, with stamps and 

signatures and whatnot? 

 

Now I have seen letters, Madam Minister, I have seen letters 

with "Emergency Measures Organization" on them sent to me 

by the local organization in my home town of Gull Lake. Now 

don't tell me that there's no place in this world that nobody uses 

the word "EMO" or the term "Emergency Measures 

Organization". And don't tell me that it's not going to cost any 

money to make these changes even if it's in the terms of 

confusion in the general public, not knowing who the heck is 

talking about what any more. 



1112 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — What we want to do is differentiate 

between the local organization . . . The local organization under 

municipal government is called the EMO. That's under 

municipal government. It's still there, nothing has changed. But 

what we have done is redefine what we actually do, and it's 

called Emergency Planning. And that falls under our 

government department. 

 

There are no changes in costs. There are no changes at the local 

level. The EMO continues to exist, as it has before. It is under 

the auspices of the local municipal government. 

 

There will be no cost increases. And at that level all it does is 

make sure that people understand the local level is Emergency 

Measures Organization; at the provincial level, it's called 

Emergency Planning because that's what we do in our 

department. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 

to thank the minister and her officials for coming in today and 

answering our questions and thank them for their cooperation. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the 

member of the opposition for those questions and for their 

cooperation, and I would like to thank the members from our 

department for their help today. 

 

Bill No. 5 — An Act to amend The Planning and 

Development Act, 1983 

 

The Chair: — Would the minister please introduce her 

officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to introduce 

Margaret Miller. She's the chief building official on building 

standards in the Department of Municipal Government. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

and officials, I will try to ask a general question so that you can 

give to us your summation of the types of questions we'll be 

asking, and perhaps we can facilitate the shortening of time that 

way. 

 

My question in general is, who will the Act affect and how will 

this Act affect them? — those kind of general questions. Now 

that departments have been amalgamated and rural 

municipalities are under the same ministry, will they be 

affected equally or differently, and how will all these things 

work? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, would the member 

opposite ask that question again? We aren't quite sure the 

nature of the question. 

Mr. Goohsen: — Who will the Act affect and how will it 

affect them? Are rural municipalities also affected by this Act 

now that you are consolidating the two rural and urban 

municipal organizations under one ministry? Will they be 

affected equally or is this just for the planning and 

development within? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, which Bill are we on? I 

thought we had moved to the building accessibility Act. I 

thought we had switched the . . . oh, I'm sorry. I was under the 

impression we were moving to item 6, Bill No. 8. 

 

Mr. Chairman, can I get my other officials in? We were 

working on the other Bill. 

 

The Chair: — Would the minister then introduce her officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes. I'm very sorry about the mix-up, 

Mr. Chairman. We have John Wolfenberg — he's assistant 

director of planning for the Department of Municipal 

Government. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

welcome to your official. And I would like to ask you a general 

question, Madam Minister, with regards to this Act, so that we 

can facilitate the shortening of the time that it might take to ask 

individual questions. I'm sure that you have some perception of 

the types of things that people will want to know. 

 

So I'd like you to, in a general way, outline to us those things 

that you think people need to know; and more specifically, who 

will this Bill affect and how will they be affected by it; and will 

urban and rural municipalities be affected equally under this 

Act now that the two are amalgamated under one ministry? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes. I thank the member opposite for the 

question. The proposed amendment deals with the following 

issues. Development levies to give municipalities authority to 

levy development charges for cost recovery on infrastructure 

expansion. There are minor variances to provide municipalities 

with minor variance authority in zoning by-laws. They are 

providing flexibility and administration. 

 

There are some administration fees . . . will provide more 

authority for municipalities on establishing fees for 

administration of zoning by-laws and subdivisions. There are 

architectural control amendments here that municipalities will 

be able to use zoning to control the architectural details of 

buildings. 

 

And under the amendment for the development of appeals 

board notice . . . to permit the board to use ordinary mail for 

serving public notice instead of registered or personal service. 

And under the amendment for a demolition of control districts, 

this will enable municipalities to control demolition of 

residential property as a means of maintaining housing. 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1113 

And under the amendment for development caveats, this is to 

clarify and standardize caveats used during the subdivision of 

hazard land. The registration of a caveat on the property's title 

can now be challenged in the court. This will apply equally to 

people who are rural or urban. And I'm not sure — was there 

another part of that question I may have missed? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — You covered most of it, Madam Minister. 

But just to follow up on that, who did you consult with, and did 

they agree with the process? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes, thank you. There was lengthy 

consultation. The amendments that I read off were specifically 

requested by the city of Regina, the city of Weyburn, the city 

of Saskatoon, and the provincial planning directors, and SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) through their 

resolutions in the last three, four years. 

 

Also in April of this year, we had consultations with SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) regarding 

this, as well as SUMA. We had meetings in April of last year 

with the Saskatchewan Construction Association and the 

Saskatchewan Home Builders' Association as well as the 

municipal planning directors. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister. 

I appreciate your candour in this Bill. I want to simply say that 

I hope that you will commit yourself to explaining the contents 

of the Bill to the people that are involved and to provide them 

with whatever information and materials that they will need to 

be able to facilitate the following of the rules that are set out. 

And I'm sure that you will do that and I'm sure your officials 

will. 

 

And while I'm on my feet, I'll thank you and I'll thank your 

official for attending today. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — I would like to, while I'm on my feet, 

thank the members opposite and assure them that we have 

seminars that we'll be holding around the province for 

municipal administrators and elected officials to explain the 

changes in this Act. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 8 — An Act to amend The Uniform Building and 

Accessibility Standards Act and to make Related 

Amendments to Certain Other Acts 

 

Clause 1 

 

The Chair: — Would the minister please introduce her 

officials? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have to my 

right Margaret Miller; she's the chief building official of 

building standards of the Department of 

Municipal Government. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

the way that we handled the last Bill worked so well after we 

got everything straightened out as to who was answering what 

questions and what Bill we were on, that I'm going to try to 

approach this Bill in the same way so that we can facilitate our 

time in a better way. 

 

So my question to begin with will be a general question 

allowing you to outline to the people and this Assembly who 

this Bill affects, how it affects them, and in what ways these 

changes are going to change the world that it's intended to 

change; what will people expect to have happen as a result of 

this Bill; who did you consult with; did they agree to the 

consultations; and all of those kind of general approaches to 

begin with. 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, I think there are about 

four questions in that. Who it affects? There's no visible effect 

to the public by this Bill. What it does though is affects mainly 

urban municipalities, and the changes will clarify the process 

for submission of a by-law for approval. 

 

The changes also now change building . . . ask building 

officials, or may be licensed. And it clarifies the process to the 

appeals board. It streamlines the whole process. Mainly these 

are housekeeping amendments to allow the function of the 

building inspector to do his work more effectively and more 

efficiently. 

 

And the people that we consulted with, there's a long list of 

them. It's a whole page of it. I can send it over to you or I can 

read them out. We maybe could just table this, Mr. Chairman, 

and they can take a look at the list. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Just send it over, Madam Minister. That'll be 

just fine. 

 

There is one thing that I want to make a point of here. As you 

say, it's a very length Bill of explanation. I think the 

explanations alone are 24 pages on this thing, although an 

awful lot of it is somewhat repetitious because it deals with the 

urban municipal Act and then it also deals with The Northern 

Municipalities Act and there's a couple of pages of explanation 

on each one. 

 

So while it is quite long, I'm sure that as I've read through this, 

that you are correct in saying that for the most part it is 

housekeeping. However, some of it may make us as politicians, 

I feel, look a little silly because it goes here on 3(d), on the first 

page of the explanatory notes it refers to the fact that we're 

going to change the title of chief inspector, from an inspector to 

a chief inspector, if I read that right and I'm remembering right. 

I read this a while back. 

 

To do those kind of changes it seems to me that we live in a 

world where suddenly someone thinks they need 



1114 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

an increase in pay so they have to have a more glorious or 

prestigious title. And so we change people's titles in order to 

facilitate making them either feel good about themselves or to 

justify giving them a bigger pay cheque, and in reality we 

haven't changed their role or their job one little bit. And it's 

been done for years and years. 

 

So some of it seems, you know, to me that we're being very 

artificial in the way that we approach life. The job hasn't 

changed, yet we're changing the title. 

 

And what happens is that everybody down the road has to start 

thinking about let's call this guy something else, and every time 

he's introduced somewhere he has to say no, I'm not the 

inspector any more; I'm the chief inspector. And it goes without 

saying that we've done changes like this with a lot of things 

through the years. 

 

I'll use the Department of Natural Resources as an example. 

Many years ago the Department of Natural Resources had its 

name changed and DNR (Department of Natural Resources) as 

an abbreviation no longer applied. To this very day my 

neighbours and friends refer to the conservation officer and the 

people involved with that process as the DNR. And so by 

changing the names, you really just confuse the public. They 

stick with it anyway. 

 

So I don't think this is quite as important a thing because I don't 

think most of us are ever going to meet the chief inspector 

anyhow. But the reality is that it's confusing and it seems like 

such an awful waste of paper and time to be doing these kind of 

things. And I hope we won't get into the habit of, you know, 

spending our time in this Assembly making those kind of 

legislative changes. 

 

Now I simply want to go through this page by page, Madam 

Minister, as we wind this down. And I will thank you and your 

assistants right now while I'm on my feet, and we'll go through 

it page by page. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, we wouldn't change the 

Act just to change the name. I respect what the member 

opposite said, that it wouldn't be appropriate just to go through 

all the expense and all the work to change an Act to change a 

minor name. But there are many important amendments in this 

Act that do relate to the functioning of the municipality and the 

safety of buildings, and they are of extreme importance. 

 

Simply put though, I will clarify for you why we chose to 

change the name from inspector to building official. An 

inspector can be hired by many other people, banks or 

commercial people. Building official specifically means that 

this is an official who is under the operation and control of the 

municipal government. So what it does, it differentiates 

between those officials who may work for other agencies and 

those that work for the municipal government. And that is why 

we chose to have a name change at this point in time. 

I don't know if there are other questions or not. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One 

question for the minister. Throughout the whole Bill there's a 

number of fees being charged, and deposits. Will those fees 

and deposits be refundable? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, the deposit to the appeal 

board is refundable. The deposit that is required . . . can be 

required by the municipal government is, if that deposit is to be 

refundable, it's something left to the option of the municipal 

government to decide. They may and they may not, but the one 

that is applied to the appeal board is refundable. 

 

The Chair: — This is a Bill with 31 clauses over 14 pages. 

Are the members agreed we proceed page by page? Is that 

agreed? Agreed. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Pages 1 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley 

Authority Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 4 — An Act respecting Local Improvements in 

Urban and Northern Municipalities and to Effect Certain 

Consequential Changes 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 25 — An Act to repeal The Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Emergency Planning 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 9 

now be read a third time and passed 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1115 

under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 5 — An Act to amend The Planning and 

Development Act, 1983 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 5 

now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 8 — An Act to amend The Uniform Building and 

Accessibility Standards Act and to make Related 

Amendments to Certain Other Acts 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 8 

now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


