




















































Hansard: June 14, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2461 

 June 14, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

The Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have 

been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7), they are hereby read 

and received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province praying that the Assembly may be 

pleased to defeat any legislation introduced to redefine the 

NewGrade Energy Incorporated corporate governance and 

financing arrangements. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce 

to you and through you to the rest of the members of the 

Assembly somebody that's very important in my life.  Sitting in 

your west gallery is my son-in-law, Duane Haave, here from 

Ottawa to do some business.  And I was able to have lunch 

with him, and I hope that he is successful in all his 

deliberations.  And I want you to welcome Duane to Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, seven grades 3, 4, and 5 students from Viceroy 

School visiting our Chamber today.  They're sitting in your 

gallery.  And I look forward to meeting with them after 

question period for photos and a drink, and I'm sure some good 

questions. 

 

I'd like all members to join . . . Sorry, yes.  And I want to 

mention also the teachers that accompany.  There's Donna 

Morris, and chaperon, Lori Klein that are here today with the 

students. 

 

I'd like all members to join with me in a warm welcome for 

their visit here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Compensation for Hemophiliacs 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, a question 

to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, on Friday the Minister of Health 

stood in this House and told us that your government has no 

money to compensate the 24 Saskatchewan hemophiliacs who, 

through no fault of their own, have contracted the HIV (human 

immunodeficiency virus) virus. 

 

Mr. Premier, what your government is basically saying, you 

have no money for 24 innocent people who have, because of 

somebody else's mistake, contracted a fatal disease.  Now today 

we see the types of things that you actually do have money for. 

Mr. Premier, it seems to me that you do have a lot of money to 

give to your ministerial assistants, people who are working for 

you.  And it's not just . . . it didn't just happen today, it's 

happened over the past little while.  We've already seen 24 of 

your political assistants get raises of 20 to 30 and 40 per cent 

this spring. 

 

Now in OCs (order in council) raise this morning, Mr. Premier, 

we see that you've ponied up raises for nine more of your 

political aides.  Mr. Premier, when will you explain, or how 

can you explain, why your political assistants deserve this kind 

of compensation while 24 HIV affected hemophiliacs deserve 

none? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To 

answer the member's question . . . and I'm really not sure how 

many questions were in there, there seemed to be a number of 

them.  But let me suggest that if it weren't for the 

administration of the former government, the 10 years of waste 

and of throwing money around, that we wouldn't be in a 

position where we're spending $840 million on interest, and 

we'd be able to afford programs that we would like to have put 

for the people of this province. 

 

I want to say with respect to the hiring of ministerial assistants, 

the member should look at the record of the past 

administration.  He should look at the fact that we have cut 

back dramatically in the number of ministerial assistants.  We 

have put in a tiered and a structured stage, a process by which 

to pay these ministerial assistants, and I want to say we have 

saved a lot of money.  And the people of Saskatchewan have 

benefited by shedding themselves of the administration that 

spent like drunken sailors. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, again to the Premier.  And as we 

saw on Friday and we continue to see today, Mr. Speaker, is 

the fact that it doesn't matter which minister or which 

government member, government members will stand in here 

and will show that they don't have any compassion, any 

understanding of the individuals out there with the real need. 

 

Mr. Premier, when Paul Faris asked you to raise his salary from 

41 to $50,000, it seems there was no problem finding the 

money; or for Gilda Treleaven going from 39 to 50, no 

problem in finding the money; or Allan Barss going from 31 to 

$41,000 a year, again no problem in finding the additional 

money. 

 

But when 24 Saskatchewan people who contracted a terminal, 

fatal disease through no fault of their own . . . no money, no 

help. 

 

Mr. Premier, all they're asking for is $30,000 a year just to help 

them with their medical problems.  And yet you turn your back 

on them.  Where are your priorities and where is your 

compassion?  How do you justify 



2462 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

giving out raises of over $10,000 a year to individuals when 

you have no money for these 24 people who really do need 

your help?  How do you justify that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to answer this 

question because the member opposite is spreading 

misinformation with respect to the whole issue surrounding 

hemophiliacs, as usual, as they are known to do. 

 

The member opposite knows full well that what I said in this 

Legislative Assembly is that the issue was under re-evaluation, 

that there would be a deputies' meeting later on this month, and 

that we were waiting to hear the results of that meeting.  He 

knows that because that was said in this House and it was said 

to the press.  So he is spreading false information today. 

 

I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that it's his government 

that originally agreed not to compensate hemophiliacs when 

they were in government.  I want to point that out.  I also want 

to point out that it's his counterparts in Ottawa that failed to 

compensate hemophiliacs adequately under their responsibility 

and legal liability to monitor the blood supply. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Premier, and to the minister.  It's interesting 

to listen to the Minister of Health and it's interesting to listen to 

any government member for that matter seeing as the Premier 

is not willing to get out from underneath his desk to talk to the 

people of Saskatchewan.  And they all hide behind the same 

argument, the argument that it's always somebody else's fault. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, prior to the last election they were 

telling us that they would streamline government, they wouldn't 

bring a lot of ministerial assistants, they wouldn't increase the 

salaries.  And yet what do we see today?  What do we hear 

today?  We hear last week the minister telling us no, we can't 

help the hemophiliacs.  And yet they turn around and increase 

substantially the salaries of ministerial assistants.  And I 

believe this is absolutely obscene. 

 

Mr. Premier, you promised to freeze the salaries of political 

assistants.  Will you make good on that promise today?  Will 

you roll back the salaries of those ministerial assistants and 

indeed reach out and help those individuals who have 

contracted the HIV virus due to no fault of their own?  Will 

you do that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The 

member is jumping from issue to issue.  It's hard to determine 

who he's addressing the question to. 

 

But I want to say in response to the question from the member, 

if he would take a look at what's happened 

since we took over government, the cost of MAs (ministerial 

assistant) in the offices is down an average of $50,000 per 

office, per minister's office.  We have 134 MAs as opposed to 

the 153 MAs that your administration had.  And I want to say 

to the member opposite, we have decreased the cost of 

ministerial assistants in this government as opposed to raising 

it.  What you see here is another example of misinformation 

and innuendo by the members opposite, not based on any fact 

at all. 

 

I want to say, if he would look at what his federal counterparts 

are doing and look at what he did, have a look at the 

appointment of David Tkachuk to the Senate, one who had his 

snout in the public trough for 10 years under the leadership of 

the member from Estevan and now has it under the Prime 

Minister of this country, and if he would look inside his heart 

and try and determine if that isn't in fact the wrong way to go. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Member, we have changed the way 

government operates.  You may not like the way we're doing it, 

but we're saving the taxpayers of this province money, and 

we're going to continue and we don't need any advice from 

you, thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting, as the 

government jumps from one minister to the other -- and I can 

understand their frustration as they don't seem to know which 

NDP (New Democratic Party) tax money sweepstakes they're 

on at any different time -- whether it's the Minister of Health or 

the minister of gaming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe Margaret Giannetta won herself an 

$8,000 raise; Debbie Young, another $8,000 raise; but lo and 

behold, Allan Barss the overall winner with a raise of over 

$10,000.  Mr. Premier must be feeling a little bit like Ed 

McMahon these days with the power to give away almost 

$30,000 at the stroke of a pen.  Thirty thousand dollars is what 

hemophiliacs are just asking for, a little bit of compassion to be 

shown by your government.  So these three raises alone would 

be enough to compensate even one of these individuals. 

 

Mr. Premier, could you please tell me, when an HIV-infected 

hemophiliac phones the minister's office to ask for help, which 

one of these three people gets on the phone and tells them that 

they have no money -- which one? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, in response to the 

member's question, I want to indicate to him just how it works.  

We have three levels of ministerial assistants.  And it would 

stand to reason that if someone enters a job at a third level and 

becomes more and more competent, that there may in fact be 

promotions.  And I think you will know and you do understand 

that that's what's happened with respect to the boys that you 

speak of. 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2463 

But I want to say to the member opposite:  Mr. Speaker, any 

levels of increase that may have happened because of 

promotions, pale to the $2 million that your cousins in Ottawa 

gave to David Tkachuk who has had his snout in the public 

trough in Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I want to remind the 

member that is certainly not a parliamentary word to use in this 

House and I ask him to avoid it.  Order. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Premier, when are you going to screw up 

your courage and let the people know exactly where your 

compassion lies?  How can you stand in your place and say . . . 

or maybe just remain under your desk and say that you have no 

money for hemophiliacs when you routinely give out raises of 

8, 10, and $12,000 a year to your political hacks? 

 

All these people are asking for is $30,000 a year for something 

that they had no control over.  If they worked in your office, 

Mr. Premier, in fact they'd receive more than $30,000 a year.  

Mr. Premier, the compensation these people are asking for 

comes to about three-quarters of a million dollars a year -- less 

than the increase you gave the Deputy Premier to do 

advertising and polling.  So don't say you don't have any 

money.  Where are your choices?  What are your choices?  You 

have the money; you don't have the compassion. 

 

Mr. Premier, if you find the compassion, you can find the 

money.  Mr. Premier, will you commit to us today that you will 

eliminate government waste and mismanagement, show some 

compassion, and assist these in our society who have a real 

need such as hemophiliacs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, let me begin by 

saying that the people of Saskatchewan began to eliminate the 

waste and mismanagement on October of 1991 when we 

defeated the Devine administration. 

 

I want to say to the member that he should put his mind to the 

magnitude of the problem that he created for the province of 

Saskatchewan -- $840 million in interest a year that we pay for 

your gross mismanagement, your incompetence, and your 

patronage -- and to put that in context, Mr. Member, the former 

department of Natural Resources could have been funded 11 or 

12 times with what we have to pay in interest because of the 

actions that your administration took in the 1980s. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Size of Cabinet 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, you brought before 

this Assembly legislation to redraw the political boundaries 

under the guise of deficit 

reduction.  Mr. Premier, you know full well that more money 

could be saved by reducing the number of cabinet colleagues 

that you have.  Mr. Premier, will you make the commitment 

today that you will not appoint two more NDP MLAs (Member 

of the Legislative Assembly) to replace the two ministers that 

have resigned? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that 

the hon. members opposite are talking about deficit reduction 

while opposing seemingly the boundaries Bill which reduces 

the size of the MLAs in this House from 66 to 58.  I think that's 

inconsistent, to put it mildly.  And I just . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Try 56. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Oh now we're in a bidding war -- try 

56 -- new-found converts on the road to Damascus, as they 

opposed the Bill initially and now want to lower it.  So all I say 

to the hon. members opposite, they haven't got their act quite 

coordinated or figured out the straight way. 

 

With respect to the cabinet, I've indicated in the past what is 

important is that the government is run efficiently and 

effectively and that there are enough ministers to do that and 

enough ministers to consult together with the MLAs for the 

public.  And we're very, very mindful of all of those factors in 

the question of appointments. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  Mr. Premier, I'm sure you will recall 

your solemn promise to keep your cabinet to 10 members until 

the province of Saskatchewan can afford more than 10.  That 

was your promise, sir.  I'm sure you remember that. 

 

But those words ring very hollow in light of your cabinet you 

have today, Mr. Premier.  You can save over half a million 

dollars every year, Mr. Speaker -- or Mr. Premier -- right now 

by reducing the budget for your cabinet. 

 

Mr. Premier, if you're truly dedicated to deficit reduction, don't 

use it as an excuse to gerrymander the boundaries -- use it as an 

incentive to reduce the size of your cabinet.  Will you make 

that commitment today, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from 

Kindersley being a -- I say this affectionately of him -- political 

rookie in this House, probably didn't live -- well in fact didn't 

live -- in the legislature as I did, over there at a time when there 

was 25 ministers right here, 25 ministers, 25 ministers. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No, you weren't there.  You weren't here.  

You weren't here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The hon. member . . . Oh yes, I was 

here.  And the hon. member, the Leader of the 



2464 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

Opposition, says I wasn't there.  I even remember, Mr. Leader 

of the Opposition, when I was in opposition where absolutely 

every MLA on the PC (Progressive Conservative) side was 

either a minister, a Legislative Secretary, or some other paid 

officer of this legislature, except one -- poor old Lorne . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- McLaren. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- What's his name? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Lorne McLaren. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Lorne McLaren from Yorkton.  And 

to this day I haven't figured out what in the world did they have 

against Lorne McLaren.  Maybe you should ask your leader, 

your Acting Leader of the Opposition, why it was they had 

everybody at the public trough.  And then you ask the next 

question . . . next questions about reduction of the cabinet size. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, it was 

you who made the commitment to a 10-member cabinet.  Was 

that not you, sir?  You stood in this Assembly and you said 

throughout all of Saskatchewan that you're going to put into 

place a war cabinet that was only going to be able to be for a 

while until the province of Saskatchewan could afford more 

than that.  That was your promise, sir.  That was your promise 

to the people of Saskatchewan.  It wasn't anyone else's 

promise; it was yours, sir. 

 

Mr. Premier, if you don't want to do it in the name of deficit 

reduction, I'm wondering if you could summon the courage to 

do it for the hemophiliacs of Saskatchewan who are asking for 

compensation as a result of the failure of your health care 

system. 

 

Mr. Premier, the salaries and benefits and expenses of two 

NDP cabinet ministers would go a long ways to helping those 

innocent victims.  Mr. Premier, if not for deficit reduction, 

would you consider compassion a good reason to reduce the 

size of your cabinet? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. members 

opposite construct out of whole cloth supposed statements 

which they attribute to me.  But there's no use me trying to 

respond to that because they make the statements and they keep 

on repeating it and the press dutifully reports it all over again. 

 

But he asks me: why don't we reduce the cabinet?  Well we 

did.  I mean we came in from a cabinet of 10 to 18 and a 

cabinet currently of 16, and by no stretch of the imagination, 

even by your Tory mathematics, does it amount to 25, does it 

amount to 25 -- none whatsoever. 

 

Secondly, with respect to the question of hemophiliacs.  I mean 

this gentleman's and this party's concern for them is as phoney 

as a $3 bill, as phoney as a $3 bill.  In 1991 they agreed that 

there would be 

no compensation to these people.  In 1991, that's what they 

agreed to -- as phoney as a $3 bill. 

 

Believe me, this government is working at a proper and fair 

and compassionate settlement for these people and others.  

We're looking at this.  We're doing it in concert with the 

national approach which is what the Red Cross and others 

involved in this sorry, sorry situation are asking us to do.  But 

please, don't give us those phoney crocodile tears on this issue, 

not from your caucus. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Services Discussion Paper 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Premier, it is astounding how you and your members of your 

cabinet can get up in an afternoon, on a Monday afternoon with 

hypocrisy dripping and oozing from your lips consistently. 

 

Now you are claiming, Mr. Premier, now you are claiming that 

you were misquoted.  Now you are claiming that you never 

said that you would have a cabinet of 10 members until we 

could afford more.  Mr. Premier, that is astounding.  It's 

Monday in the legislature.  It's Monday, June -- what have we 

got today? -- the 14th.  This is your story today.  What is it 

going to be tomorrow, Mr. Premier?  It is astounding. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Health.  Madam Minister, your latest example of the NDP 

shoot-first-and-ask-questions-later consultation process which 

you announced last week is another astounding event, Madam 

Minister.  You, after forcing rural Saskatchewan into health 

care districts, locking the door, throwing away the key, now 

said it's time to talk about what these districts will be doing.  

Mr. Speaker, she's giving those people about a week to review 

her paper and respond in detail to her proposal.  June 21, that's 

your deadline . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the member have a question?  I 

want the member to put his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- My question is that, Madam Minister, is this 

NDP consultation at its finest?  Do you think, Madam Minister, 

that one week is sufficient time in the consultative process for 

these people to respond adequately to your moratorium?  Could 

you explain that one to us, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite know 

that there's ongoing consultation with respect to the whole 

health reform area -- ongoing consultation. 

 

The core discussion paper that is being put forward at the rural 

health conference along with the paper on community health 

centres, along with discussion papers with respect to 

emergency services will be discussed at length at that 

conference.  And he knows it.  And there will be ongoing 

discussions on the entire topic.  These are good documents that 

a lot of consultation has taken place already on these very 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2465 

issues. 

 

There is a rural health advisory committee that consists of 

health care professionals such as representatives from the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association, from the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons, from the SRNA (Saskatchewan 

Registered Nurses' Association), from public health, from 

home care, and from other health care stakeholders who have 

been working on these rural health alternatives and are helping 

the Department of Health to put these options forward and to 

discuss them at length. 

 

It's clear, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite, every inch 

of the way, are fighting the preservation of medicare which is 

what this government is doing through health reform. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

preservation of health care?  The dismantling of health care!  

The unilaterally decided dismantling of health care, Madam 

Minister.  That's what we're discussing about. 

 

And your core paper that you came out with last week that 

people will have one week to discuss has essentially 

downloaded 32 of the core services to health care districts, 

Madam Minister -- 32 core services.  Virtually the entire 

function of the Department of Health is going to be 

downloaded.  Everything from acute care, palliative care, 

mental health services, immunization, communicable disease 

control, all of these things. 

 

But the one thing that your paper does not discuss, Madam 

Minister, is how are all of these core services going to be 

funded.  There's no mention of funding other than we may 

somewhere in the future develop some kind of formula, 

Madam Minister.  Not even a hint about how much money is 

going to be . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  I want the member to put his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As per usual, I do 

have a question. Madam Minister, don't you think it would be 

practical to inform these health care districts how much money 

they will be receiving before you discuss implementing these 

services?  Wouldn't that, Madam Minister, be a reasonable 

thing to do? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- You know it's not surprising, Mr. 

Speaker, that the members opposite don't understand what's 

happening in health care because they don't understand the 

health care system.  And what the member opposite fails to 

recognize is that many of these services that are defined as 

services for which districts will be responsible are already 

managed by local boards.  And what is happening, instead of 

having 400 boards, we'll end up with about 29 or 30 in the 

province.  And 29 or 30 boards will be 

delivering the services that some 400 boards are delivering 

now. 

 

He calls it a downloading, Mr. Speaker.  I call it empowerment 

of communities.  And that's the difference between those 

members and this government.  They do not believe in 

community control, in community input.  They want 

everything in health care centralized in Regina and their 

question has repeatedly been around decentralizing services 

and why would we be doing this.  We're doing it because we 

believe the health care system will be stronger if there's more 

input at communities, more input that's coordinated and 

integrated on a district basis.  It will result in better quality 

health care services and more community-based services for 

our people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

now we're into the buzz-words, eh -- empowerment, 

empowerment, well my goodness.  They will have local 

control, they will have the local decision-making process only 

in so far as they pay for it themselves and as far as that will be 

exactly in conjunction with what you have in mind, Madam 

Minister.  That's your idea of empowerment. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, my colleague has already pointed out 

your government's backward position when it comes to 

spending taxpayers' money -- your hacks are getting the 

money.  Again your Premier feels more for his political 

appointees than those who truly need and deserve attention and 

assistance, Madam Minister, another example of mixed-up 

priorities. 

 

The consequences of your ill-conceived plan are going to be 

quite apparent and they are already.  You will force these 

services onto these boards, give them inadequate funding, and 

then force them to make a choice.  And this is the choice, Mr. 

Speaker.  You will be forcing them to make a choice between . 

. . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  I want to remind 

the member that he took 1 minute and 53 seconds to ask his 

first question; he took 1 minute and 11 seconds to ask his 

second question; and he's now used a minute and he's not even 

at his question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Is the member 

from Maple Creek challenging the Chair?  Well I will ask the 

member from Maple Creek not to respond from his seat when 

the Speaker is on his feet.  I ask the member from Rosthern to 

please ask his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much for your 

admonishment, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, the choice that 

you will be making them make is between increasing municipal 

taxes or dropping the service from their area.  My question 

simply is this, Madam Minister:  is that what this whole thing 

boils down to -- increased taxes or loss of services?  Is that the 

bottom line, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer to that 



2466 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

question is neither.  The members opposite have heard 

repeatedly in this legislature, they've heard repeatedly that 

district boards will not have the power to tax on the property 

tax base.  They've heard that repeatedly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They also know that what the exercise here is to reorganize and 

coordinate services so that we provide a more efficient system 

and a higher quality of services to people.  What will happen in 

our rural communities as we develop services is that there will 

be a broader range of community-based services available. 

 

The members opposite don't understand that.  Because when 

they were in power what they did was build facilities, new 

facilities throughout this province, at enormous capital expense 

to government and communities.  And many of these facilities 

are not even used for acute care. 

 

We could be using those health care dollars in times of very 

difficult financial circumstances for real, needed health care 

services, for real services that are needed by the communities.  

And we're asking them to do needs assessment and to tell us 

what their needs are, because we will target the health care 

dollars for needs and not for services that are not needed and 

fancy . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I would request leave before 

orders of the day to make a statement pertaining to certain 

events that occurred this weekend. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

New Federal Conservative Leader 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 

members of the House for granting me leave. 

 

As everyone is aware, Mr. Speaker, on the past weekend 

Conservatives from coast to coast gathered in our nation's 

capital to select a new leader.  And I must say, Mr. Speaker, 

that I think all Canadians would agree that change in the 

political process is a necessity; that all political parties go 

through the change of leadership over a period of time. 

 

And I think Canadians viewed the recent leadership contest 

with my party as one that exposed certain issues and ideas to 

the public; that it was the progression of change within the 

Conservative Party, but also change that all Canadians will 

have the opportunity to judge sometime in the future. 

 

I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that the winner in my party's case 

will project competence and enthusiasm to Canadians.  And it 

is the first time in the history of the country of Canada that a 

woman will become Prime Minister of Canada. 

And I would say and ask, Mr. Speaker, in the spirit of 

cooperation and goodwill that all members of the Assembly 

join with me and my colleagues in extending our sincere 

congratulations and best wishes to Canada's Prime Minister 

designate, the Hon. Kim Campbell. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government side, I'd like to 

extend my congratulations to Ms. Kim Campbell on her victory 

as the Leader of the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada 

and now becoming the Prime Minister designate of Canada. 

 

This is a singular accomplishment, an important 

accomplishment.  It's an accomplishment any time that one 

succeeds the leadership of any political party, but particularly 

at the national level and a major party like the Progressive 

Conservatives, and it sets a number of firsts: the first woman 

Prime Minister, the first Prime Minister from British Columbia.  

And I think this is a matter which should be duly noted in a 

positive sense by all Canadians.  From this side of the 

government, we extend to Ms. Campbell our heartiest 

congratulations and best wishes. 

 

We hope that the election will indicate a new era of 

federal-provincial cooperation, an era in which the important 

outstanding issues, whether they pertain to agriculture matters 

or federal offloading issues, or the question of national unity or 

trade issues or taxation issues, that a new era in 

federal-provincial cooperation is about to unfold. 

 

I suspect it'll probably take an election in order to sort that out 

-- a new government, to get a mandate -- but none the less with 

the change, there is a commitment on our part to do what is 

reasonable, to cooperate in the interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan and in the interests of all of Canada.  So I too 

extend my congratulations to Ms. Campbell. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

join with all of my colleagues in the House in congratulating 

the soon-to-be new Prime Minister Campbell as well. 

 

I watched with interest this weekend and I found it most 

intriguing.  I was interested because I'd had an opportunity to 

participate with Mr. Boyer, of the Canadian taxpayers' 

association.  I found Garth Turner's words most interesting as 

well, as one who's very interested in reform.  And Jim 

Edwards, Jean Charest, and Kim Campbell as the front runners, 

I thought did an extraordinary job.  So I do wish to congratulate 

Ms. Campbell and all of the people who were in that very 

hard-fought battle. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2467 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Code of Ethical Conduct 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  Before 

beginning my comments on the code of ethical conduct, I just 

want to briefly associate myself with the others who went 

before me in congratulating our new Prime Minister elect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move a motion which will provide 

for the adoption of a code of ethical conduct by this Legislative 

Assembly.  The adoption of this code represents a significant 

step forward in accomplishing this government's agenda for 

democratic reform with the fulfilment of a major election 

commitment. 

 

With the adoption of this code, provincial legislators in 

Saskatchewan for the first time will have set out in writing their 

obligations and responsibilities.  These responsibilities go 

beyond a commitment not to use one's position to benefit 

financially.  These responsibilities and obligations include a 

fundamental commitment by members of this Assembly to 

honesty and integrity in public life. 

 

Given the innovative nature of this approach, it is appropriate 

at this time to briefly outline the assumptions and objectives of 

this exercise.  This government believes -- and I would hope all 

members agree -- that service to the people of this province has 

always been the highest calling of a citizen. 

 

And I would suggest that traditionally legislatures have 

attracted men and women -- dedicated men and women -- who 

have tried to serve their country, their province, their fellow 

citizens, with integrity and commitment. 

 

Recently there has been a regrettable erosion of public 

confidence and trust in politicians.  This erosion of public 

confidence has at the same time contributed to a decrease in 

respect for the very democratic institutions which we serve.  

While no one reason accounts for this emerging trend, a 

significant factor has undoubtedly been disillusionment about 

ethical behaviour in government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is without doubt valid reason for public 

concern and vigilance.  We are faced with the simple fact that 

unethical conduct occurs occasionally at all levels of 

government in this country.  But the impetus for the adoption 

of this ethical conduct is not an unprecedented number of cases 

of unethical conduct involving elected officials.  Rather this 

code is a response to the strong public demand that 

governments, and specifically elected officials, devise 

measures by which unethical conduct may be prevented in the 

future. 

 

Saskatchewan has no lack of laws, rules, regulations governing 

the conduct of public officials.  Saskatchewan politicians, for 

example, are regulated by the Criminal Code, the Charter of 

Rights and 

Freedoms, the Canadian Human Rights Act, the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code, The Financial Administration Act, The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, and the 

election Act, to name but a few. 

 

Additionally this government has introduced new conflict of 

interest legislation modelled on the recommendations of the 

federal special joint committee on conflicts of interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is noteworthy that the federal government has 

been attempting to deal with the issue of the conduct of 

members and conflict of interest for almost nine years, in fact 

for its entire mandate.  In contract, this government has brought 

forward reasonable, balanced conflict of interest legislation 

within 18 months of taking office. 

 

But as we are aware, laws do not stop criminal behaviour nor 

do they prevent conflicts of interest.  Those who are 

determined to abuse their positions, those who are determined 

to act dishonestly or get themselves into a position in which 

there's a conflict of interest, will do so with or without codes of 

conduct or legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government believes that the great majority 

of elected officials are fundamentally honest and will not 

knowingly breach public trust.  For these politicians, a code of 

ethical conduct will serve as a constant reminder of what the 

public trust requires in terms of members' obligations to 

colleagues, to constituents, and to all Saskatchewan people. 

 

The public places blind confidence in the hands of elected 

members and expects them to operate with high ethical 

standards.  Elected public office puts a new onus of 

responsibility on individuals. 

 

Recognizing that all the members' actions will be under public 

scrutiny, elected officials must act different than private 

citizens.  Members of the Assembly must first and foremost 

ensure that public interest takes precedence.  Our first step in 

this direction is for politicians to demonstrate their collective 

commitment to high ethical standards. 

 

I would like to quote very briefly from a report comment by 

Roy Bonisteel which I believe touches on the fundamental 

problem which results from this general public cynicism.  Mr. 

Bonisteel said: 

 

 Being a politician is likely the most unpopular profession in 

our country these days.  Public opinion polls show them to be 

only a few notches above cat burglars in garnering our trust 

and respect.  To serve our country in the political arena 

should be one of life's finer pursuits; instead, for idealistic 

Canadians it has become a one-way street to ridicule, 

disillusionment and shattered dreams. 

 

Mr. Justice Hughes, Mr. Ted Hughes, has suggested that one 

reason for this cynicism and the unpopular profile of politicians 

lies in the use of position by some 



2468 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

to create privilege for themselves.  In a similar vein, others 

have suggested that this cynicism is the result of a widely held 

belief that, regardless of political stripe, politicians are not 

capable of pushing themselves back from the public trough. 

 

The code of ethical conduct will serve as a constant reminder 

that elected public servants are individually responsible for 

restoring meaning to the term, honourable member.  The 

government believes -- and I am confident that all members 

will share this belief -- that elected public servants must once 

again be seen as an honourable profession. 

 

The adoption of this code will demonstrate to all Saskatchewan 

people that members of this legislature are sincere in their 

efforts to ensure that integrity, honesty, and accountability and 

accessibility are the fundamental components of our collective 

commitment to the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public has a right to expect that elected 

officials will not use their positions for personal advantage and 

that decisions of public importance will not be influenced by 

private considerations.  In the many recent studies and 

investigations regarding conflict of interest, criticism has 

focused on the restrictive impact that such rules and guidelines 

have on the ability of political parties to recruit candidates from 

all walks of life with a wide diversity of different experiences 

and interests. 

 

This government is very conscious of the need to draw elected 

officials from a broad spectrum of lifestyles and backgrounds.  

Neither the code presented here today nor the conflict of 

legislation which appears on the . . . conflict of interest 

legislation which appears on the order paper will unduly 

restrict or deter any individual from participating in the 

political process.  These initiatives will, however, provide 

reasonable assurances to the public that private interests will 

not override the paramount public interest. 

 

(1445) 

 

Regrettably, especially from today's vantage point, the Culliton 

report of 1986 rejected the need for a detailed, formal code of 

ethical conduct and instead recommended only minor 

amendments to The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Act and to the current members' conflict of interest 

Act.  Unfortunately, the previous administration chose not to 

enact even the limited recommendations of the Culliton report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in our democratic reform proposals released in 

January of 1991, the New Democratic Party caucus called for a 

comprehensive code of ethical conduct dictating a clear 

statement of the broad general principles and expressing the 

moral commitment of Saskatchewan politicians.  This proposed 

code of ethical conduct provides both the moral commitment 

and the statement of principles.  As such, it should be regarded 

as a source of inspiration and vision for politicians who often 

face negative perceptions on the part of the public. 

Mr. Speaker, the adoption of this comprehensive code of 

ethical conduct is not limited solely to conflict of interest or 

financial matters; it makes significant contribution to our 

efforts to raise the profile of ethics in government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this code is not intended to be cast in stone for all 

time.  It is not an end in itself.  Rather it should, and must, 

continue to be a reflection of the developing awareness of 

ethical decision making for politicians.  This code should be 

seen as a starting point for our collective efforts to translate 

society's concerns for better government into higher ethical 

standards for legislators. 

 

This code under consideration today is based on the assumption 

that although it is possible to develop a lengthy list of thou 

shalts and thou shalt nots, ultimate responsibility for applying 

ethical standards falls upon the individual legislator.  The thrust 

cannot be simply directed toward catching people engaged in 

unacceptable behaviour, although clearly that's an important 

component.  The basic goal of our efforts must be to facilitate 

and enhance the development of integrity in a public light. 

 

Notwithstanding the fact that this code is intended to achieve 

these higher ethical standards, first and foremost by sensitizing 

members to the necessity of ethical decision making of politics, 

it must be recognized that there will be consequences for those 

who violate the code.  The code will be enforceable by 

members of this Assembly pursuant to section 32 of the 

members' conflict of interest Act currently before the 

legislature. 

 

Section 32 of the above-mentioned Bill permits the Assembly, 

by resolution, to request the commissioner to give an opinion 

on any matter that relates to the conduct of a member and that 

is in addition to the compliance of the member with the 

provisions of the actual legislation.  In conducting any such 

investigation, the commissioner has all the powers conferred on 

a commissioner pursuant to The Public Inquiries Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this represents a practical, reasonable mechanism 

for dealing with unacceptable behaviour.  Furthermore, it is 

consistent with our collective commitment that all members 

have some responsibility for ensuring that the public interest is 

served. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in concluding, I believe that time will judge this 

measure as a positive, as an innovative, sincere effort to protect 

public trust, thereby enhancing public confidence in the 

integrity of those elected to serve and ultimately in the 

institutions of parliamentary government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Regina 

Elphinstone: 

 

That this Assembly adopt the following Code of Ethical 

Conduct: 

 

Code of Ethical Conduct 

 

For Members of the Legislative Assembly 

 

Preamble 

 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2469 

As Members of the Legislative Assembly we recognize 

that our actions have a profound impact on the lives of all 

Saskatchewan people.  Fulfilling our obligations and 

discharging our duties responsibly requires a commitment 

to the highest ethical standards. 

 

Statement of Commitment 

 

To the people of this province, we owe the responsible 

execution of our official duties, in order to promote human 

and environmental welfare. 

 

To our constituents, we owe honesty, accessibility, 

accountability, courtesy and understanding. 

 

To our colleagues in this Assembly, we owe loyalty to 

shared principles, respect for differences, and fairness in 

political dealings. 

 

We believe that the fundamental objective of public office 

is to serve our fellow citizens with integrity in order to 

improve the economic and social conditions of all 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We reject political corruption and will refuse to participate 

in unethical political practices which tend to undermine 

the democratic traditions of our province and its 

institutions. 

 

Declaration of Principles 

 

Members of this Assembly must carry out their official 

duties and arrange their private financial affairs in a 

manner that protects the public interest and enhances 

public confidence and trust in government and in high 

standards of ethical conduct in public office. 

 

Members of this Assembly must act not only lawfully but 

also in a manner that will withstand the closest public 

scrutiny; neither the law nor this code is designed to be 

exhaustive, and there will be occasions on which Members 

will find it necessary to adopt more stringent norms of 

conduct in order to protect the public interest and to 

enhance public confidence and trust. 

 

Every Member is individually responsible for preventing 

potential and actual conflicts of interest, and must arrange 

private financial affairs in a manner that prevents such 

conflicts from arising. 

 

Members of the Assembly must carry out their official 

duties objectively and without 

consideration of personal or financial interests. 

 

Members of the Assembly must not accept gifts, benefits 

or favours except for incidental gifts or customary 

hospitality of nominal value as provided for in legislation. 

 

Members of the Assembly must not take personal 

advantage of or private benefit from information that is 

obtained in the course of or as a result of their official 

duties or positions and that is not in the public domain. 

 

Members of the Assembly must not engage in personal 

conduct that exploits for private reasons their positions or 

authorities or that would tend to bring discredit to their 

offices. 

 

Members of the Assembly must not use, or allow the use 

of, public property or services for personal gain. 

 

Members of the Assembly, when leaving public office and 

when they have left public office, must not take improper 

advantage of their former office. 

 

And that, following the adoption of this motion, the Code 

of Ethical Conduct be included in the Appendices to The 

Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly and in 

The Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan Members' 

Handbook. 

 

I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as I 

listened to the minister in presenting his second-reading 

speech, the minister brought out a number of points that I think, 

in general, the public have been talking about for the past 

number of years.  And having been an elected representative in 

this House since 1986, certainly the need for a code and a 

statement regarding ethical conduct for members is necessary. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I would also suggest that I do not 

believe that there are any members or have been any members 

over the past number of years -- be they involved at the 

provincial scene or the local scene, municipal politics, or in the 

educational format, on the SSTA (Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association) or wherever, Mr. Speaker -- I do not 

believe that any individual who decides to get involved and 

takes on the role of putting their name forward for a position of 

responsibility does so lightly and does so with the idea that 

they're going to do it simply for their own political or personal 

motives and goals. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, we have seen over the past number of 

years that certainly there have been things that have taken place 

that have brought to question the integrity of individuals in the 

political sphere.  And it's because of that that the debate has 

been wide 



2470 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

ranging, very broad.  There's been an involvement in debate of 

a code of ethical conduct for a number of years. 

 

And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, even when it was discussed 

in the late '80s by the former government, that the reason we do 

not have a Bill before the Assembly or haven't had one to date 

is to allow for a broader debate and more information to come 

forward, more involvement by people in general so that at the 

end of the day the piece of legislation and the code would be 

something that the public in general, we trust, will agree with. 

 

Now I have a fear, Mr. Speaker, that there are still many in the 

public who may think and may not feel that they were really 

involved and may still wonder whether or not the code 

addresses all of the concerns that are out there.  I'm reminded 

of the debate that took place around the Charlottetown accord.  

And we look at the number of individuals and groups that were 

involved and got into the debate and in the end stood up and 

supported the Charlottetown accord and yet the public in 

general rejected that accord, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they rejected it because they still felt, even though there 

was an avenue for input, that they really didn't have a direct 

involvement or a direct access or a direct say in the accord and 

in the terms of the accord.  And I'm afraid that even in this 

process, Mr. Speaker, we may find that the public at large will 

continue to ask, well did the politicians really listen to us? 

 

And I know that there's been involvement.  There's been input 

from a number of people and organizations, and I guess that's 

something that we're going to have to work with over the years 

as this code of ethical conduct is developed; that indeed we do 

take note of the concerns that are out there, that in setting aside 

stringent rules and guidelines we don't make the process so 

restrictive that in general, Mr. Speaker, that there are many 

well-qualified and able-bodied men and women in our 

province, even in fact across our nation, who are going to look 

at the political sphere and say no, I don't really have time for 

that; I've got a business to run; my business is doing well and 

I'm not quite prepared to sacrifice my family and my business 

to get involved in an area of government or being involved at a 

governmental level at a provincial or a federal level, giving up 

all the comforts of home to work for the general public because 

of the fact that the public in general continues to scrutinize 

politicians very carefully and very closely. 

 

So even though I believe that the legislation is necessary, and 

it's necessary to set out the parameters if you will so that people 

in general can . . . the public in general can look at this code 

and realize that individuals from all walks of life, when they 

enter political life, are accountable to the rules, the guidelines, 

and the ethical code that we're bringing forward today. 

 

And hopefully at the end of the day people will begin 

to look at politicians and say, yes there are a lot of politicians 

that have given very unselfishly of themselves to represent 

their constituents.  They've been available, and they've 

represented their constituents to the best of their ability.  

They've worked their hearts out.  They've given of family time, 

of their personal time.  They've given that time to work to 

represent the broader constituency base that they are working 

for. 

 

So I would say, Mr. Speaker, that I trust that when everything 

is said and done, that the public at large will realize that most 

people in political life, if not all, are genuinely interested in 

representing their constituents, in giving of their best, and that 

the legislation before us, this code of ethical conduct, is a way 

of trying to map out what most politicians, if not all, today are 

trying to achieve. 

 

And we trust that at the end of the day people in general will 

admit that yes, most people . . . we maybe give politicians the 

wrong . . . we may give the wrong impression.  We may leave 

people with the general feeling that politicians are dishonest. 

 

Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I don't think most people really 

agree with that.  I think most people really feel that men and 

women in public life really do their best.  In fact if anything, I 

have more people indicate to me that they feel that I should 

spend a little more time with my family, and I've got a young 

family.  And politicians, people from all walks of life, certainly 

give a lot of their time and a lot of their efforts.  I think we 

need to commend the men and women over the years who have 

worked to represent their constituents. 

 

(1500) 

 

But as the minister has indicated, certainly people are looking 

for guidelines.  They're looking for something that's basically 

black and white.  And whether it's set down in the printed form 

and is in the black and white form, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately 

there may be some, one or two individuals, may find a way 

around it. 

 

I don't think you'll find a way in which we can set out all the 

guidelines whereby individuals will not knowingly find a way 

around them, but some may fall through the cracks.  And we've 

seen it even in our own rules and procedures in this Assembly, 

where we've attempted to be as open as we can and very 

forthright, and yet when rules are laid out there, rules are open 

for interpretation. 

 

So I think it's very imperative, Mr. Speaker, that we all work 

together to develop a code, to develop some terms of conduct 

so that down the road anyone entering public life will know 

that there are some basic rules to follow, that there are 

guidelines they're going to be working under and that the 

electorate out there, when they elect them, know that they're 

sending this individual to represent them based on a code of 

conduct that they can follow. 

 

And in discussing this with my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, we're 

in favour of it.  We're in favour of the 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2471 

general consensus of and the guidelines of the code, and 

certainly we will not be putting very many, if any, major 

hindrances in the way of the passage of this Bill. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The government 

is to be commended for introducing this code of ethical 

conduct, and it is a step in the right direction.  It is time that 

we, the representatives of the people who have been given the 

public trust to provide effective leadership, examine the 

standards by which we are to implement that leadership trust.  

And this document deserves an extensive review, for it 

attempts to define these basic standards. 

 

It is a beginning to our discussion, I believe.  It provides a 

framework against which we might be able to measure our 

performance.  It begins to provide a definition of what the 

people can expect when they place their trust in us through the 

electoral process.  And this document is key because it begins 

to define a new approach to governing which can be called 

principled leadership, or what I also call principle-centred 

leadership. 

 

Governing, Mr. Speaker, is a very complex process.  In our 

democratic society we should recognize clearly, as is stated in 

the preamble to this document, that -- and I quote directly from 

it -- "our actions have a profound impact on the lives of all 

Saskatchewan people." 

 

Our decisions here indeed affect the lives of the present 

residents of Saskatchewan.  Our decisions affect the way that 

they do business.  Our decisions affect the way they interact 

with people in the rest of Canada and across the world.  Our 

decisions may even affect who is successful and who is not.  

Our decisions affect the future of the residents of this province 

as well. 

 

This has become very evident in the past few years that we 

have attempted to wrestle with the problems of government 

debt.  Is it really ethical or moral to create major levels of debt 

and expect future generations of Saskatchewan residents to pay 

for our extravagance?  Our decisions today affect what success 

our children and grandchildren may achieve.  Are we leaving 

them a foundation on which to build, or a swamp in which to 

wallow?  These are ethical questions which we must constantly 

consider as we govern. 

 

Now there are three basic types of governing.  These styles 

may be characterized as, first, dictating; second, managing; and 

third, leading. 

 

A dictator decides what is best for their own personal welfare 

and the welfare of their friends, and then issues orders to others 

that will promote that personal welfare.  The process of 

governing is directed to serve those who govern.  Decisions are 

based . . . and the style of governing ends up resulting in 

resistance and 

dependence among those who are governed.  It builds 

resistance because people resent being excluded from the 

privilege accorded to the more favoured.  It breeds dependence 

because the only way to success that many people see is to 

succumb to seeking the favour of those who govern. 

 

This style of governing breeds corruption at all levels.  From 

time to time we see evidence of this style of government when 

see individuals and parties make decisions on the use of 

government resources on the basis of personal benefit or on the 

basis of benefit to one's friends.  When politicians make 

decisions for the best interests of the party and not in the best 

interests of the people, they come close to this dictatorial style 

of governing. 

 

Now the second style of governing is that of managing.  And a 

manager treats the decision process as if there were a set of 

resources and the task of a manager is to maximize the 

efficiency of the use of these resources.  People become one of 

the resources to be managed.  In the course of managing these 

resources a set of rules are developed which guide the 

manager's decisions.  The approach is fair in the sense that the 

rules are generally applicable to everyone no matter what their 

circumstance.  Often the result is that the rules become more 

important than the people.  And rigid application of outmoded 

rules creates inequities and hardship. 

 

Governments are just beginning to realize what many major 

corporations have already learned, that in our rapidly changing 

environment rules are not an adequate basis for decisions; rules 

change far too quickly.  We are still making decisions on the 

basis of rules that no longer have a foundation in reality.  The 

rules governing education no longer provide us with a standard 

and type of education necessary to compete in today's rapidly 

changing labour market.  Rules that govern the boundaries 

between occupations no longer apply because of rapid changes 

in technology.  And other examples are readily evident. 

 

Our past tradition of governing through rules and regulations 

then, we can see, is likely becoming obsolete. 

 

What many corporations have learned, that governments can 

also emulate, is that our rapidly changing world, governing 

must be done on the basis of general principles, that those who 

would lead must incorporate these principles within their own 

framework, their framework of values, and that as conditions 

change or specific problems arise, solutions can be created in 

innovative ways within the boundaries set by these basic 

principles.  This principle-based leadership, Mr. Speaker, is the 

direction in which all governments must move.  This is why 

I'm supporting the general concept of this code of ethical 

conduct. 

 

Although I am supporting this code of ethical conduct, I do 

have some concerns and reservations that I wish to raise.  One 

of my first concerns is that we in this House recognize the 

limitations of this code and that 



2472 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

we not mislead the public about its scope and impact.  This 

code is basically a guideline, a guideline that allows us to 

measure our own behaviour and our own conduct. 

 

It is not designed to allow the public access . . . to access, 

pardon me, our conduct, or it would have within it measures 

that would inform the public about our conduct.  It is not 

designed to protect the public, or it would have within it a 

watchdog mechanism and a mechanism to enforce adherence to 

the code. 

 

Since it is a standard against which we can measure our own 

conduct, it is only as effective as we are in incorporating these 

standards within our own set of values.  It is only as effective 

as our own personal integrity.  Since it is only as effective as 

our own individual integrity, I fear that some of us will develop 

or maintain the attitude exhibited by some of the applicants for 

the job of driver of a stagecoach in a mountainous section of 

the Old West. 

 

The owner of the stagecoach line was conducting the interview 

himself, and his main question of the applicants went 

something like this, and I quote: while we are very concerned 

about the safety of our passengers, our coaches, horses, and 

freight, since much of this route lies through mountains where 

there's often a dangerous precipice on one side of the road, how 

close can you drive to the edge of the road with the horses at 

full gallop and not go off the road, the interviewer asked.  The 

first applicant responded that he could drive within a foot of the 

edge with no difficulty.  The second applicant said he could 

drive within six inches of the edge with confidence.  The third 

applicant said that he could not answer the question.  He was 

always so concerned about maintaining a safe margin that he 

always slowed down and stayed as far from the edge as he 

could.  Needless to say, the owner of the stage line hired the 

third applicant. 

 

Now that this code has been introduced and it begins to define 

more clearly what I call the edge of the road, how many of us 

will spend our time seeing how close we can get to the edge 

without going over?  It really depends upon our own personal 

integrity. 

 

The second limitation that is of concern to me is that the code 

only discusses the issue of using government office to gain 

personal benefit.  The code says nothing about the use of 

government office to benefit friends or to benefit a certain 

segment or group of Saskatchewan people at the expense of 

other segments or groups.  We must be aware of these 

limitations and aware of them ourselves, and we must ensure 

that knowledge of this limitation is available to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We should not lead the people to believe that this code does 

things that it does not do.  That would violate the commitment 

of the honesty and accessibility that is owed to our constituents 

as outlined in the code. 

 

I'm also concerned about the small inconsistencies 

within the code itself.  The statement of commitment talks 

about promoting, and I quote, "human and environmental 

welfare" as the basic standard against which to measure ethical 

conduct while the statement of principles talks about protecting 

the public interest and enhancing public confidence and trust. 

 

I think there is an inconsistency here, and I spent considerable 

time speaking with the Minister of Justice about this.  The 

commitment statement is a positive, outward-looking approach, 

while the principle statement is inward and defensive.  Perhaps 

the concepts and language could be harmonized somewhat. 

 

The first paragraph of the declaration of principles contains a 

dual objective of protecting the public interest and enhancing 

public confidence.  The latter, public confidence, is redundant, 

Mr. Speaker, because it is the result of effectively 

implementing the former.  If the public sees the government 

and sees it consistently protecting the public interest, then 

confidence in the institutions of government and the people 

who are governing automatically increases. 

 

If the public interest is not promoted or protected, then 

confidence in both the institutions and the people governing 

decreases.  The problem with including the latter statement in 

the code is that it can be used by people who have the 

close-to-the-edge-of-the-road attitude to justify making a 

decision that may be in the public interest but not necessarily in 

the interest of promoting public confidence and trust in 

government. 

 

There's one other issue I wish to raise in connection with this 

code of ethical conduct, Mr. Speaker.  If it is really to be 

effective, then the rules and traditions under which we operate 

in this House must also begin to change so that we can more 

closely adhere to the principles we are purporting to adopt. 

 

One example of change that must occur if we are to adhere to 

the spirit of the code is the way that we behave in this very 

Assembly.  We often behave as if it were the role of the 

opposition to embarrass the government.  This practice may be 

promoting the welfare of a particular political party, but it is 

certainly not promoting what is termed in this code "human and 

environmental welfare" of the people of the province.  It is the 

role of the opposition to expose weakness and wrongdoing, but 

that in itself does not promote the welfare of the province.  We 

must find more cooperative ways of carrying out the business 

of this Assembly so that the talents and skills of all of its 

members are used more effectively. 

 

The issue raised previously about the ethical validity of leaving 

high levels of debt to the next government and the next 

generations of residents to deal with is also an issue that must 

be addressed as we move forward to implement this code of 

ethical conduct.  In fact this may require some form of 

balanced-budget legislation as proposed in the Liberal platform 

of 1991.  I really am proud to stand here as the leader of the 

only party that required of its candidates to sign a 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2473 

code of ethics in the last election.  We also ran on the use of 

free-standing votes.  We also ran on revising the conflict of 

interest on anti-corruption legislation that would hold people 

accountable even after they've left office, on a taxpayers' 

protection Act and -- yes -- deficit elimination legislation. 

 

(1515) 

 

And just to make one final comment, what we're talking about 

today is only one prong of a three-pronged approach.  The code 

of ethics is one prong; conflict of interest legislation is the 

second, but the third is anti-corruption legislation -- the way in 

which we can hold people accountable even after they have left 

office. 

 

Now there are many other areas which will require changes.  

The level of commitment to this code of ethical conduct by all 

members of this Assembly will not be measured only by the 

conduct of individual members, but also by the changes made 

to the operation of this our Assembly and to government as a 

whole to make the entire process of governing consistent with 

the statement of commitment and the declaration of principles 

outlined in the code of ethical conduct. 

 

So although I would like to see some minor adjustments to the 

text of this code, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting it and I'll 

look forward to changes necessary in the operation of this 

Assembly and to government that will demonstrate our joint 

commitment to the spirit and the intent of the new code of 

ethical conduct. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 1 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 1 -- An Act 

respecting the Conduct of Members of the Legislative 

Assembly and Members of the Executive Council, respecting 

Conflicts of Interest and to enact Consequential Amendments 

resulting from the enactment of this Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

add a few more comments to this Bill before we allow it to 

move to committee as well.  As my colleagues before me have 

mentioned, and as the minister indicated and in the speech 

made just a few minutes ago regarding the Bill just before the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, what we have here is a Bill that is 

laying out some guidelines whereby members can disclose 

their equity and their holdings as they get involved in politics 

in order to be as open and free before the public of 

Saskatchewan. 

And again, Mr. Speaker, the reason that came before the 

Assembly is because of the lack of public confidence in their 

elected representatives.  And as I indicated earlier, it's 

unfortunate that a few if not . . . I guess you would say just a 

few of the members of the public or a few people in general 

would like to dwell on the negative aspects of one or two 

individuals if any, Mr. Speaker, who may through in fact no 

fault of their own, have become involved in a government 

operation or in government contracts that have certainly thrown 

a sour note in people's minds regarding the intentions of elected 

representatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I would like to also mention is the fact that 

this Bill has received a lot of scrutiny in this Assembly.  It's 

been before the Assembly.  It was discussed prior to the 

election of 1991, and back in 1989 and '90.  In fact there was 

significant discussion taking place at that time regarding the 

conflict of interest and the code of ethical conduct. 

 

And I'm pleased to say that the initiation and . . . the initiative, 

pardon me, took place and was involved in . . . or the initiative 

began under the previous administration.  And I also want to 

commend the government and the Minister of Justice for again 

looking at the process and bringing it forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since we had second reading of the Bill back in 

March, on March 11, 1993, a fair bit of discussion has taken 

place.  And as the minister indicated at that time, the 

government was certainly looking for input from other sources 

and certainly looking for input from the opposition.  And I'm 

pleased that we were able to sit down with the minister and 

with the minister's officials and that the government in fact 

listened to and took note of some of the amendments in some 

of the areas we felt amendments should be brought forward in. 

 

Unfortunately the government chose not to accept all of our 

amendments.  But I'm pleased that the government took a 

number of the official opposition's suggestions and 

recommendations and that these recommendations will be 

moved as amendments to the conflict of interest guidelines. 

 

However, as I indicated, I regret that some of the suggestions 

were not accepted by the government.  And among those that 

were rejected were the conflict of interest guidelines applied to 

candidates for election, and that they be required to file 

disclosure papers along with their nomination papers.  And this 

was rejected by the government. 

 

We also proposed that the conflict guidelines dealing with 

government jobs and contracts apply to defeated candidates.  

As well, here again the government rejected the suggestion. 

 

We proposed that the definition of family be expanded.  

Currently it does not apply to adult children.  We continue to 

see patronage appointments because this suggestion was 

ignored.  And, Mr. Speaker, government members and 

ministers and the 



2474 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

Premier can continue to hire their adult children throughout 

government and it will not contradict this piece of legislation.  

And I find that appalling. 

 

This is a concern because it is currently happening, and we've 

brought up . . . a number of individuals' names have been 

brought before the Assembly.  For example, Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Justice whose daughter is presently hired by the 

government.  Perhaps that is why the government has rejected 

this suggestion as well. 

 

And aside from the examples I've listed, I would like to 

recognize that the government did engage in consultation in 

preparing this legislation, and I commend them on this.  

However as I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, in the . . . when 

we look at the guidelines, certainly they're guidelines.  And we 

trust that all members will look at them and treat them with 

respect because, Mr. Speaker, it's very apparent that we need to 

work on building a better working relationship with the public 

and gaining the respect of the general public at large. 

 

I realize that this legislation is far from perfect, but it's a start, 

and I believe it should be seen as a reasonable compromise.  

And we trust again that at the end of the day that the piece of 

legislation will not be a Bill or the type of legislation that will 

restrict or even discourage individuals, well thought-of and 

well-qualified individuals, from seeking public office. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in general we agree with the guidelines.  We 

agree with the route that the proposed legislation has put before 

us.  And having had a chance to discuss the piece of legislation, 

discuss the amendments with the minister, even though we're 

not totally happy that the minister has not looked favourably 

upon many of the amendments, we are pleased that the minister 

at least took some of our amendments into question and has 

applied them to the Bill. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, as an opposition, we do not have a 

lot that we would like to stand . . . and any major hindrances in 

the moving forward of this Bill, and therefore I'm just going to 

take my place and allow the Bill to move into committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Health 

Vote 32 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

I want to ask a few specific questions about the area around the 

south-west, dealing with a number of facilities -- namely Cabri, 

Gull Lake, Kincaid, Vanguard, Ponteix, and Mankota, and 

Herbert -- and what their relationship will be with Swift 

Current. 

 

I'm told that the Rolling Hills, as they have described it in the 

name, has been not approved by your department.  And I guess 

I'd need to ask you what it's going to be, what other resolutions 

that have been brought forward to solve some of the problems 

in relation to that, and what you're suggesting to those people 

there who have planned and worked this through their planning 

and steering committees, and what kind of a plan have you got 

for them so that they know that they can start to deal with the 

problems that they have in addressing what the city of Swift 

Current will do in relation to all of those area hospitals. 

 

(1530) 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you.  I thank the member opposite 

for his question.  What has happened in Rolling Hills and Swift 

Current is that the two planning groups have met.  They have 

agreed to a joint administration for the two districts -- separate 

boards but a joint administration. 

 

And the outstanding problem is that they have still to negotiate 

with some RMs (rural municipality) to come into the Rolling 

Hills district in order that you can have a continuous land mass.  

Right now the district is separated because there are some RMs 

-- I think it's a couple RMs . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . One? 

-- one RM that is not within the district and this divides it so 

you don't have a continuous land mass as required by the 

legislation. 

 

So they are in the process of negotiating with those RMs for at 

least part of that RM to come into the district so that we can 

have a continuous land mass and meet the requirements of the 

legislation. 

 

But it is my understanding that there's been agreement between 

Swift Current planning group and Rolling Hills that they would 

work together through a joint administration but they would 

retain separate boards.  And they would have people from 

Rolling Hills district board, when it's formed, will be on Swift 

Current board, and Swift Current people will be on Rolling 

Hills board.  So that that sort of cross-reference and 

cooperation is there. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Which RM is it?  Is it Lac Pelletier RM? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We'll get that back.  It's near the south 

end.  I'm not sure whether that's Lac Pelletier or not. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, it could be where the 

Kincaid Hospital is, too.  It could be because they were in 

discussions in going east to Gravelbourg. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's not. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- It's not?  Okay, I will assume, Madam 

Minister, that it's not.  Is Kincaid going to be placed in the 

Rolling Hills or are they going to be in the Gravelbourg 

district? 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2475 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We expect they'll be going to 

Gravelbourg. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- One of the concerns that the hospitals around 

the city of Swift Current have is that the city of Swift Current, 

in order to meet it's population quota, is going to have to reduce 

its beds even on a two to three -- even at a three -- beds per 

thousand on a regional basis.  They will have to increase . . . or 

decrease their beds in that Swift Current Union Hospital. 

 

That has raised a great deal of concern in Gull Lake, Cabri, 

Vanguard, and Ponteix and Mankota as well, Madam Minister.  

And the concern that they have is that the city will eat up all of 

the hospital beds.  And if they take and blend . . . or just take 

the city of Swift Current with the union hospital district that 

they have there, which I think is three and a half municipalities 

with that, those three and a half municipalities will have 

roughly 20,000 people -- could be something less than that -- 

but at 20,000 that's still 60 beds at three times.  And you have . 

. .  Or three beds per thousand.  That's still 60 beds.  You've got 

I think 18 beds short.  And they're going to have to shut those 

beds down. 

 

And I know that there were very serious concerns because 

constituents of mine whose parents were in that hospital had to 

sleep in the hallway, Madam Minister.  And that concerned me 

a lot.  And I can even give you the name of the lady, had to 

stay in the hallway as she was stabilized in . . . She's a diabetic 

and she had to be stabilized.  And in that process, she had to 

stay in the hall because there was no room for them in the 

wards in the hospital.  So that's the worry that people have 

there and the concern. 

 

Now I want you to address that if you don't mind, because there 

is a strong rural feeling that we don't want to have the urban 

pull us and take away our services.  Because Mankota is 120 

miles away from Swift Current, 80 miles away from 

Gravelbourg, and 90 miles away from Assiniboia.  And then 

you go with . . . There is no hospital then, other than Cabri, 

between Swift Current and Leader, which is another 100 miles 

distant.  And so there is a great deal of concern in those areas. 

 

And what has happened through the years, the Gull Lake 

hospital has served a lot of people in accident . . . accident 

victims along the No. 1 Highway, and that has been a very 

substantial benefit to the people who are injured on the 

highway and along the No. 1.  That's been significantly reduced 

because there's a four-lane highway there now.  But there's still 

a lot of people, and I don't know why but they do have a lot of 

accidents along that No. 1 Highway. 

 

And so we have a concern about how the city of Swift Current 

will eat up the population base and then not have rural hospitals 

with doctors there that can handle those emergency services.  

And so I'd like you to respond to that because we need to work 

that through the system. 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I would like to make this point to the 

member, and that is that first of all we're talking about two 

districts here.  One will be Rolling Hills and one will be Swift 

Current.  And what is really important on these district boards 

is your voting ballots to make sure that rural Saskatchewan has 

an adequate vote.  And in some areas it's actually shaping up so 

that rural communities have a greater say on the board than the 

urban community with which they are amalgamated. 

 

However, in this situation you don't see that amalgamation.  

You have a separate rural district.  Rolling Hills will be a 

separate district.  What they are doing is going to join 

administration to create more efficiencies, and also because 

they will then be able to share expertise and share some 

services. 

 

So now as to whether or not what beds Swift Current is going 

to have and what beds will be available in the Rolling Hills 

district isn't going to be Swift Current overriding Rolling Hills.  

This will be done through an analysis and appropriate care will 

be provided as close to home as possible for people, taking into 

consideration the bed targets, which I want to point out once 

again are flexible and are not going to be implemented 

immediately.  They will be implemented over a period of time 

as we do needs assessment and determine what the 

requirements of the communities are. 

 

So it's important that people have access to acute care in a 

place where the medical staff can handle the service and we 

have the facilities to be able to provide that.  That sort of 

assessment will have to be done on a district basis  

_- Swift Current being one district, Rolling Hills being another 

district. 

 

So it isn't as simple as saying, well Swift Current's going to 

take all the beds. Because they are two separate districts, 

number one.  Number two, I do, however, anticipate some 

cooperation amongst the districts as to what beds they're going 

to use and which ones they feel will be better in the Rolling 

Hills district, for example. 

 

So I want to say then in conclusion that we have two separate 

districts.  Rolling Hills will be voting with respect to its own 

district, on the acute care situation.  You will not see a 

circumstance arise where Swift Current starts telling Rolling 

Hills what they can do because they're two separate boards, if 

we move in that general direction, which is what we're aiming 

for. 

 

We also want to make the point that the bed targets are flexible.  

It is transition. 

 

And with respect to places like Mankota, which is an integrated 

facility -- and the long-term care will be kept open in Mankota 

-- there will be replacement services such as emergency 

services and other replacement services available to rural 

communities. 

 

Now what are those replacement services?  Well it will depend 

on the location, but obviously emergency services is a 

requirement and a must.  It could be much broader than that 

depending on what the needs are 



2476 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

and what the communities work out with their district board. 

 

So with respect to Mankota, there will be replacement services 

to meet their needs, that will provide the sort of emergency 

service that is required if someone should have a cardiac arrest, 

for example, or meet with a farm accident. 

 

And as to in-patient services, if they require surgery or 

something, they're going to go to . . . probably go to the city in 

any case.  So as long as we have emergency services and we 

can get them into the city, their acute care needs will be looked 

after.  And the long-term facility will remain open of course. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay.  I will make one other observation, and 

that is that the area Gull Lake, Cabri, Vanguard, Ponteix, 

Mankota, and Herbert were left only five beds in the scheme of 

things for funding.  And those five beds were at Herbert, which 

is at the one end of the area or the health care district. 

 

And so the concern was . . . I know that Herbert has a senior 

citizens' home and a nursing home as well as the hospital, but 

the other communities are so far away.  Is there going to be an 

opportunity for the health care board to take about one and a 

half acute care beds and spread them out in that Rolling Hills 

health district?  Because that will give them about 16 to 18 

beds that they can use in those hospitals and that would be an 

extreme advantage to them to solve some of the problems that 

they have. 

 

In fact, prior to the budget coming -- your budget description to 

the hospitals -- they had almost formulated that level to meet 

that requirement, at least from what I had talked to them.  And 

that is what they have as a concern. 

 

And I know that the board has, each one of those units . . . I 

know that Herbert will protect theirs, their five, and 

legitimately they maybe should have them.  But equally, 

Mankota, I think, had nine acute care beds and they were 

prepared to, I think, live with five as well.  Maybe four is the 

right number; maybe four and a half. 

 

But some of them need to have a realignment.  And one and a 

half . . . I think there's about 12,000 people in that district and 

so they should have about 16 to 18 acute care beds.  And are 

they going to be allowed the freedom to determine which 

places they will go to? 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- What will have to happen is that the 

district board is going to have to do a review of where the 

people are going for their services.  In other words, right now 

what is happening is most of those people are going to Swift 

Current for their acute care services.  So acute care is being 

sought in Swift Current. 

 

So what the district board will have to do is an assessment of 

where people are accessing acute care 

services.  And the government isn't going to fund for acute care 

services that are not being accessed within a district.  In other 

words they won't fund for their beds in Swift Current and beds 

within another community as well. 

 

So I think it's important that . . . it becomes very difficult for 

me at this time to tell you what that breakdown is going to be 

until we make a determination, the board makes a 

determination as to where people are accessing acute care 

services. 

 

It is very difficult to provide a significant acute care service 

where you are only funding one or two or three beds.  It 

becomes very difficult.  In fact we know that many of the beds 

that have been kept open and funded were not used for acute 

care services.  And that's what the Health Services Utilization 

Commission report indicated. 

 

So then what we will be doing is asking the board of Swift 

Current and the board of Rolling Hills to do an analysis of 

where people are using acute care services, where they want to 

use acute care services, and these are the beds that the 

government will fund. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well there's always transition in these kinds 

of conditions.  There's always illness and then stabilization, and 

then perhaps an operation or a recovery period, and all of that 

takes time. 

 

Now if you're going to utilize that acute care bed in the city of 

Swift Current and not utilize the bed in the country, then the 

people in the city are going to have a problem getting 

admissions to the hospital.  And so there has to be a blend 

between the stabilizing and recovery cycle of the patients' care 

in those areas outside.  Now I don't know what you call them.  I 

call those acute care beds.  Now maybe you have a different 

name for them.  But that's the function that has to happen in 

order for these patients to get back out of the health care 

system. 

 

Then you have the terminally ill people.  And those are very . . 

. well they get more acute as they go along on a terminal 

illness. And that is also a part of where this acute care has to fit 

in.  So I'm not sure how you classify all these people, but there 

is a definite need for those kinds of beds in that rural 

community.  And if you call them acute or transitional or 

replacement services, fine.  Then I don't think a lot of the 

people will have a problem with them. 

 

But as long as they, by definition, will allow for stabilizing the 

patient when he's there, they haven't got that much worries 

about operating on people.  But in an emergency situation they 

need lab services, they need the doctor there, they need 

emergency service care from the nurse's point of view, and 

that's to stabilize them; and then to move them into a place 

where they will be starting on the road to recovery, and then to 

recuperate.  They don't have to be in a high 

_paid bed in the city of Swift Current or in any place. 

 

And I've been through that, Madam Minister.  I spent 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2477 

nine weeks in City Hospital in Saskatoon when I could have 

been in the Swift Current hospital just as well, because all they 

had on me was traction.  And I could have easily done that in 

the community that I lived in.  And that's the kind of thing that 

we need more of; we don't need less of.  But we need to have a 

bed that that individual can go back to.  And if there isn't a 

doctor there and lab services, then there is a serious problem. 

 

So defining and identifying what you call an acute care, if it's 

those items that I mentioned, then people will feel comfortable 

with it.  But if it's not, then they won't have very much comfort 

with it. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you.  There seems to be some 

concern here about the potential lack of acute care, and I want 

to make this point.  When you talk about stabilization, that 

service will be available.  That is the transition that we're 

talking about. 

 

Community health centres will be able to provide the service of 

stabilizing a person.  They may even have an observation bed 

for a period of time to make sure that the person is adequately 

stabilized.  They'll have access to X-ray and diagnostic services 

within the community health centre in order to do the 

emergency stabilization service.  That service will still be 

available in communities, and this is what we're working and 

consulting on at this point in time. 

 

With respect to operations, clearly they are done for the most 

part in city hospitals or large or regional hospitals; that's 

primarily where our operations are being performed in the 

province. 

 

Now with respect to recovery.  This week is Home Care Week, 

and home care people will tell you that they can do anything in 

the home except intensive care and surgery, and we know that 

there are other places in Canada and in the world that have very 

extensive home care programs where people recover in their 

homes with adequate backup home care.  They don't need to 

take an acute care, in-patient bed for the purposes of recovery 

after an operation.  The other point that you . . . And so we are 

developing that service in rural Saskatchewan, the home care 

component that will provide services for people who may be 

recovering in addition to services for seniors who wish to stay 

in their home, for example. 

 

We don't need in-patient, acute care beds to provide those sort 

of services, and that's really what the Health Services 

Utilization Commission report was referring to.  They were 

saying we are using a tremendous amount of beds in 

Saskatchewan that we don't need to use, but it doesn't mean 

these people don't need a service.  They need a service in many 

cases.  It may be long-term care in some cases, and it may be 

home care in other cases.  And so that program is being 

developed, and there's been a tremendous amount of work done 

in that area already, and it's ongoing of course. 

 

The other thing you referred to was terminally ill people.  And 

my suggestion is, is to get a hold of the palliative care 

association and talk to them because 

they have a whole different perspective on how we deal with 

terminally ill people, and it is very important that we improve 

our palliative care services throughout the province.  In fact, 

terminally ill people in many, many cases, if they have proper 

palliative care, are better off in their own homes as opposed to 

being in an acute care bed in an institution. 

 

That service, as the Department of Health is now working with 

the palliative care association . . . we've talked to them about 

having representatives or working advisory groups on health 

district boards.  And that whole network of palliative care, and 

that service is in the process of being developed in the 

province.  It's already in effect in some places, but there's so 

much that can be done through palliative care. 

 

You said that you did not need to be, when you were in 

traction, in a high-paid bed in Swift Current.  Well you do not 

need to be, in many cases, in any acute care bed.  And in many 

situations this can be looked after through another form of 

service, a more community-based service.  And that's what 

we're generally moving towards. 

 

The beds in Swift Current, I should add, on average are not 

much more expensive -- I'm not even sure that they are more 

expensive -- than a bed in a hospital with less than 10 average 

daily census.  So you may call it a high-paid bed, but the fact is 

that many of the smaller hospital beds are just as costly. 

 

So I take your point.  Your point is well made that we need 

emergency services and lab services, and there needs to be 

some service for the terminally ill people, and there should be 

some service for people who may be recovering from an 

operation.  They shouldn't have to recover in a hospital bed. 

 

That's what health reform is doing.  It is saying, that's correct; 

now let's get on with providing alternate services, which has 

been taking place for almost a year and a half now in the 

province and will continue very actively in the months to come. 

 

We've had some 33 or 36 per cent increase for home care.  And 

that money has been targeted, for the member's information, to 

communities where there has been a conversion of the hospital 

from acute care to a community health centre, where we're 

moving in that direction.  Some of those home care districts are 

getting very substantial increases, just in one year, to develop 

these alternate services. 

 

And I really believe that when we have completed this process, 

that we will be able to provide a much broader range of 

services to people in rural Saskatchewan.  We will be able to 

meet their acute care needs as effectively as they were met in 

the past.  We will be able to stabilize them and provide them 

with help at home and other services as well, of a 

community-based nature, as we get the boards to do their needs 

assessment. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- In that Rolling Hills area, I believe 



2478 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

there are three church organizations that have health care 

facilities.  One is a level 1 and 2 and the other two, I believe, 

are 3 and 4 level care.  How are the board . . . is the board 

being instructed in a certain way from the Department of 

Health how to handle those facilities?  How are they going to 

be dealt with in relation to the assets that are owned and run by 

the board of directors of these facilities and rather than the 

union hospital aspect or the municipal aspect, and could you 

describe that for me? 

 

And then the last question I have is, could you tell me whether 

Herbert, Gull Lake, Cabri, Vanguard, Ponteix, Mankota, are 

going to be in that Rolling Hills, if that's the number of people 

or the hospitals that health care areas that are going to be in that 

district?  And if it's more than that or less than that, would you 

describe that for me. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, on the denominational health 

issue, what is going to occur is that denominational facilities 

are going to be treated differently than a union hospital for 

example.  And that's in order to . . . because they are privately 

funded in part and because of their denominational nature and 

the desire on the part of the government to respect any sort of 

denominational facility. 

 

The denominational facilities will enter into contracts with 

district boards.  The district board will ask for a contract of 

service, and the denominational facility will be funded in 

accordance with that contract and will provide the services that 

the district board requires under the contract.  That's what we 

have done in the districts that are already in existence.  There's 

a contract between the district board and the denominational 

facility.  In many cases the denominational facility may chose 

to use the management of the district board, to continue it, 

rather than have a separate management although that doesn't 

have to be the case.  It will depend on each area and what they 

agree to and what the best arrangement is. 

 

Where they have chosen to use sort of a common management 

and to use a common governing board -- in other words the 

district board to govern it -- they usually want to maintain some 

sort of control over the mission and values aspect of delivering 

services.  And that has been respected wherever there have 

been district boards in Saskatchewan.  So it will be a service 

contract.  There will be no transfer of assets to the district 

board from the denominational facility. 

 

With respect to levels 2, as you know over a period of time that 

level will be phased out, and people will be looked after where 

it's possible in the community.  Many of the people in those 

facilities today may be reclassified as level 3; it will depend 

when we get to that point what stage they are at, in which case 

they will then be funded as a level 3 person.  Those people who 

are presently in facilities and are level 2 will be maintained in a 

facility, or if they want to go to some other form of care that's 

fine too. 

Now even though we are going to be phasing out level 2, we 

are not phasing out of caring for level 2 people.  We will 

continue to care for people, who may otherwise have been 

classified as level 2, in the community through home care and 

other programs, through respite care in our long-term care 

facilities, and the other community-based services that I've 

been talking about.  So there will still be care for people but a 

different kind of care. 

 

So just to summarize then with respect to denominational 

facilities, there'll be a service contract; there'll be no transfer of 

assets.  And with respect to level 2 care, there will be other 

services in the community and people in those facilities will 

continue to be looked after either in a facility or reclassified 

and moved to a level 3 or a level 4 facility, if that's what they 

require. 

 

I'm sorry, there's one more aspect to that answer, and that is 

you wanted to know who is in the Rolling Hills district.  The 

communities that we now know of and believe will go into the 

Rolling Hills district -- although this hasn't been finalized -- are 

Herbert, Cabri, Ponteix, Mankota, Gull Lake, and Vanguard. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, just 

a couple of questions regarding SADAC (Saskatchewan 

Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission), and it actually comes 

out of a personal request that came to your office going back to 

December of 1992. 

 

A request came in from Dr. Barry Davidson regarding a Mr. 

Doug Bayne who had been in the hospital in Estevan, had 

finally admitted himself, with his wife's support and family 

support, because of alcoholism addiction.  And in this case, 

what happened was the gentleman was discharged on the 

Friday evening and the letter that went back to the . . . from the 

Associate Minister of Finance, said there's -- or Health, pardon 

me -- there's a process to follow. 

 

Well Dr. Davidson did follow the process, called the numbers, 

but there was no one available because it was already late 

Friday afternoon and everything was closed.  And they were 

looking for a way -- there was no readmission policy in place -- 

to address the individual having been released.  And what they 

were trying to get was the individual readmitted to the hospital 

because they couldn't do that, and they took this individual 

down to Mandan, North Dakota. 

 

And now they're trying to get some funds for . . . recover some 

of the funds from MCIC but they're told that because they 

didn't have . . . weren't referred prior to him going to Mandan, 

that they couldn't recover the money or any of the funds for the 

cost of the rehabilitation program.  And yet, Madam Minister, 

it just didn't seem there was a program or a policy in place 

whereby there was the ability to have a consultation to address 

the need and address the concern. 

 

And I guess two questions arise:  number one, why the 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2479 

hospital wasn't allowed or the hospital themselves -- I'm not 

exactly sure of the details -- why they wouldn't have held the 

gentleman in question till Monday, at his request, until they 

could have contacted the department whether or not further 

services were needed to overcome this addiction to alcohol. 

 

So that's the question we're asking, Madam Minister.  Is there 

another . . . I guess it looks like we're falling between the 

cracks.  Is there a policy in place that can address these 

situations that arise, where a person's discharged and really 

shouldn't be on a weekend when there isn't personnel 

available?  And if other corrective measures are in place, what 

process can be followed to address the cost of the services in 

applying to MCIC (Medical Care Insurance Commission)? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all I want to say that I cannot 

comment on an individual case because, as you know, it's 

against the law to raise the name and comment on an 

individual, for you and for me, publicly unless you have that 

person's permission.  So I can't comment on that case. 

 

And I want to say this generally, however, that with respect to 

referral out of province or out of country, you need prior 

approval before the funding is in place.  So I just feel that if 

you want to raise a very specific case, that we can look at it for 

you in more detail, but I certainly cannot discuss it publicly.  

And unless you have that person's individual permission, you 

should not be either. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Madam Minister, let me remind you of the 

number of individuals you dragged into this House and before 

the House on occasions.  Fine.  And that's fine. 

 

And I've got the letter from the doctor and I've talked to the 

individual, and the major question that comes up here is what's 

the policy?  A person comes seeking help, and because of his 

discharge on the weekend and the offices aren't open and the 

hospital isn't open, and the person is actually seeking help, 

regardless of who that individual is, what is the policy? 

 

Is there a policy that addresses the concerns out there so that a 

person, individuals, or families, are not forced to use other 

alternatives and then have to come to MCIC looking for 

funding to help in the overcoming . . . or covering the cost and 

expenses of overcoming the circumstances -- the cost of 

gaining the treatment that's needed, Madam Minister?  That's 

what we're looking for.  And that's the question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I want to point out to the member again 

that I cannot get into the details of the specific situation.  I can't 

get into the details of the specific situation. 

 

I do want to say generally, however, that there are emergency 

services available in Saskatchewan.  And there are detox 

programs in the province, for example, and hospitals do 

provide emergency services.  And I can't get into the details, 

but if in one area there's 

problems, a physician can access emergency services in the 

province at some point. 

 

However in order to get prior approval for out-of-province 

services, it takes an extensive review and there has to be 

approval given for out-of-province services.  It isn't just done 

on a physician saying this person's got to go out of province.  

And the emergency services are available in the province, that 

would provide for an emergency situation and allow for the 

review to take place which would then lead to an approval for 

out-of-province services if indeed that was necessary. 

 

Now with respect to the particular situation you raise, I'm going 

to ask the Department of Health to speak with you and take a 

closer look at what happened there and whether there is 

anything that could be corrected or anything put in place. 

 

But generally speaking, prior approval has to be obtained for 

out-of-province services.  It means a very extensive review of 

the situation, and there are emergency services available in the 

province. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you, Madam Minister.  

Madam Minister, I would like to have a bit of a breakdown of 

what the emergency process is.  And certainly I will be more 

than pleased to send another letter over with the request that 

has come regarding this particular circumstance, and ask the 

office to review it again and get back to us.  Thank you, 

Madam Minister. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The process with respect to emergency 

services is generally as follows: if an individual is identified as 

requiring hospitalization by a physician, obviously, or family 

member, they will be hospitalized.  If an individual, however, 

is identified as requiring detox services -- this can be done 

through a family physician, through family members or 

through workers associated with SADAC or alcohol and 

addiction counselling -- if they're identified as requiring detox 

services then they would have to contact a detox centre and 

they would be admitted to that centre. 

 

So it's either hospitalization, if they require hospitalization, or 

detox services if they require detox services.  And it's very 

simple to get admission to the hospital or to the detox service 

centre if that need is identified by a family member or a 

physician.  In some cases it may even be the individual 

themself submitting themselves for some help. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, I 

just have a few things I wanted to discuss with you this 

afternoon about specific hospitals in my constituency.  I think 

we've probably registered our opposition to the health care 

changes that you are implementing. 

 

I just want to deal specifically though with the hospital at 

Dodsland to begin with.  And I wonder if you can 



2480 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

provide some assurance to the people of that community and 

that surrounding area that the health care, emergency care 

needs of that community as well as the long-term care needs of 

that community will be met? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you.  The question was, is will we 

provide long-term care needs for Dodsland and emergency 

services?  And of course, the short answer to that is yes, there 

will be emergency services available and long-term care needs 

will be met throughout the province. 

 

Now what will happen and what we're encouraging 

communities to do in conjunction with their district board is to 

convert the hospital to a special care home . . . to a health care 

centre, rather, and in that health care centre to provide services 

such as emergency services if that is the most appropriate way 

to do it. 

 

Now I don't know specifically what discussions Dodsland is 

saying.  I do know that most communities are looking at that 

option.  Some, however, are looking at other options such as 

using another facility in their community because they feel it's 

more appropriate, or it's closer to the special care home and 

they want to be able to look at being closer to the special care 

home. 

 

Now I can't give you the specifics with respect to discussions 

that Dodsland is having, but I can assure that there will be 

emergency services to stabilize people if they have a cardiac 

arrest, for example, or a farm accident, in order to get them to a 

hospital where they can perform surgery or do whatever has to 

be done in order to look after this person and provide them 

with appropriate acute care. 

 

The health centre may have other options to it as well as 

emergency services. And that of course is being discussed at 

this point, I'm sure, by the board at Dodsland in conjunction 

with the planning group and the district board.  And at this 

point in time I can't tell you exactly what that will look like. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Madam Minister, that's pretty cold comfort 

for the people of Dodsland.  They've asked that I on behalf of 

them, ask them about some of these things, Madam Minister.  

They had a public meeting in Dodsland that I'm sure you're 

aware of, and the whole community turned out to the public 

meeting. 

 

And I don't know . . I attended the public meeting, Madam 

Minister, and it seemed to me there was a fairly strong 

consensus there that evening.  In fact I would almost venture to 

say it was a unanimous consensus, Madam Minister, that the 

plans that you have or lack thereof for the Dodsland hospital 

and long-term care facility, are of great concern to them. 

 

They don't want to be part of an experiment with their health 

care system in that immediate area and the community of 

Dodsland.  So they're wondering things like, is there going to 

be emergency care available within their converted hospital, as 

you like to refer to it.  Is it going to be available on a 24-hour 

basis?  Will we see a number of job lay-offs in the community, 

and 

where do you anticipate the people that are being laid off from 

that facility will be going?  If there are lay-offs in the health 

care facilities there, I don't think there's that many opportunities 

for them in Dodsland to go elsewhere, Madam Minister. 

 

So right now, for example, the ambulance service is done by a 

group of volunteers basically, coordinated by the hospital. So 

they're concerned about that type of thing.  If they lose the 

ability to have someone to coordinate all of that, they think the 

whole system's going to break down and the ambulance care, 

ambulance services that are available at the moment won't be 

available in the future. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I think that in that particular area of the 

constituency of Kindersley, they don't agree with you on it, 

Madam Minister.  They think that their situation is such that 

their needs were being met pretty well prior to the proposed 

changes. 

 

So I just, you know, want to ask you about a couple of those 

specifics.  Are there going to be . . . is there going to be 

emergency care available from that facility on a 24-hour basis? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I have said repeatedly there'll be 

emergency care available on 24-hour call.  It doesn't mean 

there'll be someone in the facility for 24 hours, but there'll be 

someone who will have access -- quick access, sufficient 

access -- to that facility so that they'll be on 24-hour call.  And I 

have said that will take place in these facilities.  I've said it a 

thousand times throughout this province and in this legislature. 

 

Now with respect to Dodsland being an experiment, Dodsland 

is not an experiment.  There are community health centres 

where this takes place right across Saskatchewan.  It exists in 

other provinces right across Canada.  Community health 

centres with emergency services on 24-hour call, this is not an 

experiment.  I mean this exists right across Canada.  In fact 

nowhere in Canada are there more hospital beds than in this 

province on a per capita basis -- nowhere in Canada.  So it isn't 

an experiment. 

 

Will the ambulance service be there?  Of course the ambulance 

service will still be there.  The ambulance service isn't being 

dismantled.  The member opposite, I think, knows that because 

we've said that repeatedly.  And I'll say it again.  Emergency 

services will be available.  The ambulance service will be 

maintained. 

 

Over a period of time we intend to enhance emergency services 

through a number of different measures in communities such as 

Dodsland and other communities throughout the province.  

And the Department of Health is working on a package to 

enhance emergency services.  And that will take place over a 

period of time. 

 

So yes, people in Dodsland do not have to be concerned about 

access to emergency services.  They will have access to 

emergency services.  They don't have to be concerned about 

their ambulance service 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2481 

being dismantled.  In most of these communities that are going 

through this transition, the people in the health care area know 

full well that these services are going to be available, and they 

actually see opportunities within the change to deliver services 

of a broader range to their citizens. 

 

With respect to people being laid off, as I indicated in this 

House, there are discussions going on with respect to labour 

adjustment and labour transition, and I believe my colleague is 

going to be making an announcement very soon, if he hasn't 

already done so, with respect to labour adjustment and the 

transition for some people.  Now there will be some jobs 

available in . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Tell me, if you're saving 5 million a year 

and you're spending 3.6 . . . 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Do you want to ask a question?  Do you 

want to ask a question or are you going to sit there and talk 

from your seat?  There will be services, other jobs available.  

There will be other jobs available in community-based 

services, for example, for some people who move from the 

institutional sector and are no longer working in the 

institutional sector.  So some of that will be taking place. 

 

But I must say that in times of fiscal restraint when we're trying 

to pay off a $15 billion debt, we have to take our health care 

dollars and target them to real health care needs -- real health 

care needs.  We cannot be using health care dollars as 

economic development.  It has to be targeted to real needs and 

we have to make sure that health care needs are met in the 

province. 

 

That means taking money from the institutional sector and 

putting it into more community-based services, because we can 

deliver just as effectively, and in many cases more effectively, 

quality health care services through community-based services.  

And through the delivery of community-based services, we 

also deliver services at a cheaper cost to the citizens of 

Saskatchewan, which means a more effective use of health care 

dollars at an expense that is affordable for taxpayers.  And that 

is one of the aspects of health reform that I feel is very positive. 

 

So I know people are going to be laid off and I understand what 

that means to them and their communities.  We are hoping that 

we can put some of them into community-based services, as 

they've done in Saskatoon.  There's been a lot of work done in 

that regard.  Some of them may continue to work in the 

institutional sector.  There will be some collaboration amongst 

districts as well and within a district as to where some of these 

people can be placed. 

 

And essentially what we have to do in these times is to make 

sure we use health care dollars effectively for real health care 

needs. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And, Madam Minister, I think that's exactly the 

concern that most everyone has.  The feeling is though is that 

that isn't what you are 

implementing.  The feeling is that the health care needs of their 

community are not going to be met any longer, Madam 

Minister. 

 

They're concerned about the emergency care situation.  They're 

concerned about the distances they're going to have to travel to 

reach adequate health care services.  Those were all of the 

kinds of concerns that came up at the public meetings that I 

attended, Madam Minister. 

 

And I think they were very heartfelt types of concerns when 

you have an ambulance operator who has been on the job for a 

number of years, Madam Minister, and he stands up in a public 

forum before all his friends and neighbours and says to the 

people of his community, that he has had the gut-wrenching 

experience of watching someone die in his ambulance.  And he 

can only feel as a result of the changes that you are 

implementing that he's going to be faced with having that 

feeling a whole lot more often. 

 

(1630) 

 

And that's, Madam Minister, the type of comment that was 

made at those public meetings.  And that came from health care 

professionals.  It didn't come from anybody else.  It came from 

the people who work in those facilities who run ambulances, 

who do all of those kinds of things, Madam Minister.  So I 

don't think that the people of that community support you on 

this, Madam Minister. 

 

The Eston hospital is in a similar circumstance, Madam 

Minister.  It's a community of some 1,400 residents in the 

community and surrounding area; maybe even a little higher 

than that.  Madam Minister, they had a public meeting as well 

which you attended yourself, and I think you saw the kind of 

genuine concern that the people of that community had when 

the entire community turns out.  In fact when people come 

from some distance to attend a meeting of that nature, I think it 

shows quite clearly to you and your government that they don't 

support your initiatives either, Madam Minister. 

 

And we saw an example, Madam Minister, that evening that I 

think shows that there needs to be some degree of flexibility in 

all of this. 

 

If you recall, there was a gentleman there expressing a concern 

on behalf of the Eston Full Gospel Bible Institute, and the 

situation was really quite simple.  There's a large Christian 

school in Eston.  They are considering expanding their 

facilities, expanding the services that are available, and 

expanding the college there.  They're looking at an approximate 

$1 million expansion to the facilities that they have and will be 

attracting a whole lot, be able to house and host a whole great 

number more students than they have been in the past. 

 

But one of the concerns that they have is when they go out and 

actively look for students to come to their college or when 

students apply to their college, to the 



2482 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

Gospel Institute, one of the first concerns that students as well 

as their parents have is, is there adequate health care services, 

full services available to a community.  And they said, as a 

result of the changes that you are talking about, that they can't 

in any good conscience go ahead with that investment into that 

community any longer. 

 

And, Madam Minister, that's what they told me there that 

evening, and that's what they told you there that evening.  And 

they wanted some kind of flexibility built into this thing to take 

into account those kinds of situations, Madam Minister.  They 

don't think that having some kind of glorified nursing station is 

going to be adequate to deal with the kind of concern that the 

parents and the students have for their community hospital.  

And that extends not only to those students, but it extends far 

beyond that to the whole community.  We will see, Madam 

Minister, a community that has something in the order of 14, 

1,500 residents in the town and immediate area without the 

kind of services that they have had and enjoyed in the past. 

 

And, Madam Minister, I don't think that they feel it's 

acceptable.  There was a great deal of frustration expressed at 

that meeting.  There was a great deal of concern, anger about 

your proposals.  They feel that you are pulling the rug out from 

their community; that's exactly the way they feel, Madam 

Minister. 

 

So I wonder, Madam Minister, if you would just care to 

comment to this point on their concern at the Full Gospel Bible 

Institute. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I want to say to the member opposite that 

I have personally not spoken in any detail with these 

individuals, and so I therefore hate to comment on their 

concern through you, not having spoken to them personally in 

any sort of detail. 

 

I do think it's important to note however there are other 

communities in this province that do not have hospitals.  There 

are other communities that do not have hospitals, and they 

receive adequate health care.  There are communities such as 

Caronport and Wilcox, as the member knows, that do not have 

hospitals, and they also have Bible students in their 

communities.  And they receive adequate health care. 

 

The people from Eston, when they are in a serious emergency 

where they require an operation or some surgery or something, 

if they have a farm accident or if they go into cardiac arrest, 

what generally happens is that they go to the hospital, they're 

stabilized, and the ambulance takes them into the city.  And in 

this case they go to Kindersley or to Saskatoon from Eston.  

And how many of those patients go to Kindersley and 

Saskatoon?  If you looked at the charts in Eston, you saw that 

evening that there has been an increasing trend where most of 

those people, if there's any sort of an emergency, go into 

Kindersley and Saskatoon.  And in some instances under the 

old system where there was a hospital, people died in the 

ambulance, as you indicated. 

But the point is is they didn't leave them in the Eston hospital 

for that treatment.  They stabilized them and they moved them 

on. And that service isn't going to change.  That service is 

going to be there, where people will be stabilized and moved 

on when they need to be moved on.  The individual who passed 

away in that ambulance, with a hospital in place in Eston, will 

be looked after in the same kind of way.  A case like that will 

be looked after, and they'll be stabilized and sent into the city.  

That's a reality of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

That's why you find when you examine the statistics, that 

there's very little acute care that takes place in these facilities, 

acute in-patient care, because they make the determination that 

they're better looked after in a city facility where there's an 

anesthetist and specialists and so on.  And so they move them 

on.  That's what happens today and that will continue to 

happen. 

 

So there is absolutely no need whatsoever for the residents of 

these communities to suggest that somehow their emergency 

services are going to be negated and they're going to be dying 

in ambulances now.  Like that is just . . . it's not accurate, 

because the same service is going to be there.  The only 

difference is is there will not be in-patient acute care in the 

facility where they can stay for two or three or four days. 

 

But there may be an observation bed, if they have to remain in 

an observation bed for a few hours in order to be stabilized.  It 

will depend on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it will 

depend on . . . the member opposite says maybe.  It will depend 

on what the people in that community feel they need. 

 

But the difference here that is happening is that rather than 

having in-patient acute care where they stay in the bed for two 

or three days, they're moved on to a city facility, which is 

Kindersley and Saskatoon.  That's who the Eston people access 

-- Kindersley and Saskatoon, and primarily Saskatoon, is my 

recollection from that meeting, in most cases. 

 

So what the government is doing is it's going to improve 

services to the people of Eston, because it's working on 

enhanced emergency services and improving those services 

that are there.  So when the people of Eston are met with a 

situation as referred to by the ambulance person in that area, 

we will have improved services to look after that person. 

 

And what happens, again, is they're brought in, they're 

stabilized, they're sent into the city.  And we are hoping that 

through a number of different measures that we can improve 

the emergency services within our communities, and those are 

being worked on with planning groups and the Department of 

Health.  And as we move through health reform in this 

transition, a number of those things will be in place over a 

period of time. 

 

So the hope is and the plan is, is to enhance those services to 

the people of Eston and other areas.  And 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2483 

the Department of Health is working very hard on that and will 

be providing . . . 

 

The other hope is, is that community health centres, some of 

the funding that went to funding acute care beds for people 

who may not be really acute care patients . . . in other words 

they don't have to be looked after in a hospital but through 

some other form of care.  By rechannelling some of this 

funding, we are hoping to expand the services in the 

communities by putting more counselling, more prevention 

services, foot care maybe for seniors, and other services for 

rural Saskatchewan residents, so that we can actually improve 

the quality of services to many of our smaller communities.  

That's the end result of this health care reform. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The people of 

Eston don't agree with you either.  The people of Eatonia don't 

agree with you.  The people of Kindersley don't agree with you.  

The people of all of the communities in my constituency that 

had public meetings don't agree with you, Madam Minister.  

They don't agree with what you are telling them. 

 

They believe that they know the interests of their community 

better than you know the interests of their community.  They 

don't think that having these kinds of wellness centres are 

going to be adequate, Madam Minister.  They feel that you are 

abandoning them.  You are dismantling the health care system 

in their community and they don't like it, Madam Minister.  

They, I believe, feel that a hospital is one of the very 

cornerstones of a community. 

 

And so I guess we can only go on record as registering our 

strongest protest on behalf of all of these communities, Madam 

Minister.  I believe that you will have a real time trying to 

convince the people of rural Saskatchewan that you're doing 

anything different than abandoning them. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I would invite you to take the 

opportunity, Madam Minister, I would invite you to take the 

opportunity to contact the good folks of the Full Gospel Bible 

Institute, because I believe you got a letter.  I have a copy of a 

letter that explains the situation in detail.  It explains the 

situation in detail about their concern for the hospital.  And as I 

say, I would invite you to take the opportunity to call them and 

visit with them a little bit about it.  Because I don't think that 

they agree that having a wellness centre is going to be the type 

of thing that is adequate for them to reconsider their plans to 

expand the Full Gospel Bible Institute in Eston. 

 

So I guess, Madam Minister, we'll leave her at that, but I don't 

think they support it in my constituency and they want me to 

register the strongest protest we possibly can. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I will ask the Department of Health to 

check and see if there has been a letter from them received, and 

if there has been we'll follow up on it. 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

I want to ask a couple of direct questions about my 

constituency and the way things are going to shake out there.  I 

understand from the member from Morse that you already dealt 

with the positioning of Gull Lake in a health district and I have 

that information from him. 

 

What I do want to know is though . . . my understanding of 

what's happening in Gull Lake over the past week is that -- or 

two -- is that pink slips have been handed out to everyone in 

the hospital except for two people.  I may be wrong on the 

numbers exactly, but I think that's what I was told and I'm 

pretty sure my source is correct. But I want you to confirm that. 

 

And if in fact it is true that those pink slips have been handed 

out, what are your observations of the potential survival of the 

hospital in Gull Lake and at what kind of level will it be, what 

kind of service will they be able to provide?  I'm told that they 

have $119,000 with which to pay more than 200-and-some 

thousand dollars worth of severance pay alone in the 

allocations of monies for this coming . . . rest of this year.  

Those numbers just don't add up. 

 

How will those things work out?  Can they get extra money for 

the severance so the people that would be laid off . . .  Who 

pays for that?  Or is this just a rumour that can be put to rest?  

And can we find some other solution to the problems there? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I can't comment specifically on whether 

Dodsland has made lay-offs . . . Gull Lake, pardon me, has laid 

off any people.  Because we don't get involved on a 

case-by-case basis and get informed prior to any lay-offs being 

made. 

 

I do know that there have been reports of lay-offs in that 

general area.  And it's my understanding that the SHA, 

Saskatchewan Health-Care Association, is working with them 

on lay-offs and is working with them to prepare a management 

plan which should be submitted very soon. 

 

I'm also advised by the Department of Health that there are 

some $423 in reserves . . . $423,000 in reserves in this 

particular hospital . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well in Gull 

Lake hospital as of March 1992.  And obviously this funding 

and some transitional funding may be used with respect to 

severance.  And as well the SHA is looking at each individual 

case to see what they can do in terms of transferring people 

from this particular facility to another facility, for example, 

which may also affect the severance that is being paid in the 

process. 

 

So there is no general fund.  The government is not saying, 

here's a package of money for severance.  It will have to be 

reviewed in each individual case.  In many cases hospitals have 

very substantial reserves.  And in some cases it may mean that 

the person moves to another facility, for example, or to another 

service and then severance is . . . It will depend on their 



2484 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

particular agreement and what the terms are. 

 

So it's my understanding that the SHA is working very closely 

with hospitals on these issues.  And I don't have the specifics 

with respect to Gull Lake other than the information I've just 

given you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  I 

understand that there are also debentures out on that hospital, 

and I believe that those are in about that same range as the 

reserves.  Would they not have to be paid off to the people 

down there if the hospital is going to basically be closed down? 

 

And while I'm on my feet, I want to ask you, where do Leader 

and Maple Creek hospitals fit in?  Are they in the same health 

district proposed or do they have one that's agreed on, or are 

they on their own for now?  Or what's happening up there? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I don't have the amount of debentures 

that are owing by that particular hospital.  However, it is my 

understanding . . . I mean, I can get that.  I just don't have it 

here right now. 

 

The Saskatchewan Municipal Board is going to take a look at 

the liabilities that a hospital has, such as debentures, and may 

use the reserves to pay off some or all of the debentures, 

depending on the circumstances in each particular case.  That's 

the general sort of principle that will be happening throughout 

the province. 

 

With respect to the range of communities involved in the 

Maple Creek district, the ones that are having discussions and 

looking at forming what they are calling the south-west district 

are Climax, Eastend, Shaunavon, Maple Creek, and Leader.  So 

they're looking at forming a district of their own. 

 

I don't have any more specific information in that regard at this 

point as to how close they are to it, but I would imagine they've 

have considerable amount of discussions already on that issue 

and should soon be coming together as a district. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  One brief 

question to Madam Minister, and I don't expect her to have the 

information today but I would like her to provide it to us.  

Could you give us a comparison of the difference in cost of, 

say, what my local union hospital would have spent on 

remuneration for board members and board-related expenses 

compared to what the remuneration, for instance, of the new 

Thunder Creek health care unit would be for the board of 

directors and board-related expenses.  And I understand that 

the difference in size between the union hospital board in 

Moose Jaw and the Thunder Creek health unit will be bigger. 

 

But I'm wondering, Madam Minister, as the boards are formed 

-- because they will be setting budgets and your department 

will have to access those budgets -- I would like you to make 

available to us the comparisons between all of the union 

hospitals boards and what they spent and what the new, larger 

boards of directors and their related board expenses will be as 

that happens. 

 

And I understand that isn't available today, and some of them 

won't be available for some time, but would you make the 

commitment to allow the opposition to have those numbers? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Yes, we can get that information for you, 

but there are two or three things I have to point out. 

 

First of all, the remuneration that will be paid will . . . that is 

being set is a maximum at this point, and boards will be able to 

pay themselves up to that maximum and may choose 

something else within the range.  For example, in Saskatoon, 

Mr. Wright has forgone a substantial amount of the 

remuneration that was available to him.  So until we know 

where they pay themselves within the range and until we know 

how frequently they meet, it will be impossible for us to 

determine just exactly what that pay will be. 

 

Another point -- but we'll get you the information as we can 

compile it -- the other important thing to note is that when you 

compare a hospital board remuneration to the board of a 

district, you're comparing oranges with apples.  And the reason 

for that is, these district boards will be providing a much 

broader range of services.  They will be providing home care 

services, public health services eventually, special care home 

services, hospital board services, and so on.  So it's a much 

broader range of services that will be provided by these boards 

than a hospital board. 

 

So to compare hospital remuneration . . . for example, if you're 

administering one hospital, it's a lot different than 

administering two or three hospitals, or a hospital and two 

other facilities, plus home care, plus public health, plus 

addictions counselling, plus mental health counselling, and so 

on.  So you're really comparing oranges to apples. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I realize that.  You just spit them out and we'll 

sort them, and then we'll make our own conclusions, okay?  

You just provide the information and we'll get along fine. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, I've been paying very close 

attention over the last while to the questions that my colleagues 

have been raising and there seems to be a discrepancy between 

the feedback that we are getting as opposition members and 

what you seem to be conceding in this House, in terms of what 

people's impression is of your health reform. 

 

Now we as an opposition have always agreed that yes, indeed 

there has to be reform; there has to be some sort of 

rationalization of the health services.  But, Madam Minister, 

the choices that you are making are the ones the people do not 

seem to agree with -- the majority of the people of 

Saskatchewan -- not only the choices you are making, but the 

manner in which you are going about it with your consultative 

process. 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2485 

You're fond of getting up and saying, we are consulting as 

never before.  But, Madam Minister, there is a huge difference 

between consulting and then what you do with the information 

that the people are giving back to you.  And that is where the 

great deal of dissatisfaction within the province is developing.  

Because you don't seem to be listening to what they're saying. 

 

Yes, you're consulting, and yes, people have an opportunity to 

speak.  But first of all there's a jammed time line because 

somehow August 17 has a magic ring to it for you.  And that is 

wrong too, Madam Minister.  You're not giving the people 

enough time, as I did in question period.  I raised the one week 

in which they have time to respond to your core development 

program that you've got out.  And that's not enough time for 

these folks. 

 

And they are discouraged and they are, quite frankly, mad, as 

we discussed on Friday.  And I still have that article here with 

me, that the frustrations are still there; the anger is still there.  It 

may not be as prevalent or as public, but it is smouldering, 

Madam Minister. 

 

Now we have examples upon examples upon examples.  I have 

here a folder of more petitions that, Mr. Chairman, I'm going to 

lay on the Table at this time -- petitions dealing with diabetics.  

Madam Minister, these are petitions that we have received over 

the course of the spring and summer now.  Just because there's 

not a public hue and cry does not mean that the problem is not 

there and that it is simmering under the surface. 

 

Now there are literally hundreds of names of people who are 

concerned about diabetics.  I lay those on the Table.  Then I 

have another folder here, Madam Minister, of not only 

hundreds, but I wonder if it doesn't go into the thousands, of 

level 2 special care -- people who are concerned about your 

withdrawal of funding for these kinds of people. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

immediately reverse the decision to discontinue this funding, 

and instead support keeping these vital level 1 and 2 health 

facilities viable. 

 

Again, literally . . . well you can see for yourself.  Each one of 

these has about 25 names of it. More than that -- much more 

than that.  People are concerned, Madam Minister. 

 

Then we have further petitions here on the health districts 

where the people are essentially saying: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to postpone consideration of The 

Health Districts Act, so that communities may continue their 

efforts to organize their people and have a genuine impact on 

the process without intimidation or threat of arbitrary action 

by the government. 

(1700) 

 

Madam Minister, you can take a look at the numbers of 

petitions that are being handed in along this line.  These are in 

addition to the chiropractic petitions, the optometric petitions 

that have been handed in, and indeed may I say, the publicly 

funded issue of the abortion issue. 

 

So quite literally there have been thousands and thousands of 

petitions that have come in, Madam Minister, that are objecting 

to the direction and the unilateral decision with which your 

government is making many of these decisions. 

 

Even as late as today, your colleague, the Associate Minister of 

Health, had a news release, a wonderful news release where 

you're going to be spending $3.6 million trying to 

accommodate the dislocation of people who have been fired, 

lost their jobs -- 800, I understand, is what the associate 

minister said in his scrum.  And so you're going to be 

presenting the $3.6 million to help them. 

 

But also during that same time, I noticed in his news release -- 

and I don't have it with me now -- but I recall that there was a 

great deal of talk about retraining, relocating.  But all the talk, 

three or four paragraphs, dealt with unionized workers, 

unionized workers, unionized workers.  Now although some of 

that training money may be going to non-union . . . retraining 

will be used for the non-union workers, they seem to be as an 

afterthought. 

 

Madam Minister, I have a letter here.  And this letter comes 

from the west central district no. 21 home care.  And this was 

dated November 25.  And it's sent to the Hon. Lorne Calvert, 

Associate Minister of Health. It says, and the first paragraph 

indicates: 

 

 As we all know, health reform is well on its way in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  At the special ministerial forum 

held during the SHA's annual meeting and conference in 

October, we did not receive any firm answers regarding 

labour relations.  All of the discussions seem to centre around 

unionized workers. 

 

Now this is a concern that the west central district no. 21 home 

care has.  And you like to spout off all the time about what a 

wonderful job and what a wonderful cooperative effort you 

have with the home care people.  And of course that's 

important, and I acknowledge that to a degree.  But here are 

some of the questions that they were asking you: 

 

 Is there a possibility that unionized staff will be able to bump 

non-union staff?  What happens when the quality of care 

provided to our clients is put in jeopardy when qualified and 

experienced staff are displaced by non-experienced staff?  Do 

we advise our staff to unionize for better job security? 

 

And it goes on and on and on.  These are questions that 



2486 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

the people are answering.  And quite literally for public 

consumption, Madam Minister, what I'm going to do now is 

table just a small portion of the copies of letters that we are 

getting, of letters that people and concerned citizens of this 

province are addressing to you as Minister of Health, to the 

Premier, and to the Associate Minister of Health. 

 

Madam Minister, the variety and the array of concerns that 

people in this province have must be disconcerting to you as 

you go about on your unilateral approach to this whole 

problem. 

 

And I say that considerately when I say your unilateral 

approach, Madam Minister, because you take great stock in the 

consultative process, and yet quite frankly you've done very 

little to assure people of the province that indeed that you are 

on the right track, on the track that they want to concur with.  

Because while you consult, you do not listen. 

 

And you do not listen.  You heard the member from 

Kindersley.  You heard the member from Maple Creek.  

You've heard other members representing the concerns of the 

people of this province as you embark upon your revised and 

revamped health strategy. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I would suggest to you that if indeed it 

was a consultative approach, you would listen to people.  You 

would listen to the Bill 10, for example, that I was basically 

forced to bring into this legislature which indeed does what 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

and what SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association) are requesting, namely the repeal of The Hospital 

Revenue Act.  Even in question period you said, these folks 

will not have the right to tax. 

 

But, Madam Minister, your offloading, your downloading is 

precisely how you expect to get out of that binge, that tight 

squeeze that you're under right now, and these folks recognize 

that.  And they're saying that if you're not going to use The 

Hospital Revenue Act for that, then get rid of it. 

 

Now I know in times past it was utilized, and it was a useful 

purpose for it.  But they are saying, we don't trust you.  You're 

offloading responsibility.  I can't ask you questions right now 

about the boards because you say you don't have all the 

knowledge about what the board is doing. 

 

On Friday you accepted the fact that there's going to be a 

billion dollars spent through these hospital district boards.  And 

yet the audit trail, the audit trail and the accountability is 

suspect right now.  Because you say to me, I have no right to 

ask you detailed questions about what happens or how the 

money is being spent.  That's the conclusion that we arrived at 

on Friday, Madam Minister. 

 

So while I say that something has to be done in the health care 

system, and we've always said it -- the opposition supports 

changes; it supports rationalization -- what we don't support is 

your arbitrary decisions to unilaterally say August 17, 

there's the deadline, folks, line up now or we'll do it for you.  

That is not consultation, Madam Minister.  That's threats; that's 

intimidation. 

 

So we are asking you now and I'll ask you once more, will you 

just whoa up a little bit, will you slow this process down so that 

there can be meaningful input by the people of Saskatchewan 

so that you will be working in concert with them as opposed to 

leading them or prodding them on, perhaps would be a better 

demonstration or a better way of putting the situation?  The 

analogy could be put that way. 

 

So that's the question that I have for you, Madam Minister.  

Will you please slow this thing up so that meaningful input by 

the people of Saskatchewan will be able to direct and channel 

your efforts as you go forward in this whole process of the 

revitalization of the health care system?  Will you do that, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 32 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992-93 

Consolidated Fund 

Budgetary Expenditure 

Health 

Vote 32 

 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 32 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I would like to 

take this opportunity to thank my officials for the tremendous 

amount of work that they have done in preparing for these 

estimates and getting the information together for me and for 

the opposition. 

 

And I also want to once again take this opportunity to thank my 

officials for the incredible amount of work that they have been 

doing in getting health reform under way and in going out and 

talking to communities.  Just this week they're going to be 

having another conference on rural health alternatives.  And 

this kind of effort that has gone into putting together these 

conferences, putting together the discussion papers, talking 

with people, has been quite incredible. 

 

There are many people over at the Department of Health that 

are literally working seven days a week and are on call 24 

hours a day, and I want to commend them for that effort and 

for that loyalty to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to concur 

with some of the remarks that the minister has just made about 

the dedication and the hard work of the officials.  I don't think 

at any time during these estimates or during question period or 

during the discussion on any of the Bills that have come 

forward 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2487 

from the Department of Health, has the loyalty and the hard 

working and dedication of the officials ever come into question 

whatsoever.  It's just that the minister and I a long time ago 

have agreed to disagree on many of the issues, and that is 

wherein some of the difficulties arise. 

 

And I want to thank the minister for her forthrightness as well 

in some of the issues, and I wish her well as she continues on 

on a very, very big job.  And I say that sincerely.  And you can 

always count on the opposition to help you whenever possible. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


