


















































Hansard: April 26, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1201 

 April 26, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 3 — An Act respecting Health Districts 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, and good evening, Mr. 

Chairman, and to the Associate Minister of Health. 

 

Just prior to supper break, we were engaging in a discussion 

revolving around some of the concerns that certain 

communities, certain municipalities in this province have with 

the implementation of your plan to close rural hospitals, Mr. 

Minister. And the particular concern that I was addressing to 

you was the RM (rural municipality) of Carmichael and the 

ratepayers' meeting that they had. And during the meeting they 

came up with two resolutions, which they have sent me copies 

of, and prior to supper I passed these over to you so that you 

would be in a position to respond to them. 

 

Now to refresh your memory, Mr. Minister, I will take these 

resolutions one at a time. And the first resolution by the 

municipality of Carmichael stated: 

 

 WHEREAS the Government of Saskatchewan has 

announced a plan for severely reducing health services to 

rural Saskatchewan and further disadvantaging rural 

residents by limiting their access to acute health care 

facilities; 

 

 BE IT RESOLVED THAT this meeting move a motion of 

censure against the Minister of Health for abandoning the 

health care of rural residents; 

 

 AND BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that we request the 

Government of Saskatchewan to reconsider the restriction 

of hospital care services to rural Saskatchewan and budget 

to retain existing acute health care facilities in Rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, was carried by the residents of the RM 

of Carmichael and the ratepayers of Carmichael. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I would suggest to you that a community, 

in any community in its totality should be and would be 

considered to be non-political, apolitical. This was done 

because the community was concerned for its welfare. And in 

order for an entire community to rally around a particular issue 

and to move a motion of censure — censure in this context 

means condemnation — a condemnation of the Minister of 

Health, and I suggest to you by expansion, the condemnation of 

your cabinet and indeed your entire government . . . needs to be 

addressed. So, Mr. Minister, I want to know from you, what are 

you going 

to do to respond to the concerns of these citizens and how will I 

answer this letter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, as the member has 

indicated, he was good enough to provide a copy of the 

motions and they will of course be responded directly by 

government. They were motions directed to government and 

they most certainly will receive a direct response from 

government. 

 

Beyond that, Mr. Chair, I think the member opposite, reflecting 

concern that does exist in the Saskatchewan community, and in 

some communities in particular, suggests that what government 

is doing through the process of reform is — to quote the 

motion or the resolution — is that we are, quote, abandoning 

health care in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Chairman, nothing could be further from the truth. Nothing 

could be further from the truth. Mr. Chair, we are looking not 

just at today but the long term. And if we want to preserve 

health care, quality care, in all parts of our province in the long 

term, there is just no doubt about it that major reform and 

restructure is necessary. And, Mr. Chairman, that's what this is 

about. This is a major reform and restructure that is widely 

identified and it's necessary to not abandon health care in rural 

Saskatchewan or any other part of Saskatchewan but to 

restructure so that we might have a firm foundation to provide 

quality health care for the future. And that's what this is all 

about. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Evidently, Mr. Minister, not so. Your 

Minister of Health, while she was out there at the rally in front 

of the legislative steps, was not able to convince the people that 

the case was otherwise. Any reports that we're hearing back 

from a result of that rally is very negative on your government 

and its insistence on going headlong on this approach that is 

anything but consultative. Anything but listening to the people. 

 

So I'm sure that the residents of the RM of Carmichael are not 

going to take much solace in the response that you have just 

given. And hopefully by the time you get your officials to 

prepare a written response, you will be a little bit more 

accommodating to addressing the concerns of these people. 

 

Resolution number 2, Mr. Minister: 

 

 WHEREAS the Government of Saskatchewan has 

announced that the proposed larger Health Care Boards for 

Rural Saskatchewan are to be composed of eight locally 

elected members and four members appointed by the 

Provincial Government; 

 

 AND WHEREAS it is our belief that locally elected board 

members will better reflect the interests of rural residents; 

 

 THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED that we request the 

Province of Saskatchewan to reconsider and that local 

Health Boards be composed 



1202 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

of 11 locally elected members and only one Provincially 

appointed member. 

 

That also, Mr. Minister, was carried by the ratepayers of the 

RM of Carmichael during their meeting that was called. 

 

Obviously, Mr. Minister, they have a great deal of concern 

about your appointees and the influence that they will have 

over these boards, which may well not be in the best interests 

of the residents within that health district. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, this is not the only jurisdiction that has 

approached me with concern about the make up of these 

boards. They want to have true local input. Now I know you're 

going to get up and you're going to say that they have to be 

nominated within the district and so on, but, Mr. Minister, at 

the same time, who makes the final determination as to who 

those appointees are going to be? 

 

Will you tell these people that it will be they that will make that 

decision? Or are you going to get up now and say that that will 

be done by OC (order in council), Lieutenant Governor in 

Council, meaning cabinet, meaning you? That is a concern that 

they have. For true input they want to have this final and 

ultimate say in the composition of these boards. Will you 

address that concern? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, the member will know 

that the legislation prescribes that in the case of all of those 

boards outside of the two major cities of Regina and Saskatoon, 

the board will be made up of 12 individuals. Eight of those 

individuals will be elected based on a ward system developed 

within each district. 

 

Mr. Chairman, obviously the majority control on the boards 

will come from the elected members. Now in the process of 

discussion that went around behind this legislation and in the 

shaping of this legislation there was a debate within the 

province on the nature of these boards, whether they should be 

totally elected or totally appointed or some combination of 

them both. 

 

We believe that this legislation presents that consensus that it's 

reached across the province. It doesn't satisfy everyone, but we 

believe it's the compromise and consensus of the province that 

the majority of the boards will be locally elected based on a 

ward system within the district boards and that a third of the 

boards — 4 out of 12 — will be appointed. They will be 

appointed based on nominations from those who are nominated 

by people who live within the district, and ultimately, yes, they 

will be appointed by order in council. The goal here is to 

ensure that interests that may not be elected to the board, but 

may have an appropriate vested place in health care decisions 

in a district, are in fact represented. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Minister, twice now, in the afternoon and 

now again, you just reiterated that there were in your massive 

consultation that you 

undertook, you're making the comment, that there are groups of 

people out there in the health field that said all members of 

these boards should be appointed. Who was this that told you 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In my own case, Mr. Member, in a 

variety of public meetings that I attended, that proposal was put 

forth by individuals in those meetings. In writing, in a more 

formal sense, both the cities of Regina and Saskatoon indicated 

that their preference would be for totally appointed health 

boards. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Could you table those documents that would 

support that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The answer is yes. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Could you table that before we finish the 

discussion tonight? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Because we will have opportunity 

tomorrow to continue in committee, would it be appropriate for 

the member if we can get them to you by tomorrow? It'll be 

difficult, given the time of day. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — That's understood and that's appreciated, Mr. 

Member. I don't think that should be a problem as long as we 

do get that information in time to react to it. Thank you. 

 

You're talking about the new health districts and the 

organization of the new health districts. Do you perceive, Mr. 

Minister, all of the health districts, the remaining ones — as 

they will either be organized by the local people in the areas or 

by the minister after August 17 — do you see these health 

districts being modelled after the Regina model? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — No, no, no. The member will know that 

there are now at least two rural health districts and at least one 

urban-rural health district in addition to the districts that now 

are in Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert. Each district in 

some ways will be unique, reflecting its own communities and 

geography and characteristics, but the model I think that will be 

more general would be the model that we can now observe at 

work in the Midwest district. 

 

So I think the answer to the member's question is no, the 

majority of districts will not be parallel to the Regina and 

Saskatoon situations which are unique because they represent 

our two largest urban centres. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Well thank you, Mr. Member. I would ask 

you then to outline for the people who happen to be listening 

how you perceive the Midwest district to be organized? Could 

you give us a thumbnail sketch of the organizational . . . the org 

chart as it were, of how you perceive this health district 

functioning? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I may be a little unclear in the question 

and I'll ask the member if it wants further 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1203 

clarity to re-ask. I'm not sure if the member's asking about sort 

of administration, the organization of administration within the 

district, or the organization of the district. 

 

Let me try and address first of all the organization of the 

district. I think as the member knows, it was formed because 

this legislation is not yet in place. The Midwest district was 

formed under The Non-Profit Corporations Act, and that's its 

legislative umbrella. It was formed by the various committees 

. . . or communities represented in that district, each of whom 

geographically have representation then on the board. 

 

Currently my understanding is that the Midwest district has not 

yet engaged a full-time or a permanent chief executive officer, 

and some of the organization work is yet to be done. When this 

legislation is passed, the Midwest district, as will all of the 

districts, will come under the umbrella of this legislation and 

take on the characteristics and an organization prescribed here 

in the Bill. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Who is the CEO (chief executive officer) of 

the Midwest district? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I repeat: the Midwest district does not 

yet have a permanent CEO. We will endeavour to find out the 

name of the acting chief executive officer, and if it's all right 

with the member we'll provide that by tomorrow as well. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Well I guess I'm curious, Mr. Minister. How 

do you deal with Midwest if you don't deal with the chief 

executive officer? What kind of . . . Don't you have any 

communications with him? How do you deal with somebody 

that you don't know who it is? 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Member, we will be dealing with 

the chairman of the district board, who is Lyle Leys. The 

gentleman's name is Lyle Leys. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I'm curious now 

what the cost is going to be, involved in running a district 

board like this. Is this part, number one, of the global funding 

that you're ascribing to these folks? Do they determine 

themselves what the CEO (chief executive officer) is going to 

be paid, what are the per diems of the individual board 

members, how many board members are there going to be? I 

want a complete description so I will know what the 

administrative cost of running a board of a health district is 

going to be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — To the member, we want to be very 

accurate in the information that we provide and we didn't 

expect through the clause by clause on the Bill to be dealing 

with specific financial questions. Again if I may beg the 

member's indulgence, I can report that the per diems for board 

members will be according to a fixed policy, and that is indeed 

in place and we will be glad to provide that to the member 

again overnight so he can have it for committee tomorrow. 

 

The chief executive officer of a district is and will be employed 

by the district, and that'll be part of their budgetary measures. 

And again, as with . . . there is a salary grid in existence for 

CEOs that is set currently through SHA (Saskatchewan 

Health-Care Association) work. And so we would expect our 

district boards to be using a grid system for the CEOs of the 

various districts. 

 

And to the first question, yes, the administrative costs as they 

are now will be borne from the global funding. In the current 

circumstance, of course, the funding is provided to an 

institution. Out of that funding, the institution provides its 

administration and staff and so on. It will be the same in the 

district board case where, out of the global funding, the district 

board will make its budgetary decisions in regard to 

administration. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — First of all, Mr. Minister, we're not in 

clause-by-clause study; we're still on clause 1, which means 

that it's a general, open discussion, and anything is fair game. 

So let's not start talking about clause by clause yet. 

 

The fixed policy, Mr. Member . . . I'm amazed that here we are 

dealing with the Committee of the Whole which is intended for 

extremely detailed questions. So when I ask you a question 

about how much who is going to get, you say you don't know. 

When I want to know what a CEO gets, you say, well there's 

some policy somewhere, but I'm not quite sure. 

 

How do you know how this . . . how much money is going to 

have to be used in administration so that how much money of 

this district board and its global funding is going to have to 

have left over for the front-line services for what it is intended? 

 

We have to pursue this a little bit, Mr. Minister. I want more 

decisive, definitive answers. What do you perceive the total 

funding for administration of a health district, (a) as in Regina 

to be per year; and (b) since there seems to be in your mind a 

difference between Regina and rural, then the Midwest district. 

What are the total administrative costs going to be in each 

case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Point number one, Mr. Chairman, we 

have not yet reached the stage where the districts have 

submitted a global or unified budget. That occurs for the first 

time in the next budget year. We are today, in some ways, in 

many of our health care institutions, continuing under the 

former system. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, the point that I think needs to be made 

and made very clearly here, that we expect and can now 

demonstrate that as a result of health care reform, district 

formation, and the restructuring of our governance of health 

care, we in fact will be saving significant dollars, saving 

significant dollars on administration. 

 

For instance, I can point to the situation in Saskatoon 



1204 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

where from a situation of seven chief executive officers, we 

now have one chief executive officer. Our experience thus far 

with those districts that have been at work is that administrative 

costs have fallen generally 10 to 15 per cent. So what we know 

for sure is that there will be administrative savings under the 

new governance and structure. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — That's not good enough, Mr. Minister. I want 

you to tell me what your research has shown. I want to have a 

copy of your research which shows precisely what those 

savings are going to be, or is this just some kind of willy-nilly, 

pull a figure out of the air, that there will be significant savings. 

 

All right, let's assume for a moment that there will be 

significant changes. Surely to goodness you're not doing this 

massive restructuring based on some gut reaction that there will 

be savings. I want to know what are the savings. What are the 

savings in Regina? What are the savings in Saskatoon, 

administratively speaking, and in the Midwest? What are they? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I think, as the member 

knows, the Saskatoon board has released publicly — I expect 

the member has a copy of it; if not, we'll be more than happy to 

provide it to him — the Saskatoon board has tabled now 

publicly, has provided publicly, a report of their experience 

thus far. They demonstrate significant savings in 

administration. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, we are at, in some ways, the beginning of 

the process where district boards are now forming. As those 

district boards form, they will make decisions within their 

district most suited to their district. It is our experience thus far, 

with the districts that have been functioning, that the savings 

are between 10 and 15 per cent in administrative costs. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Minister, from your experience in Health 

— and your officials will be able to tell you — what 

percentage of a hospital budget is used for labour? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Generally . . . I want to define just a 

little. This does not include the salaries or the benefits paid to 

medical doctors. But if we're speaking of nursing staff, support 

staff, cleaning staff, cooking staff, and so on, beyond 

administration, approximately 70 per cent of a hospital's total 

budget will be spent — 70 is the information that I have. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — All right. I thought it was 75 but we're 

basically in the same ballpark there, Mr. Minister. So if you're 

going to have savings of $20 million a year on the hospital 

implementation, does that mean that $15 million is going to be 

saved through loss of jobs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I want to be very clear 

for the member. It is 70 per cent or thereabouts will average the 

cost of front-line health providers in our institutions. The other 

30 per 

cent spent there will include also capital costs, equipment, 

supplies, and administration. And so let's be clear that it's not 

30 per cent being spent on administration. 

 

Now when we are taking monies out of health care generally, it 

is clear that those monies taken out of the system will have 

effect on people's employment. No one will deny that. It simply 

cannot be denied. And that is precisely why we as government, 

working with health care providers, their unions, their 

management, the health care organizations, are even as we 

speak tonight working to find ways to mitigate as best we can 

the effect on working people as a result of these budgetary 

reductions. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Well thank you for all that information, Mr. 

Minister. Now just in a word, answer my question. Does that 

mean now that the $20 million saved, 15 per cent of that saving 

will basically be coming out of wages? And I'm not talking 

about administration now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, as the member is aware, 

there is . . . as we reduce and eliminate in some cases the 

funding for acute care beds, the member is aware that some of 

that money is being returned to the district for alternate 

services and transition services. Some employment will be lost 

in the acute care sector. But as some of that money is then 

brought back into the system for alternative services, it is our 

hope and expectation that employment opportunities will be 

created. 

 

And so it's not as simple as the member would make out. If we 

just take the money out then there's that corresponding loss of 

employment, because some is going back and there will be 

alternate employment. And so we're looking for somewhat of a 

balance. And I can't be definitive, I think, with the kind of 

definitive answer that the member is trying to get here. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I think we're going around in circles here, 

Mr. Minister. What type of alternate employment are you 

talking about? What portion of the amount of monies that is 

going to be redirected are we talking about? Or is this just 

another figure taken out of the air and say well, gee, we don't 

really know but it could be this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, there certainly will be 

new and alternate services in the short run and in the longer 

run. We are looking at already with some budgetary increase 

in, for instance, home care where the budget has over the last 

two years gone up over 30 per cent. That already is creating 

new employment opportunities in home care. We'll be seeing, I 

know, over the next months and years, new opportunities for 

instance in physiotherapies that may be offered. There may be 

new roles for the nursing profession. And so we see a variety of 

alternate services and with those alternate services will come 

alternate employment. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Minister, I know one of the things that 

you're hanging your hat on in terms of being able to save 

money is by the elimination of many of the multiple boards that 

we have in the province and so on. 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1205 

But before you get up and answer that, let me remind you that 

most of these boards were through voluntary service. And a lot 

of the health inputs that we've had has been through voluntary 

service, voluntary donation. Like the VON (Victorian Order of 

Nurses) in Regina is a good example, where you're losing 

almost $200,000 of voluntary money through the system, 

which the taxpayer of the province is going to have to pick up. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, would you answer this question: what is the 

total cost of payments made to all hospital boards in the last 

fiscal year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I think that the member 

knows before he asks the question: to respond to that kind of 

question, with the specific detail that he wants, would take 

some hours, if not days, to sort out payments across the 

province in that regard. 

 

And this of course isn't an appropriate kind of debate, or 

questioning, to be having in estimates. But the member asks the 

question. We will endeavour, we will endeavour to provide the 

answer. I cannot guarantee that answer by tomorrow. 

 

But let me say this. The savings that can accrue from the 

district formation, the amalgamation of boards and so on, is not 

primarily from savings in payments to board members. In fact 

there will be little in that regard. Where the savings accrue is 

when a district board is in place and begins to integrate service, 

coordinate, and cooperate together. 

 

(1930) 

 

Now we can demonstrate from experience already, with the 

district boards that exist, that considerable savings can be 

achieved. Let me just use this one illustration, both from 

Regina and Saskatoon. Literally hundreds of thousands of 

dollars have been saved in the procurement of insurance when 

that procurement is being done by one administrative board as 

opposed to several. So the savings come. And the important 

savings come through this cooperation, coordination, that 

comes through the district-board model. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — It's becoming patently obvious to me, and I'm 

sure to all of our listeners who are trying to follow this debate, 

that, Mr. Minister, you have no answers. I've asked you many 

specific questions and you haven't given me one answer. You 

haven't done one thing to alleviate any of the concerns that I 

have that you really know what you're doing. Where are the 

cost savings? I've asked you that. 

 

You give me these significant savings, these tremendous 

savings. Well put it down in hard numbers so we can follow it. 

That's what I'm asking you to do. You're not doing it. 

 

Before, this afternoon, you were complaining that we weren't 

asking specific questions. You said let's get down into some 

detailed questions. That's what you said this afternoon. That's 

what I'm doing. That's 

precisely what I'm doing. 

 

I want some information that proves to me and to the people of 

Saskatchewan that indeed you do have a plan and indeed you 

know what you're doing. And so far I'm not convinced that you 

are. I'm not convinced at all that you know what you're doing. 

 

You're saying that there are significant terms, thousands of 

dollars you said, savings through procurement. Well I know if 

you have a big operation you go in there, the economy of scale 

generally dictates that you're going to buy cheaper because 

you're buying volume. I understand that. But how much? 

Where? 

 

Surely there's got to be something more than just some kind of 

wishy-washy gut feeling, that yes we're saving significant 

amounts but don't ask me how much and don't ask me how. 

That does not particularly give me a lot of confidence, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

So again I ask you, can you be more specific and give us some 

hard facts. In fact, Mr. Minister, why don't you table right now 

a study that you have done before you implemented this 

program which proves there are going to be savings here and 

here and here and this is how much in each case. Surely you 

have a study like that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, the member asks in this 

context, which is not the estimates, which is not the budget 

estimates and therefore we do not have the financial officials of 

Health here. He asks for specific numbers. 

 

Now I want to point out to the member — and he knows this, if 

he would, if he would care to admit it, he knows this — that the 

Saskatoon board has publicly published a record of their 

significant cost savings that they have achieved. The Regina 

board has made public and published a record of significant 

cost savings through the press. The Prince Albert board . . . 

these three district boards which have been functioning now the 

longest period of time. They have identified very specifically 

the savings that they have achieved and it makes sense, Mr. 

Chairman. It just makes sense. 

 

And he asks for a study. Well he knows that his own 

government spent a million eight on the Murray Commission, a 

study that recommends regionalization for some of these 

reasons and others. 

 

I guess what it is, Mr. Chairman, I mean I trust — I have a 

great deal of trust in — Saskatchewan people. When asked to 

deal with a responsibility, they take that responsibility and they 

achieve, Mr. Chairman. And we've seen that, we've seen that 

already in the short history of the district boards that have been 

at work. 

 

The information is available. Mr. Chairman, if the member 

would just care to access it, I am more than confident, if the 

member would wish to have a visit with the chair of the board 

either here in Regina or P.A. (Prince Albert) or Saskatoon, that 

that opportunity 



1206 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

would exist. A phone call could I'm sure bring to his attention 

many of the significant cost savings that they've already 

achieved. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Well I'm sure there are a lot of people very 

disappointed in this debate so far, Mr. Minister. We're just 

getting nothing from you. You don't know what's going on. 

You're proving it time after time after time as I ask these 

questions. 

 

You don't have a copy of the report from Saskatoon, obviously. 

You don't have a copy of the Regina board report. Aren't you 

interested? Don't you want to know what these savings are? I 

mean your Minister of Health and your Premier are going 

around saying this is budget driven. We have to save the 

province; we have to save money. You're doing this to save 

money. And all I'm doing here now tonight is simply asking 

you, how are you saving money and how much are you saving? 

Where is it being saved? 

 

You can't answer one question. You say there are considerable, 

significant amounts being saved. I ask you, well where? How? 

Share this with the public. If you could give straightforward, 

honest answers that will prove your point, you're going to allay 

a lot of the fears of Saskatchewan. Because right now the 

people of Saskatchewan are saying, oh they're going to save $5 

million this year and devastate the health care system in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Is that worth it? I submit to you, Mr. Minister, no it isn't. And 

the people of Saskatchewan don't think it's worth it either. 

 

You know why you're fudging? You know why you purposely 

left all this information out and didn't bring it in tonight? You 

say I can't ask these kinds of questions because it's more 

appropriate in Finance. 

 

Well goodness sakes, Mr. Minister, we're talking about a 

fundamental restructuring of the health system in 

Saskatchewan, and by your own admission of the Premier and 

the Minister of Health, it's budgetary driven. The reason you're 

doing this is to save money. 

 

And now when you have a massive Bill like this before the 

House, you're telling me I'm not supposed to ask you questions 

on it. Now does that make sense? Like one of your colleagues 

said, no, we're putting the horse before the . . . the cart before 

the horse. And I think you're right. That's exactly what you've 

done. That's why you don't have answers, or certainly you're 

not willing to share with them us. And I'll give you another 

reason why you're not willing to share them with us. We've 

been led to believe that you have done a study, that you have 

done a study as to the impact, the financial impact, of the 

restructuring of their health in Saskatchewan. 

 

And your own study, Mr. Minister, is showing that there are no 

financial savings — none. Ultimately there will be no savings. 

That's what your own study shows, Mr. Minister. And you 

want to get out of this House. You want to get out of this 

session. You want to 

do damage control, as your Minister of Health is doing today 

because she's afraid of coming in here and facing the situation, 

facing the people of the province, answering to them. 

 

Your own study shows that you will not be saving money, and 

therefore you're not going to be releasing that study till the end 

of May. That's our information. And you look very quizzical as 

to what study are we talking about? But, Mr. Minister, I am 

suggesting to you that that's the dilemma that you're finding 

yourself in. That you're doing this ostensibly to save money, 

and you're finding out now that you may be saving money in 

certain areas, but it's costing you more in other areas where 

you're setting up a whole new bureaucracy to accommodate 

this new system. 

 

And by your own admission, as you go from one town to 

another town, and the town is beseeching you . . . and your 

Minister of Heath says, well if you have real problems, just 

come to us; you will be a special case. That's what the Minister 

of Health tells everybody that she meets. They're expressing 

their concerns and saying, oh my goodness, we're not going to 

have the proper kind of health; we won't have the timeliness. 

There won't be a wellness model in our town because there 

won't be anybody around because of the economic devastation. 

And she says, well come to us; you're going to be a special 

case. You will receive special consideration. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, either that's not being honest and upright 

with the people that she's meeting, or if indeed you did that to 

every community that request — and I'm sure that everybody, 

community, considers themselves to be special — then where's 

the cost saving? Where's the cost saving? That's what we want 

to get at tonight, Mr. Minister. 

 

So I ask you again about that report: are there and is there 

information to lead you to believe that indeed you were wrong? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite of 

course can ask any question that he wishes to ask. There is no 

doubt about that, and he will ask any question that he wishes to 

ask. It is appropriate that we, in broad strokes because we're 

discussing the enabling legislation here, that we talk about 

some of the motivations that brings this legislation before the 

House. 

 

One of those is our need as a province to be as careful as we 

can in the expenditures of what are very limited dollars, be it in 

health care and education or in any other endeavour of 

government. And so obviously financial considerations play an 

important role. We have to reduce health care spending. We do 

not have much choice in that regard. We must reduce health 

care spending. Health care spending in Saskatchewan in fact, as 

the member knows, has been reduced. 

 

Now we can look. We can look at demonstrable success in 

accepting some of those health care expenditure reductions 

where the district model has been in place. We can look for 

instance at Saskatoon 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1207 

where a year ago about $10 million was saved from their 

expenditures in that district alone. Many of the savings were 

made through the district organization and governance. I 

indicated to the member earlier significant savings, hundreds of 

thousands of dollars savings, have been achieved simply in the 

procurement of insurance services when there is one board, one 

administration, doing that work. 

 

We know there is savings when instead of a multitude for 

instance of finance departments — financial administration 

within institutions — that can be brought into one. We know 

there is savings when we can bring our personnel departments 

in institutions into one board. We know there is savings when 

institutions working together under the district model can 

engage in bulk purchasing. We know those savings exist, and 

they're being demonstrated in those districts where the board is 

now in place and governing. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Minister, in continuing on in the theme 

that I've been after, could you give me the figure, the global 

figure, for hospital budgets in Regina and Saskatoon and your 

famous Midwest one. Give me those three figures. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, and it's a dangerous 

situation to start using numbers when we don't have the precise 

figures in front of us; and because it's not the budgetary 

estimates, these figures are not here. 

 

And the member looks in disgust and makes all sorts of 

comment from his seat. We are here, Mr. Chairman, in my 

view, to discuss the content of this piece of legislation and not 

the finances of the Department of Health. Now if the member 

wants to use this opportunity to move into estimate discussions, 

then we will have the officials with the precise numbers here so 

that we can provide the precise information. So I think if he 

wants to use this time as estimates, then estimates it will be. If 

he wants to discuss the clause by clause of the Bill, then let's 

get at that. But please would the member make up his mind so 

we know the right material to have here to provide the specific 

answers in terms of financial numbers that the member seems 

to want. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — What a disgusting development, Mr. 

Minister. You know what you just said? We're not supposed to 

ask you questions about the fundamental basis and premiss 

upon which your health restructuring is based on. 

 

Your Premier and Minister of Finance and Minister of Health 

are going around the province saying it's to save money. Well, 

Mr. Minister, I'm asking you questions about money — the 

basis, the premiss upon which your health restructuring has 

been based. And you're chastising me for the audacity of asking 

you questions like this, and you say you don't have the 

information. All the more reason, Mr. Chairman, for us to take 

a recess until tomorrow so that you have that 

information here. And then we'll begin again from tomorrow 

and add the 2 hours and 15 minutes time left to us tonight onto 

that period of time. Is that a good suggestion, Mr. Minister, to 

give you time to get prepared for the discussion in this 

Committee of the Whole, so you can get your act together? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: — What is the member's point of order? 

 

Mr. Swenson: — The member from Regina Rosemont called 

the member from Rosthern a dork in the committee. I think that 

deserves some kind of a reply. 

 

The Chair: — Order. I heard the member for Rosemont use 

the word "pompous," and I didn't hear what he had to say after 

that. If the member for Rosemont in fact used the words 

alleged to have been used by the member for Thunder Creek, 

then I invite the member for Rosemont to stand up and retract 

the use of those words. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, yes, I'll retract the use of the word 

"dork" in referring to the minister . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. If the member used them, then I ask him 

to stand up and retract that, not reiterate, and to do so 

unequivocally and without further comment. I'll ask him to do 

that now. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — It's retracted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, the member knows full 

well how the process of this House functions. If he wants to get 

into a line-by-line discussion of the Department of Health's 

budget, and a line-by-line debate on the estimates in precise 

dollar amounts, he knows that that's the procedure we do in 

estimates. And he will have as much time . . . And I heard one 

of his members this afternoon say that we're going to be here 

for weeks on those estimates. Fair enough. 

 

We're here to discuss the legislation. Now if he wants to turn 

this process into the estimates, that's his choice. It's my 

understanding that we come today to discuss legislation — the 

Bill that's before the House. 

 

Now I have said, and will say again, in this province today, 

given the fiscal circumstances that we're in, all of the decisions 

that we take as government and that you object to as opposition 

in some ways are related to our fiscal condition. We simply 

must live within the means that we have. 

 

The last 10 years of borrowing is over. We can't do it any more. 

This affects each and every decision that we take. This is true 

in Health; it's true in Education; it's true in Agriculture; it's true 

everywhere. 

 

Now in terms of health care reform, when we're talking about 

the principle of reform, surely the member opposite can see 

that in the district board formation, in regionalization, there are 

cost savings to be had — be it in administration; be it in bulk 



1208 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

purchasing; be it in procurement of other services; be it in 

coordination of services. 

 

Now if he wants some specific numbers, we know in this 

budget year we will find savings of $20 million in our base and 

regional hospitals, and in this budget year we will find 5 

million savings in our small hospitals. That's the budget plan 

for this year. We know that those savings will be easier to 

achieve given the district board formation where the decisions 

around procurement, administration, and all the things we've 

talked about, can be made. 

 

Now if the member wants to go line by line, then I suggest that 

is the process of estimates and he knows it. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Well, Mr. Minister, you're copping out again. 

It's a cover-up. You don't want to admit the fact that there are 

virtually no cost savings in the final analysis. And in your own 

words, you're talking . . . you just finished saying that the 

reason we're here is because of the fiscal reality of this 

province. That's what you just said. So I want to pursue that. 

You are saying now that your purpose, your motivation, is to 

save money because of the fiscal reality of the province. And 

you also just finished saying that in the current year, the 

balance, you're going to save 5 million, and that in each 

succeeding year you're going to save 20 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, get up and show me where you are going to 

save $5 million. And don't prance around about talking about 

some global saving because of economy of scale. You've done 

a study. I want to see: where do you save that 5 million this 

year? Where are you saving 20 million next year? Let's give us 

an outline on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — At point number one, Mr. Chairman, the 

member refers to a study. I believe what he is referring to is the 

health utilization commission due to report I believe at the end 

of May or thereabouts. 

 

Now the health utilization report is not a report that's out there 

to study money. It is out there to study what is the appropriate 

health care services required for the people of Saskatchewan in 

1993 and beyond. It's not a group to be out there doing the cost 

work. 

 

Now we're asking our now-existing health boards and the 

now-forming district boards to deal with some budgetary 

realities which have in them reductions. And we know in this 

budget year — I repeat again — $20 million of savings will be 

found in our large base and regional hospitals; $5 million of 

savings will be found in our smaller hospitals. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Would you table the document — your 

calculations that show where those 20 millions and those 5 

millions dollars of savings come so we can see where those 

savings are coming from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The reductions from the department — 

and these are part of the budgetary 

estimates, as the member knows — base centres will have a 

reduction of funding of 3 per cent this year; regional centres, a 

reduction of 2 per cent; and all others, a reduction of 5.5. Those 

are widely known and publicized numbers. 

 

Now I think what the member wants is for me in this House to 

describe precisely how, for instance, the Moose Jaw-Thunder 

Creek or the Midwest or any other existing hospital board will 

secure these savings. The member knows that that's the work of 

the local boards and their administrations and their workers and 

so on, working together to achieve those savings. 

 

The argument I think more germane to the discussion tonight is 

can a district formation be more effective in absorbing savings 

or the existing circumstance? Now if it's the member's 

argument that the existing health care structure is better 

equipped to deal with limited health dollars, then he should put 

that argument. The argument we put through this legislation as 

one of the bases for this reform process is that in the district 

formation, communities working together are more able to find 

the kind of cost efficiencies than if they were standalone and 

working alone. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — In the year 1992, how many hospital 

administrators were there in the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The member's question, I believe, were 

how many administrators, how many hospital administrators 

specifically? Given that we have 132 hospitals, it is very likely 

that we had, unless there's a vacancy somewhere, 132 

administrators, CEOs. Now there are of course in the 

neighbourhood of 400 other health care institutions and 

programs each that may have their own CEO or administrator. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — So would it be a fair assumption then, Mr. 

Minister, for me to say that there are now 52 fewer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well of course the answer is no and the 

member knows it. The budgetary decisions fall into two 

categories. The budgetary decisions that I believe he's referring 

to, which would be the reduction in funding for acute care 

beds, fall into two categories: one, a six-month category; and 

the other with the integrated facilities, an eight-month category. 

 

And so today, as the member asks the question, the answer is 

obviously no. As the district boards form and begin to make 

their own decisions about administration, as about every other 

aspect of the provision of health care, then that number will 

evolve. 

 

I expect there will be fewer. But today, as the member asks the 

question, the answer's no. There would be tonight the same 

number of administrators or CEOs as there were a week ago, a 

month ago, or maybe a year ago. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — So we have the same numbers of 

administrators in Saskatoon and Regina as there were prior. 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1209 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — No. Because the member asked 

specifically about 52 — the 52 affected by the acute care 

funding reductions. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He asked you how many. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well he asked . . . If the member from 

Thunder Creek wants to ask, he can stand up and ask. He 

moved his questioning from how many province-wide, then to 

a question which said, well do we have 52 fewer, referring to 

those 52 institutions. 

 

Now I have said earlier in the discussion tonight that yes, in 

fact administration has been reduced in Saskatoon and Regina. 

In terms of the 52 institutions affected by the reductions in 

acute care funding, this is too early for those decisions to have 

been made by the district boards. We know those decisions will 

be coming. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Minister, it says here, and I quote: 

Romanow said he didn't believe health care costs in the 

province are sky-rocketing. "The cost of medicare is well 

within the budget." Prince Albert Daily Herald, January 31, 

1991. 

 

Health care costs in the province are sky-rocketing; he doesn't 

believe that. "The cost of medicare is well within the budget". 

Do you agree with your Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Member, I'll tell you what has 

sky-rocketed in this province. It's not health care costs. What 

has sky-rocketed in this province — and that is a good 

description for it — is what we're paying interest on the public 

debt. Interest on the public debt is what has sky-rocketed in this 

province. 

 

I believe it's in the neighbourhood of $840 million we'll pay 

this year, this year, to cover over the debt that you folks ran up 

— $840 million, the third largest expenditure of government, 

soon to equate . . . soon to equal what we spend on education. 

 

Now that, Mr. Member, is what has sky-rocketed. I have 

consistently and continue to make the argument that in the 

Canadian medicare, in provision of health care in Canada, we 

by . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . serious look at the '70s. Look at the 

decisions he made in the '70s. Where did you borrow your 

money? What did you do? Spent it on potash mines, 

underfunded pension plans. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well the member of Moosomin is 

hollering from his seat now. I invite members, if they have 

points to make, to get on their feet to make them. 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . how a lot of people were telling the 

truth around here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now the fact of the matter is that . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. The minister has the floor and the 

members should allow him the courtesy of his response. 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now the member from Moosomin from 

his seat wants . . . 

 

The Chair: — Well I've just asked the members for their 

cooperation and the nattering continues from both sides. It's 

difficult for those who are recognized by the Chair to carry on 

with the business of the House if other members tend to want 

to natter and to carry on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The member from Moosomin wants the 

truth of the matter. The truth of the matter in this budget year is 

that we will pay $840 million in payments on the public debt. 

Now that's 840 million tax dollars taken from Saskatchewan to 

make payments on a public debt that you folks ran up. 

 

Now wouldn't it be wonderful, wouldn't it be wonderful, Mr. 

Member from Moosomin, or member from Rosthern, wouldn't 

it be wonderful if tonight we were in this House debating how 

best to spend that $840 million on providing services to the 

people of Saskatchewan. But we're not. No we're not. We're in 

this House, in this session, in this budget, debating how to 

provide services with a shrinking base of financial security here 

in this province. 

 

(2000) 

 

Now he wants to talk about what's sky-rocketed. Well I'll tell 

you what's sky-rocketed; it's the debt. And the interest on that 

debt now threatens to consume us, Mr. Chair. In terms of 

health care costs themselves I make the argument, and have 

consistently and continue to make, that our Canadian publicly 

funded, publicly administered medicare is, of options that we 

can see existing in the world, one of the most cost-effective. 

There is no doubt about that. 

 

But the fact remains, we in this province and in some ways in 

Canada, are faced with limited dollars and we have to make the 

very best use of those dollars. And one of the ways to make the 

good use of those dollars is through the district formation, 

rationalization, regionalization, and coordination of spending. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's unfortunate 

that the minister, as soon as he gets a little bit under hot water, 

gets political and goes off with the old, traditional, political 

jargon and doesn't answer the question. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I think what we're finding here is a 

proposal by you that you're prepared to do almost anything in 

order to have your way in so far as deficit reduction is 

concerned. And that comes from a government who got elected 

on the promise that you were going to bring back the dental 

plan, you were going to save the prescription drug plan, you 

were not going to do any of those things that the Tories before 

you did in so far as spending money on health, because we only 

gave a 3 per cent increase per year on health, and we were 

starving them for money. 

 

Your Minister of Social Services is on the record — I 



1210 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

have the quote right here — saying that because we put 125 

deductible on the prescription drug plan, that we had destroyed 

it; that families were going to have to make a decision between 

whether they were going to buy food or buy drugs. 

 

And now you sit in your place and have a 1,700-and-some-odd 

dollar deductible in place. And you are the people over across 

the way who were elected by the people of this province 

because you said, we don't have to make those cut-backs — 

we'll spend more — full well knowing that you were largely 

responsible for the massive deficit that is in existence right 

now. 

 

That's where the betrayal comes in, and that's why we had 

those angry people out on the steps. Many of them and most 

. . . a lot of them, as a matter of fact, most of them voted for 

you, or the member from Shaunavon wouldn't be here as a 

member. And these are the people now that feel so betrayed, 

that you're turning your back on them and doing exactly the 

opposite of what you always said you would do. And they 

trusted you, and they elected you. 

 

And now while we have this massive restructuring here and I'm 

trying to get some information from you, you hide behind the 

Committee of Finance and say we're not going to give you any 

information. And yet at the same time you say, well ask 

questions, ask questions. 

 

Well we're under closure here, and all you're doing all the time 

is looking at the time — when's 10 o'clock going to come — so 

that we get out of today and tomorrow and then I don't have to 

answer any questions. That is what's so frustrating here. 

 

We know full well that when the time comes for estimates, 

your House Leader is not going to hesitate to put closure on 

that. That's exactly what's going to happen. We all know that. 

So the people of Saskatchewan are not going to have answers. 

They're not going to have answers because you refuse to give it 

to them. I still don't think that you're sitting there refusing to 

answer because you don't have the answers. It's because you 

don't want to give them. 

 

Mr. Minister, one of the fundamental problems . . . or two of 

the fundamental problems that you are having here is the 

motivation for what you are doing, the health restructuring. 

And I come back to the offloading that you are doing, the 

offloading that you have done on numerous occasions here 

tonight where you say, well I can't answer that. The decision is 

not up to me. The decision is up to the district health board. 

 

You're offloading responsibility. You're passing the buck. 

You're making them the hit men for you. These people that are 

in charge of the health boards are the ones that are facing their 

neighbours. 

 

That's why Cliff Wright in Saskatoon said he wouldn't want 

that job of being full-time chairman. That's why Mayor 

Anderson from Kerrobert said he wouldn't 

touch that job with a 10-foot pole because it's pitting neighbour 

against neighbour, community against community. That's 

what's happening here, Mr. Minister. 

 

So you're offloading responsibility, passing the buck, and at the 

same time a concern that many people in Saskatchewan, 

taxpayers, have is that what you're going to be doing is 

offloading a funding as well. That's the motivation. 

 

You complain about the federal government offloading. What 

have you been doing to the municipalities of this province? 

And that's exactly what's happening here. 

 

You're having substantial cuts to these district health boards. 

You're giving the staff a substantial amount of money less to 

work with, and you full well know that they're going to have to 

cut services, that they're going to have to close hospitals. Your 

euphemism for it is that you're converting. Well, Mr. Minister, 

when you pull a doctor, when you pull an acute care bed out of 

a hospital, you're pulling the doctor out. And when you pull the 

doctor out, you pull the drugstore out, and it's a mushrooming 

effect that it's having on these communities. So you are 

offloading funding. 

 

So these communities now have a choice. Oh yes, oh you bet. 

They have a choice. They can make local decisions, and the 

local decision is fundamentally going to be: are we going to 

close that hospital or are we going to tap the municipality on 

the shoulder and say, listen buddy, put on 10 more mills to 

cover the costs otherwise you have to close your hospital? 

That's the choices they have. 

 

The Hospital Revenue Act is that avenue that you're counting 

on. Oh I know your Premier got up in SUMA. I was there; I 

listened to him. Oh yes, these health boards will not have 

taxation rights. Don't worry about it, folks; they won't be able 

to tax. And he got an ovation for it. 

 

All the while . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . not that far. It 

wasn't a standing ovation, but it was an ovation because the 

people believed your Premier. They believed him, but now they 

know the truth. They know that it's just another back-door 

method of doing something indirectly that they were afraid of 

doing directly. 

 

So the communities have caught on. The rural communities 

have caught on; the urban communities have caught on. The 

urban communities have caught on, and so they are saying, 

listen; if The Hospital Revenue Act which gives them that 

taxation power is not going to be used by you . . . And there's 

no real function for that to be in existence; it can be done in 

different ways. If there's no real function for that and if that is a 

threat perceived by SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association) as a back-door way for you to 

offload your funding onto the local tax base, then why, Mr. 

Minister, why will you not do what SUMA asks you to do? 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1211 

Here is a press release of March 4, 1993 where it said that 

president Ted Cholod of SUMA reacted cautiously to the 

province's new Health Districts Act. And he had some praise 

for you; he said SUMA is pleased that the new health district 

boards will not be funded out of the property tax base. That's 

what they thought. And assurance we received from the 

Premier at our recent convention. And I quote again, Mr. 

Chairman: Premier Romanow made a commitment to remove 

health care funding from the property tax base, Cholod said. 

That being the case, SUMA is calling on the province to 

announce a date for the repeal of The Hospital Revenue Act 

which will result in the removal of possible levies from the 

property tax base and so that the hospital boards would not be 

forced to come to the communities, to the municipalities, to get 

the shortfall in funding made up. 

 

Now I have a whole bunch of correspondence, because after 

that news release came out, your minister of Community 

Services, the member from Melfort, got very irate and sent a 

letter to alderman Ted Cholod threatening, threatening 

government's heavy-handed fist would come down on funding 

for municipalities if he didn't cease and desist with that kind of 

talk against the government and that he should retract those 

words, that your remarks display an apparent lack of good faith 

on your part to continue this partnership. One can only assume 

that this was done for political purposes, he writes to Ted 

Cholod. And he continues with this threat: in order to achieve 

any further progress in alternate financing methods, I strongly 

urge that you issue a clear, unequivocal retraction immediately 

or else you won't get funded. And I also have his response to 

that threat. 

 

Mr. Minister, given that, that SARM supports the request for 

retraction, for the repeal of that Hospital Revenue Act; given 

that I have a private members' Bill before the House that asks 

— Bill 10 — that asks for that very same thing; given that 

SARM also requests that . . . Those two organizations 

themselves, SARM and SUMA, to my way of thinking, 

represent 100 per cent of the people of Saskatchewan. I don't 

know of anybody in Saskatchewan that doesn't live within the 

parameters of one of those two organizations. They're both 

asking you: get rid of that Act. 

 

Mr. Minister, I ask you: will you do that? Will you show, will 

you give the people of Saskatchewan, some faith that indeed 

your whole determination here is not to put it on the shoulders 

of the taxpayers of this province alone? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I want to reflect a little 

on some of the things that the member has said at some length. 

 

I guess we have here in some ways a philosophical difference 

in our view of how Saskatchewan people can work together. It 

is the conviction of this government that better decisions can be 

made by people working on a more local arrangement. It is the 

view of this government — and I believe the view of 

Saskatchewan people that was expressed throughout 

hearings during the Murray Commission, was expressed during 

the consultative process that went on in the first year we were 

in government — that communities are asking to be 

empowered to make their own decisions in regard to health 

care. 

 

Now the member opposite says we're downloading decision 

making. Mr. Chairman, what we are doing is empowering local 

communities to make their health care decisions. We believe 

that is the way the better decisions will be made. 

 

Now he turns then to the question of financing. And he is 

correct. The Premier of this province has made it very clear, 

and it is emphasized and re-emphasized in the legislation 

before the House now, that the new district boards will not 

have direct access to the property tax base. Again, that position 

was the clear consensus and will of the people of Saskatchewan 

represented through SARM and SUMA. 

 

He is saying tonight we ought to repeal The Hospital Revenue 

Act. I want to remind the member that through all of the other 

sources of revenues to health care in this province, beyond 

direct funding from the province, those being the revenues 

made from The Hospital Revenue Act, the revenues raised 

through the union hospital levy, and the revenues raised 

through The Public Health Act, contribute about $23 million — 

$23 million to the funding of health care in this province. A 

large amount of money, but when put in the context of health 

care spending of $1.5 billion, a very small percentage of health 

care funding is coming directly from the property tax base. 

 

Now that 2 per cent levy, when the union hospital districts 

disappear and with them that union hospital, the levy will be 

applied across the board. Now it has been clearly indicated 

from the beginning that this is an interim measure, until such 

time as the discussions can occur to decide between SARM, 

SUMA, and the province how best we can replace that source 

of funding to health care in the province. Those discussions, 

the member will know, are ongoing. 

 

(2015) 

 

As early as just late last week, the Minister of Health met with 

representatives of SARM and SUMA and again discussed this 

whole matter. And until such time as we know where those 

revenues can be replaced, The Hospital Revenue Act will stay 

in place. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — So your commitment then, Mr. Minister — 

just let's make sure we know where you're coming from — is 

that if SARM and SUMA continue to insist that this Act that is 

before us can be used as an alternate means of passing the buck 

off to the taxpayers of this province, to the property taxpayers 

of this province, that you will endeavour to find alternate 

means for the revenues created by the revenue hospital Act 

now, and that indeed at that point and that juncture, you will 

repeal that Act. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, that is the process that is 

now under way. The discussions are going on 



1212 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

with SARM and SUMA and with others across the province on 

how best we can replace that source of revenue. While not a 

large percentage of the health care budget, the health care 

spending in the province, it is neither an insignificant amount 

of money. And it would simply not be wise in any case to take 

that kind of money, in addition to the kind of budgetary 

reductions we already face, out of the system right now. Until 

those discussions are complete, the revenue Act will stay in 

place. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Well, Mr. Minister, I may be an amateur at 

this, but it would seem to me that there is a very simple 

solution that wouldn't require an awful lot of machinations on 

your part, and that is simply commit yourself that the funds that 

these folks are now raising through The Hospital Revenue Act 

are still going to be applicable and that The Hospital Revenue 

Act is not going to be applicable for anything else, that there 

will be no additions that are permissible under this Act. 

Remove the Act, pass something else that will still allow them 

to come up with the funds that they're accessing now through 

that. 

 

But their fear is that you're going to be using that as a back 

door. Remove that fear, and then you've solved the problem. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I think it seems to be relatively simple. 

District boards will not have direct access to the property tax 

base. The district board will not have the power of taxation. 

 

With The Hospital Revenue Act of 2 mills province-wide . . . 

That's a provincial Act, and it won't be changed until such time 

as we, through negotiation and discussion, have found a way 

appropriately to replace that source of funding. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

want to go back to some of the questions that were raised 

earlier by my colleague from Rosthern, and I think it's 

incumbent upon you, in discussing this Bill in Committee of 

the Whole, to be able to prove to Saskatchewan taxpayers the 

words that your Minister of Health and your Premier have 

spoken so often to taxpayers around this province — that you 

are going to save money. 

 

Now I'm going to ask you some very simple questions, Mr. 

Minister, and I would like you to answer them, and I'm sure 

your deputy minister has those answers. 

 

Mr. Minister, what is the hospital budget for the city of 

Regina? What is the hospital budget for the city of Saskatoon? 

What are the hospital budgets outside, for the rest of the 

province, outside the cities of Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, 

and Prince Albert? 

 

Those three questions, Mr. Minister — they should be fairly 

easy for your deputy minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — To the member from Thunder Creek, 

we've talked about those numbers in broad terms. To get the 

very specific, accurate information, because we don't want to 

be in a situation where 

we're not . . . and we're not here with all the budgetary 

documents of the Department of Health. We will provide for 

the member, for the members opposite before discussion in 

committee tomorrow, the exact numbers to the question he 

asks. Now he will also know that we have a written question on 

the subject we've agreed to answer, and those numbers will be 

available in a very specific way for discussion in committee 

tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, I'm not asking for specific 

numbers. Let's put it to the nearest million, okay? Most 

taxpayers, I think, who'd be watching tonight, realize that you 

don't have the kind of numbers down to dollars and cents, to 

the nearest hundred, the nearest thousand, the nearest ten 

thousand. I'm not asking that. Let's have the nearest million. 

 

You said to my colleague from Rosthern, why don't you talk to 

some of the boards? Well we've done that. For instance, the 

Regina board tells me they have a $92.6 million capital budget 

over the next five years. And they expect to break their 

situation out even after 10 years. You would have that kind of 

information, Mr. Minister, so why don't you just give me to the 

nearest million, okay? Just ballpark it. 

 

What the hospital budget, city of Regina, city of Saskatoon, 

and the rest of the province outside of Moose Jaw, Prince 

Albert, Regina, and Saskatoon — nearest million will do just 

nice, thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, the member from 

Thunder Creek says, and I heard him say it, that he'd been in 

contact with the Regina board, that he indicates here in the 

House tonight that the Regina board has a commitment of 96 or 

$98 million for capital expenditures. Now that's simply not the 

case, simply not the case. 

 

The Regina board, like any other health care board, will make 

projections and planning for capital expenditures over a 

number of years. They lay out those plans. 

 

But I would think the member opposite would know from his 

own personal experience, that until those plans are submitted 

and approved, money is not committed. So what is committed 

for capital to the Regina board now would be something in the 

neighbourhood of 5 to $6 million for the purposes of planning 

and developing their projects. So the fact of the matter is, there 

is no 96 or $98 million capital commitment in this budget. 

 

Now when he wants to talk about the budgets for Regina and 

Saskatoon, I can tell him now — and again I repeat we will 

have all of the specific numbers for the members opposite — I 

can tell him now that between Regina and Saskatoon the total 

board expenditures for both boards will be in this budget year 

about $390 million. And that is to provide the health care 

services — total — in those two districts. Now because the 

board structure is in place in Regina and Saskatoon, the boards 

then will make some choices about how 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1213 

that funding is most appropriately spent in their districts. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, in an hour-long 

discussion with the Regina board, they didn't seem to have any 

problem with coming up with numbers at all. They talked about 

the rejuvenation of the Pasqua and the rejuvenation of the 

General, and they had numbers attached to it, and they had 

numbers attached to closing down the Plains in yearly savings 

and where they were going to . . . they were going to require 

$92.6 million. They were very specific on what it was going to 

cost all in. And they were going to break it out even after 10 

years time. Now why you wouldn't have these numbers . . . 

 

You stand up here and quote Saskatoon all the time and about 

the savings that are being achieved. You seem to know those 

numbers fairly in-depth when it suits your own purposes. 

They've got detailed plans of how they're going to rejig the 

General Hospital, what departments are going to move here 

and what departments are going to move there. They have all 

that; they provided it. It's not appropriate for you to stand in 

this legislature and tell me that you don't have that stuff, that 

it's only 5 or $6 million. That's sheer garbage. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, any year prior to this I would be able to ask 

the Health minister, or in your case the Associate Health 

Minister with your deputy beside you, what the hospital 

budgets were in the city of Saskatoon, city of Regina - 

_ not the health care budgets — the hospital budget. It is a 

large, global number. You used to globally fund them. And I 

can't believe that you won't stand in this legislature and tell us 

what those numbers are. Because, Mr. Minister, your Premier 

and your Finance minister and your Minister of Health have 

said this is all about saving money. So we just want to add the 

numbers up here. 

 

If I'm told that there's a $20 million saving annualized over the 

next four years, each year, is what your Minister of Health 

says, and I take the entire Health budget of the province, 20 

million over 1.5 billion, I come up with 1.33 per cent. 

 

Let's start there, Mr. Minister. Is my arithmetic wrong? Is that 

the percentage that I should be at? Or is it different? You tell 

me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I have here in my hand 

the document, the vision document distributed by the Regina 

Health Board, publicly, widely distributed. Now the member 

from Thunder Creek would like to, I think, have this legislature 

believe that this is a fixed plan, approved and in place. He 

knows that's not the case. He knows, if he's read the document 

that has all of the specific numbers that he refers to — they're 

all here — he knows if he's read the document that what we 

have here is a proposal, a proposal from the Regina Health 

Board, a vision document for, to quote: the consolidation of 

clinical services in Regina. This is the proposal. 

 

If the member would like me to quote: This proposal is 

given to the community and members of the community, that 

they may, quote, please take time to consider the proposal and 

we look forward to your comment. 

 

And the member will know that the Regina Health Board, 

because this is a proposal, has scheduled a large number of 

public meetings, beginning this week across Regina and across 

southern Saskatchewan, to entertain comment in consideration 

of their proposal for clinical services here in Regina. A part of 

that proposal is proposed capital expenditures. 

 

These are not approved expenditures. This is a proposal that is 

now being laid before the community and will eventually be 

laid, I think — with community support if that's found — will 

eventually find its way into the government and the 

Department of Health where then the appropriate decisions are 

made on expenditures and funding. 

 

What we have here, as the member well knows, is the Regina 

district proposal. That's what's under discussion, and that's 

what's under debate in the community here. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, they don't have any choice in a 

bunch of that unless you're commitment that was made in this 

House to shut the Plains hospital down is pure hogwash. The 

Regina board told us that they have no option. They have no 

option but to take the ICU (intensive care unit) unit out of the 

Plains hospital. And they have to move it in its entirety, and 

they have to design a special facility to house it, that the walls 

have to have certain things inside it, that there are certain fixed 

costs associated with moving the components out of the Plains 

hospital. And those fixed costs have to be included in that 

document, so you can say, well it's approved or it's not 

approved. 

 

(2030) 

 

But if they're going to move that stuff that's currently in the 

Plains hospital, if they're going to move it into these other 

structures after they've built rooms and stuff for it, there are 

fixed costs. And they've identified those costs, and there's no 

way around it unless you're willing to stand in this legislature 

tonight and say that the Plains hospital is going down without 

any of that stuff being moved. Those costs have to be built into 

it, and you know it. You know it, so don't tell me that you 

aren't going to approve it. 

 

If you aren't going to approve it, then you should stand up and 

tell people that you aren't going to approve it because there's 

costs associated with that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now I want to know from you, sir — because you should be 

able to give me this number — outside of Regina and 

Saskatoon and Moose Jaw and Prince Albert, what, within the 

nearest million, is the hospital budget for the rest of the 

province of Saskatchewan, to the nearest million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In regard to the discussion about 



1214 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

the Regina Health Board's proposal, Vision for Change, I guess 

the question is here, is the member opposite suggesting that the 

Regina Health Board is off in what it's doing here? Is this the 

wrong process or have they come to the wrong conclusions? I 

don't know what his point is. 

 

The situation is that this is a proposal, that I think admirably 

they're taking to the community of southern Saskatchewan to 

get comment and reflection on. When the proposal . . . and this 

is what they believe is the most appropriate amalgamation and 

alignment of clinical services here in Regina. When their 

process is through, they will refine — I am convinced they will 

refine — their proposal and planning, and ultimately it will 

come to the department. And when capital resources are 

needed, those requests will come as budget requests to the 

department. I think, Mr. Chairman, that that's a very 

appropriate route for this Regina board to follow, and they will 

continue to do their work. 

 

Now we've said earlier to the member, with all of the specific 

financial kinds of information that would be more likely to be 

asked in estimates, we will have those numbers, specific 

numbers, for him and for the purposes of this committee 

tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, I don't think it's inappropriate 

at all what the Regina Health Board is doing. They're laying 

out the costs as they best see them. They're saying to the 

taxpayers of this province, this is what we think it's going to 

take to implement the plan that the government has foisted 

upon us. I'm just telling you that they're being honest, 

above-board, and open. 

 

They're saying there are certain millions of dollars attached to 

doing this. They're saying I cannot move the ICU unit out of 

the Plains Hospital without it costing X because that unit has 

some very special requirements attached to it, that you just 

simply don't piecemeal it out of there, that it requires specific 

capital construction to move it. And the other components that 

are in that hospital, which you say is going to be closed, have 

specific costs attached to them. 

 

They are being totally above-board and open with the process. 

All we're asking you to do is be the same open process that 

they are. If you're not comfortable with talking about the 

taxpayers' money in dollars, maybe you could just give me a 

percentage. I'm sure that your officials must have some 

percentages on the top of their mind. Give me the percentage of 

the hospital budget outside of Regina, Saskatoon, Prince 

Albert, and Moose Jaw, and I'll do the arithmetic for you. Just 

give me the percentage, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The member will recognize, I hope, that 

we're talking here in broad, broad numbers and statistics. And 

we're getting the specific information that the members and 

members opposite want. 

 

If we're talking about funding to institutions in the two 

large cities and in the regional centres, we are talking 

approximately — and I underline the word approximately — 

60 per cent of the spending. Forty per cent therefore spent 

outside of the large urban centres and the regionals. But the 

member opposite will also know, or should know, that much of 

the health care that is provided — the institutional health care 

provided in the large urban centres and in the regional centres 

— is provided to residents of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So that my information is that for instance in the two large 

urban centres, 44 per cent of the hospital beds at any given time 

on average will be occupied by people who do not live in the 

large urban centres. So while 60 per cent of the health budget, 

institutional health budget, is spent in these centres, they serve 

the whole of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, so we get this straight. Out of 

the 130, 31, whatever institutions that were classified as 

hospitals or integrated facilities in the province of 

Saskatchewan at present, you're saying besides the seven base 

hospitals, Regina and Saskatoon, the four hospitals in Prince 

Albert, Moose Jaw, that outside of those 11 institutions, you're 

saying there is 40 per cent. 

 

So that's 131 or 130 take away 11. That's 118, 119 facilities, 

either straight acute care or integrated, that have 40 per cent of 

the budget. Is that what you're telling me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I want to underline again for the 

member that these are approximations — very approximations 

— and we will have specific numbers. And I want to 

re-emphasize again that we're here now talking about 

institutions we know as hospitals, not long-term care 

institutions. We're talking specifically about hospital funding. 

 

Approximately 40 per cent will be spent outside of the base 

hospitals and the regional hospitals, outside of Moose Jaw, 

P.A., Regina, and Saskatoon. 

 

But it's also important to underline that these facilities that exist 

in Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, Regina, or Saskatoon serve not 

just the populations of those communities, but in fact the entire 

provincial population. And I'm sure the member understands 

that and would want it to be so, that we concentrate some of 

our specialist services, expensive medical technologies, the 

teaching role in medicine and so on, in our base hospitals and 

that they do exist to serve the need of all Saskatchewan people. 

 

But again I want to emphasize these are approximate numbers. 

We are here not with the budget documentation in front of us. 

We can provide that and will provide it but I just want to 

re-emphasize these are approximations. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, does any one qualify as a 

regional centre outside of Moose Jaw and Prince Albert? 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1215 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We describe our regional centres as we 

listed: P.A.; Moose Jaw; Swift Current; Yorkton; and North 

Battleford — five. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — When you're saying that 40 per cent of the 

institutional budget then resides in that portion of 

Saskatchewan excluding those five regionals plus Regina and 

Saskatoon . . . is that what you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — To be clear, I believe when we started 

the discussion the member was asking for the approximations 

of funding outside of Regina, Saskatoon, P.A., and Moose Jaw, 

and so when we were talking about that 40 per cent we were 

using those four. So to be clear, the 40 per cent figure — and I 

again underline approximately, approximately — is that 

funding for everything other than Saskatoon, Regina, Moose 

Jaw, P.A. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Okay, Mr. Minister, let's throw the other 

three in the hopper and would you give me an approximate 

percentage of what that hospital institutional funding is outside 

of those five regional centres plus Regina . . . well, Mr. 

Minister, don't shake your head. You gave me 40 per cent for 

four of them; I mean just add the other three on. I'm sure 

somebody there knows what the globals were before, so let's 

just give me a percentage now approximating what we are 

outside of those seven. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, the member is asking for 

the specific, detailed, financial information that we do not have 

here tonight. I've said over and over again we'll be more than 

willing to provide it for a discussion in committee tomorrow. If 

again he wants to do an estimates process here, we can do that, 

but let us have the . . . I want to provide correct and specific 

information in this House to the member. And therefore we're 

just getting into a line-by-line discussion of the budget of the 

Department of Health. We will provide that information for the 

member and we can have the discussion tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Chairman, I'm not doing that at all. I've 

said to the minister that he can use numbers to the nearest 

million. If that's line by line then we're in a bad state of affairs 

here with their line items. He has volunteered that 60 per cent 

of the institutional budget resides in Regina, Saskatoon, Moose 

Jaw, and Prince Albert. I've simply asked what Yorkton, North 

Battleford, and Swift Current, in a percentage term, add to that 

total. 

 

I've said ballpark it for the purpose of the discussion tonight. 

There's nothing specific about that at all. Is it . . . instead of 40 

per cent, does it drop down to 37 or is it 36 or 35? I mean the 

minister has all sorts of latitude here. I'm not asking for specific 

numbers at all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I say again, Mr. Chairman, repeat to the 

member that with the kind of questioning that the member 

wants to engage in, and it's fair enough, but he will understand 

there is no point in having a discussion where we're talking 

about just ballpark numbers and so on when the information is 

available and we can have 

it here, when we can have it here tomorrow. And we will do 

that. 

 

(2045) 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, the point, in my view, of committee on a 

Bill, is to be looking at the Bill in a clause-by-clause fashion. 

And I would assume there are many, many questions that the 

members will want to do and deal with in terms of this Bill in 

its implications and so on. I think we were having some of 

those discussions when we were talking about board make-up, 

ownership of facilities, and so on. These are important 

questions that arise from the Bill. 

 

In addition, through the discussion of clause by clause, I know 

we would be having discussion about the principles and the 

reasoning and the point of the Bill. Now if the members 

opposite want to engage in estimates as we're going through 

this committee process, well I guess that's their prerogative. 

But surely they would agree, I think, that in terms of the kind 

of responses they would wish, they would want those responses 

to be accurate. So we're not talking in ballpark figures when it 

comes to the very significant questions of financing our health 

care institutions. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Chair, I say again that we will have the specific 

information available for the members tomorrow in committee. 

And I would suggest that we get back to looking at the Bill 

itself. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you can suggest 

whatever you want. The very fact that there is closure on this 

Bill . . . and then in a short few hours no one in the province of 

Saskatchewan will be able to ask you or your government 

anything. You will have rammed this through this legislature, 

regardless of the wishes of anybody else in this province. You 

will have done that, sir. 

 

I don't know why you don't screw up your courage and give 

some of those answers that I know you've had. You don't need 

to discuss with the member from Elphinstone the correct 

political response here. You don't need his help. You are the 

Associate Minister of Health. You are responsible for the 

health care delivery to a million Saskatchewan people and 

being honest and truthful about that and not getting your 

direction from the minister from Elphinstone as to how you 

should handle yourself. 

 

You know darn well what those percentages are. I haven't 

asked you for anything specific in here in the way of numbers 

at all. And you know that. You can give me percentages and 

you can be plus or minus 1 or 2 with them; I don't care. But 

you know them. And I think it's appropriate for this discussion 

when your Minister of Finance, your Minister of Health, and 

your Premier have said this is all about saving money in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I ask you again. Outside of Regina, 

Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, North Battleford, Swift 

Current, and Yorkton, what percentage of the hospital 

institutional budget does the rest of the province get? You have 

told me 40 per 



1216 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

cent is the number without Yorkton, North Battleford, and 

Swift Current. With those three in, what percentage 

approximately, Mr. Minister, are we at? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I occupied a seat 

on the other side of the House and had my turn at participating 

in these kinds of debates and asking questions of ministers and 

so on. And I recall a time, not so long ago in this province and 

in this legislature, where ministers on this side of the House 

stood up and just numbers flew every which way. We know 

how that kind of responding and that kind of accounting of the 

taxpayers' dollars, we know where that's got us in this province, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

As a minister in this government, I want to be able to provide 

to the members opposite very concrete and very specific 

information. I have said over and over again tonight that that 

kind of information will be available to the members for 

tomorrow. It's the kind of information that is traditionally 

requested in the estimates process. 

 

And the member, I think, from Arm River earlier today said the 

estimate process they'll run for as long as it takes. Well fair 

enough. We'll be answering the questions at that time. But 

because the members opposite, for whatever reason, wish to get 

into a discussion of specific budgetary line items in the 

Department of Health, we'll get that information and we'll have 

it to them in specific number tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well let's try this a different way. In a 

response earlier to the member from Rosthern, you said 

approximately 70 per cent of a hospital, of an institutional 

budget is made up in wages, and that excludes administration. 

 

Mr. Minister, most of the institutions affected by your closure 

order have said that the transition fees allocated to them on a 

per bed basis, on a per bed basis, on their acute care beds in 

order to transform themselves to another system, that those 

transition fees in a lot of cases won't even cover the severance 

that they are obligated to pay to employees as per provincially 

bargained agreements, whether that be SUN (Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses), CUPE (Canadian Union of Public 

Employees), or others. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, what is going to happen in those 

institutions if they don't have that kind of money left over to do 

their conversion? Do you have some provisions under your Act 

in order beef that up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It's clear at this point that there will be 

some job loss in the health care sector with the budget 

reductions. I think that's clear. What is very unclear at this 

point is the numbers of those who will be affected by these 

budgetary discussions. 

 

Now we know from experience last year where, for instance, 

I'm told in Saskatoon approximately 150 lay-off notices were 

given, but — when through the various processes of bumping 

and attrition and so on have worked their way through — the 

number, number of actually affected people has reached 

something like 12. Therefore we know there will be effect on 

jobs, but today we do not know the extent, and therefore we do 

not know the extent of the severance costs. 

 

Now there is in the collective agreements, as the member 

identifies, some severance provisions. We know on the various 

bargaining tables some of those issues are now being 

bargained. We are meeting today and throughout this week and 

over the course of the next month with all of those involved in 

these issues to endeavour to minimize the job loss and to look 

at all of the various provisions that can minimize job loss — all 

the way from severance, retraining, and so on. That will 

demand some funding, and we as government will be prepared 

to look at some funding for that purpose. It will be then part of 

the funding to the various districts and health care institutions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, that doesn't wash. That's not 

the question I asked you. I talked about the 52 institutions that 

got their death order last week. 

 

Now what they're saying out there is that the money for 

transition which you have allocated on a per bed basis as per 

October won't even cover their collective bargaining unit. 

 

Mr. Minister, it's one thing to say that bumping and all of these 

things work well in the city of Saskatoon where you've got 

three of your large-based hospitals, where you've probably got 

25 per cent of your entire institutional budget for the province, 

but we're talking about . . . is the folks out there that had a very, 

very small percentage. 

 

You can't redefine the role of someone who has bargained in 

the basis of a SUN contract or bargained on the basis of a 

CUPE contract, you can redefine the role of their institution all 

you want, unless you're telling me that you're going to break 

those union agreements. What the administrators are saying is 

the severance requirements ate up all of the money which 

you've allocated for transition. So you can define that wellness 

centre however you want, but once the acute care bed is gone 

and the 24-hour nursing requirement that goes with the acute 

care bed is gone, that means that you have a SUN person who 

has to be redeployed in a community that doesn't have another 

place for her to work in — unless you're saying to that nurse 

who belongs to SUN, or you're saying to that CUPE person 

who belongs to CUPE, get out of the union and we'll find some 

other way of employing you in this new centre. If that's what 

you're saying, then stand up and say so. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I think we're back to the 

question that the member put earlier. Now I'll just run through 

what is happening. Those institutions which have been affected 

have been asked, in the context of their district planning 

committee and in cooperation and coordination with the district 

planning committee, to work on management plans to outline 

how the expenditure reductions will be achieved. That will 

involve, number one, staffing levels; and number two, the 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1217 

financial plan. Now when these plans are worked on and 

worked through and then worked with, in terms of the province 

and the department, we will begin then to have a much better 

sense of the actual impact on employment. 

 

Now we have, at the bargaining table, certain monies on the 

table for severance provisions. We have a group, transition . . . 

health transition committee, at work. This committee is 

bringing together all of the various health sector unions, 

various management bodies, SHA, home care, SASCH 

(Saskatchewan Association of Special Care Homes), reps of the 

existing district boards and reps of people who are not 

organized but who work in the health care system. They are 

working on strategies that will include severance. At the end of 

these processes, we will have an idea — much clearer idea — 

of the kind of resources that will need to be made available to 

meet those severance needs. 

 

Now I think what the member is doing over here is assuming 

that there will be a certain number of people eliminated from 

their positions simply because of the budgetary measures, and 

therefore the cost of severance will be so-and-so. What we are 

not aware of today and only through the process will we 

become more aware of, will be the actual impact on actual 

people. When that process has been worked through and we 

know that more specifically, then of course we will then have 

to deal with the more specific numbers in terms of severance 

costs. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, you've told me that outside of 

your base centres and your regional centres there's a 5.5 per 

cent cut to these institutions, 52 of which you have said will no 

longer have acute care as we know it today as part of their 

facility, and you're going to redefine this and these regional 

boards are going to redefine this for you. 

 

Well they've got a 5.5 per cent cut to start with, okay? You're 

cutting back the funding on their acute care beds so that means 

that you're cutting back on some of the provincially required 

requirements in there. And you've got standards. You've said 

that in here many times. You've got provincial standards that 

have to be met if certain services are provided. 

 

So these boards aren't going to have any choice, Mr. Minister. 

Number one, they're going to have to lay off people because 

they can't afford them any more. Number two, they're going to 

have to cut back services because they can't afford them any 

more. And if they are going to try and provide acute care 

services, as per provincially bargained agreements, they will 

have to pay at a certain rate. 

 

That's why, Mr. Minister, we would like this utilization report 

which you people have, this utilization committee, why that 

should be tabled in this legislature as part of this discussion 

because the conclusion people are coming to out there is, there 

is no cost savings here. There is simply mayhem and 

destruction in rural Saskatchewan for what reason we can't 

quite fathom. 

Now you've given the example of insurance in the city of 

Saskatoon, where the three hospitals could go to a single 

insurer and get a better deal I presume, maybe through a tender 

process but knowing your government, probably not. What you 

had with these 52 and every other institution around the 

province is they usually bought their insurance from somebody 

in the town. 

 

So what you're saying to the Midwest health region now is, 

we're going to buy all our insurance in one town. Is it going to 

be the guy in Rosetown? Is it going to be the guy in Outlook? 

Which town is going to have the insurance agency which 

handles the single buy? 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Minister, I'm saying to you, if that's the rationale for saving 

the medicare system in Saskatchewan, that because somebody 

in Kyle or somebody in Rosetown or somebody in Dinsmore 

underwrites an insurance policy through SGI general, which is 

common all over the province of Saskatchewan and that's going 

to save the medicare system, then I suspect we've got the same 

planning process here in Health that we had in GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) last year. We simply torpedoed it, 

and then let everybody fall to the wind. So you simply 

torpedoed GRIP last year, and now you've got every farmer in 

the province with $5,000 of net income. 

 

So you go out and you torpedo a bunch of rural hospitals, and 

at the end of the day we'll have a bunch of rural people with no 

health care because you aren't seeing the savings in the entire 

system that you should be because it isn't insurance. 

 

Mr. Minister, the vast percentages of the cost in this province 

sit in a very few large institutions. Now I want you to tell me, I 

want you to tell me that provincially bargained agreements 

with health care workers in the province of Saskatchewan 

relating to those 52 institutions, relating to those 52 institutions 

that this Bill torpedoes, that those bargained agreements aren't 

going to negate almost all the cost savings which you envision 

out of there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, the rhetoric gets more 

exaggerated as the hours go by in this House. Now we've got 

mayhem. Now we've got torpedoes. I mean some of us, Mr. 

Chairman, would like to come into this House and have a 

reasonable discussion about a piece of legislation that's very 

significant to the people of Saskatchewan, but what we get 

from the opposition is just this rhetoric, on and on, over and 

over — mayhem, torpedoes, and so on. 

 

Now if the members . . . Let's just think about this argument for 

a while. I guess what the members are saying opposite, that 

reform is not necessary, that we simply carry on the way we've 

carried on for the last 10 and 20 and 30 years. Now if that's the 

argument from members opposite, that we don't need to be 

changed and we don't need to reform, then I guess we have 

very little to discuss. 



1218 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

I really don't think that is their argument. I think they would 

say, well yes we need to reform, but . . . but not this fast or not 

this way. Well fair enough, and that's fair point of debate. If 

members opposite want to stand in their place and suggest — 

even though they had 10 years to do it and didn't do a thing 

about it — if they now have seen the light and they understand 

the need for reform and want to stand in their place and 

describe an alternate view, and we can have a healthy debate 

about that. I've not heard them do that on this day or any other 

day in this House. 

 

Now what I fear is that members opposite are suggesting that 

we ought to go the way of our neighbours in Alberta. And it's 

becoming more and more apparent how reform is working 

itself out in Tory Alberta. This is the . . . an advertisement, Mr. 

Chairman, that appeared in the Moose Jaw Times Herald. It 

appeared in other daily papers around this province not so 

many days ago, an announcement, and I'll just quote from this 

ad: Announcement: The Western Canada MRI Centre is now 

open. Where is this centre located? It's located in Calgary, 

Alberta. Is this a publicly owned or publicly funded health care 

institution? No. Mr. Chair, this is opened by a group of private 

individuals who have opened this private MRI clinic. Now to 

get this MRI test in Alberta, if you've got 900 to $1,100, you 

can get quick access to the test. 

 

And that's the kind of reform that's happening in Alberta. And I 

guess that's the route — because it's happening in Tory Alberta 

— that's the route that — the privatization of health care, the 

two-tiered health care system — that the members opposite 

would support, have supported in the past, and I guess would 

support today. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is, Mr. Chairman, we are 

endeavouring, living with the fiscal constraints that are upon 

us, to maintain publicly funded, publicly administered, and 

accessible health care — accessible, quality health care  

_- across Saskatchewan, for every resident of our province no 

matter where we live, whether it be in the North, whether it be 

in the far South, whether it be in rural Saskatchewan or 

whether it be in urban Saskatchewan, to maintain publicly 

funded, publicly accessible, quality health care for all of the 

people of our province. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, we have set forward in legislation and in 

vision documents, our vision and our goals. They're fair for 

debate. But I think we would all be better advised to spare 

ourselves the exaggerated kind of rhetoric that seems to have 

entered this debate tonight and through the discussion on this 

Bill. 

 

Now as I said earlier, today began a process of discussion 

between the various trades, trade unions that are representing 

health care workers in our province, between SHA, SASCH, 

home care, various departments of government. The kind of 

issues that the member raises here tonight are the very issues 

that they are discussing. These are the people with the 

expertise, the hands-on knowledge, and these are the people 

who can find reasonable and appropriate solutions to some of 

the problems that we know exist when there is significant 

budget reduction. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this little lecture from 

the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow who stood in this 

House a short time ago, I believe it was 1989, and said that he 

couldn't sit with a government or a bunch of people that 

brought closure down in this House and took democracy away. 

And I just now get a little lecture from the Associate Minister 

of Health on how I should behave in here and on rhetoric. 

 

If the member would like, I could read him about four pages of 

Hansard that was just full of rhetoric that obviously he didn't 

believe in; obviously that he had no feeling for. It was just 

political rhetoric; that's all it was. He didn't mean a word that 

he said. He said, I couldn't sit with people that would bring 

down closure and cut off the democratic rights of people. 

 

That's the member from Wakamow who was standing here 

representing his constituency so bravely those days such a short 

time ago. And now he stands up and lectures us on health care. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, he chastised us earlier about the Murray 

Commission, how we spent 1.6 or $1.8 million of the public's 

money on a commission that we didn't use. And every time 

something was mentioned in this House or outside about doing 

anything with the Murray Commission, the New Democrats all 

stood up and just howled that that was tearing down the 

medicare system. 

 

You . . . (inaudible) . . . make a move. We're going to go out 

and promise Saskatchewan people that we'll spend more, that 

we'll do better, that we don't have to tear anything down. That's 

what they did any time anyone mentioned modernization of the 

health care system. You always got to spend more. The rate of 

inflation wasn't enough. Lecture after lecture from the New 

Democrats. 

 

They went around this province, the election campaign, and 

always promised more for health care. Didn't matter what the 

budget numbers was. Always more. And then they stand in 

here and lecture us with closure — closure a matter of hours 

from its termination. Closure shoved down the throats of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

A thousand people on the steps of the legislature — that doesn't 

matter. We don't have to answer any of your questions. The 

member from Wakamow, the minister now who stands and 

lectures and who never believed a word of what he said four 

years ago, is asked some simple questions about how people 

are being treated in this province and if they're being treated 

fairly. 

 

A lot of rural people are saying, we don't think we are being 

treated fairly. That the health care system that we have and we 

deliver on behalf of the taxpayers of 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1219 

this province is fairly cost effective and efficient. 

 

And I've simply asked the minister tonight for some numbers, 

some percentages to confirm his own beliefs, and he won't give 

them. He says I'm asking detailed questions, that I want line 

items from the budget, that I want line items from estimates. 

Mr. Chairman, that's simply not true. 

 

I have simply asked questions on behalf of hospital 

administrators who say the 40-some-thousand dollars allocated 

to my institution as a transition fee from an acute care facility 

to something they don't know about will be used up mostly in 

severance because they have to deal with provincially 

bargained bargaining units. And the minister says, well there'll 

be some job dislocation and we're not sure and we've got a 

committee together to study it. 

 

The deadline is August, Mr. Chairman — August the 17th, I 

believe. And then the minister is going to impose after that, and 

in October the funding runs out. The funding runs out, and you 

either do it his way or the doorway. I think these are legitimate 

questions, Mr. Chairman. I don't know why this Associate 

Minister of Health is so reluctant to answer them. 

 

If they truly believe what they're saying, then he would be 

happy to stand up and say, well of the $20 million going to be 

saved, X is here, Y is over here, and this is the plan into the 

future. But they refuse to do that. Why is that? 

 

The suspicion, Mr. Chairman, is the reason that they won't do 

that, why they use closure, why they shut down debate in this 

legislature, is that it doesn't, number one, save any money, and 

two, it screws up the political agenda of the government. That 

seems to be the only reason we can come to, Mr. Chairman, 

after hours in here of asking questions with the Minister of 

Health, with his deputy beside him . . . would be able to answer 

out of course on any platform or stage in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I bet if the minister was standing in Moose Jaw Wakamow 

somewhere, maybe in the Sportsman's Centre or maybe in any 

other stage, he'd be proud to stand up. He'd be rattling those 

figures off just left, right, and centre. Or down at the co-op hall 

on Sunday afternoon when the New Democrats have their 

forum, my guess is he'd be rattling those figures off just like 

you wouldn't believe, to that nice little crowd of New 

Democrats that would be in the co-op hall on a Sunday 

afternoon. But in this legislature, with closure hanging over the 

heads of 52 rural communities and hundreds of others, this 

minister doesn't give us anything. Instead he stands and he 

preaches. He preaches to us about how we shouldn't be asking 

these questions. 

 

Mr. Chairman, you can appreciate some of the frustration. We 

are into the committee stage of a Bill that diametrically 

changes the face of health care in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And you know what, Mr. Chairman? If we're 

wrong — if the opposition is wrong — then the government 

can simply go out there 

and say, the Tories were wrong; vote for us next time. But, Mr. 

Chairman, if the opposition is right — once that institution is 

closed, once that town is closed, once the health care is gone, 

and then somebody dies, Mr. Chairman — then the government 

is responsible for that whole sequence of events. 

 

If I'm wrong, Mr. Chairman, maybe I lose a seat or maybe I 

don't gain one next time. If the government is wrong, the 

destruction of a community and potentially lives is wrong. And 

that's why that minister, instead of standing and lecturing, 

should stand in his place and give the numbers, and the figures, 

and the percentages that he has and his minister . . . his deputy 

minister have, instead of this charade that he's been running in 

this legislature tonight. 

 

Mr. Minister, I ask you once again. Hospital administrators in 

this province say that the funding available to them will not 

cover the cost of transition to they don't know what. And what I 

asked you tonight was — given that you know how many 

members of SUN, how many members of CUPE, how many 

members of other provincially bargain units work in those 

institutions — what is the government going to do to negate 

that process before, during, and after the implementation of this 

Bill which your majority is going to ram through this 

legislature with closure? 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I sit and I listen to 

the member go on and on and on. And I wonder what he says. 

What does he say? One of my colleagues answers, nothing. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the member, I believe, and other members 

opposite, would have a little more credibility in this House — 

in this province, in the community that I call home, everywhere 

— they would have a tad more credibility in their arguments if 

just for once, if just for once they would indicate to the people 

of Saskatchewan the kind of mistakes that were made in the 

1980s that have put us into the situation we're in as a province 

today — if just for once they would stand up in their place and 

admit their role in where we are today and then go beyond that 

and say, but here's some positive thought about where we could 

be or should be going. No, what we have in fact is this situation 

where the members just get up, as we've just witnessed the 

member from Thunder Creek one more time, ranting and 

raving, if I may say it, fearmongering, if I may say it, sharing 

with the people of Saskatchewan the kind of misinformation 

that is promoted by those folks everywhere they go in the 

province these days. 

 

Again I hear the member opposite talking about the closure, the 

closure of hospitals when he knows full well that the rural 

hospitals, the small hospitals, the eight-bed-and-less facilities 

who are seeing their acute care funding being reduced or taken, 

will be receiving replacement funding for transition purposes, 

that those centres may in fact become health and wellness 

centres in many of those 



1220 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

communities, Mr. Chairman. There is not closure in that 

scenario, and he knows it. 

 

But they continue to, from their seats and from their speeches, 

talk about hospital closures when they know, when they know 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And now the member from 

Estevan comes on from his seat, when he knows that the very 

study that he commissioned, the Schwartz study, he knows 

what the conclusion of the Schwartz study is. He knows what 

the conclusion of the Murray Commission is. He knows what 

conversations in this province have said over the years, that, 

number one, the way to move in terms of health care reform is 

toward district board regionalization and so on; that in terms of 

our smaller institutions, it has been the observation and the 

conclusion for many in our province that better health care 

service will be provided from a change of role in some of our 

smaller, many of our smaller institutions; that we will have, 

Mr. Chairman, as a result of this reform process, better health 

care — I repeat, better health care — for the people of our 

province in the years to come. 

 

Now many years ago, in my lifetime in any event, many years 

ago, we went through a massive health care reform and 

restructure and debate in this province in 1962. We talk about 

those days when medicare was born in Saskatchewan and we 

know at that time, at that time, at that time we know that 

members of the political party represented opposite fought that 

with the kind of arguments that go — the kind of arguments 

that we're hearing today — oh it's a good idea but you're going 

too fast. It's a good idea but don't go so fast. Slow it down; 

slow it down. 

 

Mr. Chairman, that is akin to saying stop. That's what they 

really want. They really want to stop health care reform in this 

province. Well this health care reform is underway because the 

people of Saskatchewan are behind it, understand the need for 

it, and will work with us to see it provide better health care for 

all of our people in the years to come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the next thing you 

know the member from Wakamow is going to be telling us he 

was down here in his kiddie car when the mass demonstration 

was on in '62, riding around on the pavement out front. I mean 

it gets better with time doesn't it, Mr. Minister from Wakamow. 

The stories, they grow and they grow and they grow. You've 

been listening to some of the older types around here a little bit 

too much. You aren't old enough and neither was I to have any 

kind of opinion on that process at all. 

 

What we're into here is 1993. What we're into here is 1993, Mr. 

Minister. You're bringing a Bill under closure through this 

House to take away the rights of Saskatchewan people to have 

access to health care. Now if you honestly believe, if you 

honestly believe that process . . . And it's really nice now to 

hear you talk about Schwartz and other studies that have been 

done in here that were universally condemned by you people in 

opposition. I mean Schwartz, Murray, it 

didn't matter what came up. Both people were simply tearing 

down the health care system. Now you hold them up as icons, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

If you really, really believe what you say, then you would have 

said, Saskatchewan people, go out and form yourselves into 

health districts. Elect yourselves some boards — not appointed 

— elect yourselves some boards. And then allow them to have 

their existing global funding and say, we as Saskatchewan 

taxpayers have a mission to reform our health care system. 

Here are some guidelines; go out and give it a try. 

 

But that's not what we get from you, Mr. Minister. It's arbitrary 

all the way through. You cut their budgets. You appoint people 

to the boards. You don't believe in allowing local people to 

design the health care system that's best for their community. 

You simply say we'll impose it from above and we'll make 

sure, we'll make sure that our larger centres do all right. I don't 

think that's acceptable, Mr. Minister. You can't say one thing 

such a short time ago and then expect people in this province to 

believe you when you do diametrically the opposite down the 

road. 

 

Mr. Minister, how in the world can they change those facilities 

to something else that still offers acute care services without 

being adherents to provincially bargained agreements with 

health care professionals. Would you please tell me how they're 

going to switch after October to a unit that provides acute care 

services with all the provincial standards that are tied to acute 

care service without being subject to provincially bargained 

agreements with health care professionals? How can they do 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, reflecting back on some 

of the comments made by the member from Thunder Creek. He 

talks about who or who may not have been here on the steps of 

the legislature in 1962. He is absolutely right. I was not here on 

the steps of the legislature in 1962. I nor none of my family 

were part of the KOD (Keep Our Doctors) and the Tories that 

came to the steps of the legislature in 1962. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, the member talks about the situation in a 

community and a district where institutions will, through the 

process of conversion, become wellness centres or health care 

centres offering a variety of other services to the community. 

This will be in the context, again I say, of the district that will 

be responsible for the provision of all health care services in 

the district. 

 

He recognizes there are difficulties. There are challenges to be 

met in working through the various agreements signed with the 

various health sector unions. These are not simple issues to 

deal with. That is precisely why this day began the work of the 

health transition committee. One of their mandates and a 

particular part of their work will be to consider the prospect of 

transfer and merger agreements in the context of district 

formation. 

 

Now we know there have been some transition 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1221 

agreements signed in Regina and Saskatoon and P.A. These 

may serve as some model. This group of people will be 

working diligently over the next month in this regard as well as 

in regard to the other issues we've talked about earlier tonight. 

These are not simple solutions and we know we've put together 

a very effective . . . and a group that I hope can work well 

together, to begin to deal and to deal with transfer and merger 

agreements in the district context. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 

want to address some comments and some questions to the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, the associate minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, at the outset what I'd like to say is that an awful 

lot of people in Saskatchewan don't believe that you are going 

to save any substantial amount of money with your so-called 

plan. Number two, is that they know that it's high risk for them 

for their own health reasons, and secondly, high risk for the 

communities. They know that there are serious consequences in 

the event that your plan doesn't work. 

 

In other words, what if your so-called idea doesn't pan out? 

What if people aren't taken care of in terms of emergencies? 

What if there isn't the support to maintain the acute care or the 

integrated facility? 

 

What if you end up in a situation where after you've taken 

away the drug plan, after you've taken away support for 

seniors, after you've taken away funding for schools, after 

you've taken away and shut down hospitals, after you have 

removed farm safety nets, after you have abandoned roads, and 

after you take away jobs — and as you know, Mr. Minister, 

they're saying, and imagine how you'll feel once you then take 

away the population base — then, Mr. Minister, is part of your 

plan, or at least they don't know how it would be any other way 

that you then take away the riding. 

 

And one of the members chirped up, well that's a novel idea, 

and then they laugh, they laugh. Well, Mr. Minister, what I'm 

saying to you is people don't believe that your plan is foolproof 

at all. They haven't heard anything that would give them 

confidence that they aren't going to lose their hospital. And I'm 

going to read you lots of supporting documentation here, that if 

they lose their hospital and if they lose then consequently their 

school and they lose therefore consequently more population 

base and rural jobs and they start to lose not only the younger 

people but the seniors won't retire there because there isn't 

medical attention, so you lose your nursing homes, you know, 

Mr. Minister what happens — you don't have the support staff 

in agriculture and the support programs because you've taken 

them away — then the population seriously looks at declining. 

 

And you'll say, well I guess the plan didn't work very well. 

Really what we have here is centralization and control over a 

wide area that we have seen. I guess the population isn't going 

to be there. We might as well make sure that . . . have to 

address that in terms of 

political concerns; we'll take away the riding. 

 

The member from Prince Albert says that I shouldn't be saying 

these things. I should sit down because the people of 

Saskatchewan believe in this model. Of course they don't 

believe in it. They have no confidence at all. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want the minister, the associate minister, to be 

able to give us any serious guarantees or examples of how his 

so-called plan will actually work to help people. He wouldn't 

respond to my colleague, saying here's the cost savings; here's 

how we will make sure that these facilities aren't closed; here's 

how we'll deal with emergencies; here's how a community like 

Estevan with 10,000 people . . . I mean, we're going to be down 

to where you've got one and a half acute care beds for a 

thousand people. You're looking at 15 beds in an area with 

massive technology from the oil patch, coalminers, agriculture, 

a great deal of transportation. They have no confidence that 

your plan at all is going to guarantee them adequate health care 

or services. 

 

And so the minister knows that he's . . . from what I'm speaking 

from has some credibility. Here's how various places across 

Saskatchewan have reacted to your void of a plan: "52 

hospitals lose gov't funding" is the headline. And underneath: 

"If hospital is shut, can the school be far behind?" That's the 

Saskatoon Star-Phoenix on April 15. 

 

The Star-Phoenix is saying, if you're going to close the hospital 

and you take out the jobs and you take out the funding, then I 

suppose then people might not live there, means you'll 

probably then say, well for centralization and control which is a 

nice socialist plan, we'll have to close some schools. And if we 

close the schools then the seniors won't retire there; we'll 

eventually close the nursing homes. And we've taken away the 

agriculture support programs so therefore we'll have fewer 

farmers. And that's what these papers are saying. This is your 

plan. Your plan has nothing to do with efficiency in health 

care. It's called centralization and control of the people. 

 

Here's another one: NDP losing credibility on health care. Mr. 

Minister, that's what the headline says. The NDP (New 

Democratic Party) . . . 

 

(2130) 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. 

 

Mr. Devine: — And they say no. Well that's what they're 

saying. The NDP are losing credibility on health care. Bashful 

approach backfiring. You are bashing the people, trying to use 

intimidation, browbeating them, and you have no plan that can 

guarantee that you won't take away not only the drug plan, not 

only the farm programs, not only the hospitals, but then the 

schools, then the nursing homes, finally they close the church, 

and finally people say, I guess that's it. 

 

What happens if your plan doesn't work? What if it 



1222 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

ends up just as we have described in these articles are saying? 

What if it isn't any good? The consequences on health care are 

severe. The social consequences on people's lives are 

significant. And the members opposite laugh. They say, well 

rural communities don't matter; cities like Estevan, Weyburn, 

North Battleford don't matter. 

 

Look at this, Mr. Associate Minister. This is what it says about 

your health care: what a farce. That's what it says in the 

Star-Phoenix. Your wellness model, they say, what a farce. 

Stop telling people in the country or in local level that you're 

giving them control. Tell them the truth, it says. It says you're 

not telling them the truth. Your whole wellness model is a farce 

because you don't plan to give local people control. It's called 

centralization and control at the top and the centre, the oldest 

socialist trick in the book. 

 

You go to old Russia today, the old-timers there, they say, 

socialist control, centralization and control; we can't let the 

people have any say. And that's what you're about because 

there's no money saved in this. You don't save the 

communities. You don't make the seniors happy. You don't 

support the agricultural people. You don't support the local 

co-ops that live out there. You don't support the local church 

there. 

 

You are taking away their very livelihood with this so-called 

plan, and you have no answers for us. You don't tell us what 

the cost savings will be. You don't tell us about the 

revitalization of health care. And so the headlines say: what a 

farce. The NDP wellness plan called a farce, by the Saskatoon 

Star-Phoenix. 

 

They don't believe it's anything to do with local control. Well 

he says . . . the NDP are . . . say yes, they do. Of course you do. 

You'd like this socialist control and centralization. Isn't that 

what it's all about? And they laugh and giggle. I must have 

struck a nerve. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Well that is the most ridiculous 

statement I've ever heard. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Well then tell us some . . . tell us what the 

money is you're going to save . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

No, no, no. You're going to listen to this because you didn't 

answer one question, not one — not one. And when people call 

your plan a farce, then you deserve to hear it. And you can 

laugh and snicker all you like, but you deserve to hear the facts. 

 

"Despite wellness model, Eston's sick with anxiety." The 

people are sick with anxiety, and you're standing in here 

laughing from your seats, thinking you've done a wonderful job 

to save health care . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well if it was 

that easy, why don't you just give us the information? What 

will it save? And it won't help you to look at the clock. You can 

vote closure, so we can't even read these to you. Cowards, 

political cowards, social cowards, economic cowards. 

 

Hospital closures exact a heavy price on people, and you're the 

socialist party, the party of  

Here's another one. It says: shock and anger. That's how people 

feel, in shock and anger. Closure upsets staff; it upsets the staff 

and the patients both. So the town's angry, the patients are 

angry, the nurses are angry, the doctors are angry, and you're 

sitting here, chirping from your seats as if you've got a plan, 

and you don't tell anybody about the plan. They're not involved 

in the plan. You won't answer any questions in here. You won't 

respond. 

 

We just say, how much will you save by closing the hospitals? 

If there's money for transition, tell us how it's going to work. 

How will you get . . . work through the transition itself given 

the bargaining unit? And you won't answer any of that. Why 

should the people believe you? 

 

"Rural rage explodes against NDP's health care reform". Mr. 

Minister, look at that — rage. Your program is called a farce, 

and there's rage and anger and anxiety. And you won't, in the 

face of that and with a thousand people on the steps here, even 

answer questions. You won't even respond to the public. 

 

Take the senior citizens, anybody over 65 in Moose Jaw — 

why don't you, for television's sake, stand in your place and 

say, these are the savings for all your rural relatives and friends 

across Saskatchewan; here's what it will do for the towns and 

communities. Couldn't you tell them that? Nope. You all say, 

well we'll have a better idea when we get it worked out. 

 

Imagine their very lives and their town's at stake and you're 

saying you'll have a better idea when you work through this. 

 

That's enough to make anybody upset. What a weak, weak 

response. We'll have a better idea when we kind of work 

through it. You have no idea what the cost saving is. You have 

no idea what it'll do to rural communities. You have no idea 

what kind of pressure it'll put on urban communities. And you 

kind of wade along and say we'll have a better idea when we 

get it all done. Pathetic. 

 

It's awful how you treat people. Absolutely awful. They had no 

idea you were going to do this. And you don't have to say it's 

because, what we didn't know, there was something like a $14 

billion deficit. You campaigned against it. You said, oh, we'll 

fix it up. We'll have more money for health care, more for 

farmers, and we will not raise taxes. That's what you said. And 

this is what you're doing. And it's called a farce. 

 

And a huge impact on people's lives. Absolutely huge impact 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I guess. You're saying that 

this is the right thing to do. If you would've campaigned on 

this, people would've said, this is awful. Unfair. 

 

Look, you can point all you like. Point all you like. It's pathetic 

what you're doing. Absolutely pathetic. You betcha. And 

re-elected to help rural people and health. Not do what you're 

doing. You said that you 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1223 

would provide more money for health. You said that. And you 

would provide protection for prescription drugs. And you did 

not tell the truth. You . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Give me a break. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Give you a break! You did not tell the truth; 

neither did your ministers. And you got elected on a farce and a 

falsehood. That's how you did. Because you wouldn't have got 

elected doing this, and you know it. You would not have got 

elected doing this. 

 

"Wellness given a rocky ride". I guess it's going to be given a 

rocky ride. Minister should heed her own words. When she was 

in opposition she said she would never do this. That's why 

people are calling you hypocrites, absolute hypocrites, because 

you won't even talk about the cost savings. If you'd stand in 

your place and defend it, but you won't. That's why you 

deserve to be dressed down. You're so weakly and cowardly 

and hiding. There's no numbers, no plan, no numbers. 

 

Look at this one. And the minister says we're making it up. 

Rural Saskatchewan scared sick — scared sick. And you're 

sitting there laughing and smirking: oh we don't have to 

provide numbers to the public. We don't have to tell you about 

this Bill. We'll just shut the House down. We'll limit debate. 

We'll put closure on closure and we've got a plan for you folks. 

 

How will you feel when we cut away your social programs? 

How will you feel when we take away your hospitals? And 

how will you feel when we finally take away the schools? Then 

we take away the nursing homes, we take away the jobs, and 

then we take away your ridings. Centralization and control; 

that's the old NDP plan. I mean everybody can see it now 

because you have no other defence. 

 

You're not saving the money you said you were. And $5 

million . . . Imagine. That's what it is — 5 million. For heaven 

sakes, you spend that every 10 minutes. And you've added 1.6 

billion to the deficit. And you complained about our deficit; 

800 million and another 5, 600 million and now another 300 

million and your credit rating's gone to BBB and you've added 

1.6 billion to the deficit. You're no closer to balancing the 

budget than you are to the man in the moon. 

 

And you're doing all this to people and no numbers to say it's 

going to be worth it. I mean at least you could justify what 

you're doing. Give them something to believe in. "Simard 

defends hospital cuts; angry rural residents rally at legislature". 

And they leave disappointed because the minister runs and 

hides. She has to run in here to question period. 

 

An Hon. Member: — And answer questions. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Yes? She has to. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Stupid questions that the Tories were 

asking. 

Mr. Devine: — Stupid! Stupid! You are calling the people who 

live out in Saskatchewan stupid then. That's what you do, and 

I'm defending people who are going to lose their hospitals, 

losing their . . . and the NDP saying, stupid people. Stupid 

people. 

 

Mr. Chairman, can you believe this? And the minister comes 

and runs and hides in the legislature when a thousand people 

are out on the steps. She can spend some time out there. She 

comes in here, and then she's here for a few minutes, and then 

she even hides from here. 

 

For heaven's sakes if the minister . . . if the Premier of the 

province and the Finance minister can spend five days in New 

York — and no question period here — you think that the 

Minister of Health could spend a few more minutes with 

people that have driven since 5 o'clock in the morning because 

they're worried about their town — the entire community of 

Vanguard shut down — to talk to the minister, to talk to the 

Premier. 

 

The Premier wasn't here. The Minister of Finance wasn't here, 

and the Minister of Health runs and hides in the House and 

then hides in her office. Big . . . and now no answers. She's not 

here to answer, and the associate puppet minister won't give 

any answers. No cost savings, no it doesn't matter. He says 

we'll have a better feel for it when we work it all out. Well 

what if it doesn't work? You're going to run the risk of tearing 

these communities apart because you might get a better feel for 

it later on? And that's a plan? Jeez. Beds and jobs cut. Hospitals 

cuts revealed. Rural health cuts are not wellness. 

 

What's that got to do with wellness? At least if you would 

explain it in here, it would be worth listening to . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Some answers. Well that's true, and it must be 

difficult to sit there and say, well honestly, we don't have any 

answers; we're going to work our way through this and we'll 

just have to hope that closure will get the opposition and the 

public quiet. We'll get it done and maybe we'll muddle our way 

through. 

 

And then what if the economy isn't going to do what you're 

going to do? What if, through question period today as we 

found out, that what you're saying in New York and the 

Premier's saying in New York isn't at all what's going on here? 

What if he's making that up too? Oh stop, he yells. Well did he 

say it or not? 

 

I read it from the newspaper and he said farm income was 

going to go up . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Are you saying 

he didn't say what's in the newspaper? Did he say what's in the 

newspaper? Yes or no. Did he say what's in the newspaper? 

Because he was quoted. Did he say what's in the newspaper? Is 

he saying the paper lied? Is he saying the paper lied? 

 

You must be touchy about this, Mr. Attorney General, because 

what he said in New York is diametrically opposed to what's 

going on here. And if he said farm income's going up to bluff 

his way through there, and actually it's fell in half here, it's just 

like he's treating 



1224 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

the rest of the people — falsely, falsely. He got elected on a 

falsehood and he's still living on a falsehood. And he didn't tell 

the people he was going to do this. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What a cry-baby. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Cry-baby. I'll tell you there's a lot more people 

than the thousand who were on the steps who think you are 

absolutely pathetic, the way you're treating people. And you 

won't give them the answers. At least if you'd stand in here and 

say, this is how it would work; here is the money we will save; 

here's how we'll make the transition. But you don't. That's why 

you deserve to be dressed down. And you bet you; we can do 

it. And you can laugh about all the people that you're going to 

really help from Nipawin. What about the people? What about 

the people? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Cry-baby. 

 

Mr. Devine: — All they can do is sit over there and say, 

cry-baby, cry-baby. Well I'll tell you, the people, the people are 

crying. That's your smart-alec answer. And they sit over there, 

and they smile, and they laugh at people going through this 

anxiety . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well then why won't 

you give us the answers then? All right, where's the answer . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . He hasn't answered for two or three 

hours. He deserves to hear some of this so when he gets on his 

feet, at least people can watch television, realize he doesn't 

have any answers. And if he did have it, he won't give any 

answers. And it's a cowardly approach. 

 

(2145) 

 

And then they get into closures invoked in the health care 

debate because they're afraid we might talk about it. I'll tell 

you, there's people . . . this House has years and years and years 

of political and democratic integrity in terms of debate. And 

imagine closing people's communities, and you will not allow 

us to debate longer than a few days, even to discuss it. 

 

And the changes of roles — Look at this: doctors are saying 

you've been changing the role of the hospitals in urban centres. 

Will they be able to cope? People are saying, I don't think you 

can even begin to think about closing the Plains hospital 

because if you close all these other hospitals people are going 

to have to have beds. Have you figured that out, or is it just sort 

of a window-dressing? We'll talk about closing the Plains to 

show you. We'll have a little bit of political hurt here in the 

cities as we're devastating rural Saskatchewan and then 

whoops, oh I guess we'll have to keep the Plains open. 

 

Is that part of the plan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No? Well 

then how are you going to handle all these people, and all these 

seniors, and all these emergencies, and all these long-term care 

if you close all these communities? Because you certainly don't 

have the money out there. You haven't said anywhere you're 

going to be able to do this. And they say here, restructuring's 

okay, but it's not the method, because you haven't laid out any 

kind of a plan except 

centralization and control so you can have political control. 

 

So what I'm saying to the members opposite, if they care to 

listen, and to the associate minister, is that when the public ask 

you, will you please tell us how this will save us money and 

how this will work to save our health care system, can't you do 

better than, well we'll have a better idea sometime in the future. 

Couldn't you be just a little bit more specific, to say here's what 

this will do in terms of . . . even terms of 52 closures. How 

much money? Is that going to save $5 million this year? How 

much money are you going to have in transition and how will 

you use that money? And how will you look at the staff that 

has to go and compensate them? And then what kind of money 

will be there for the long-term care? And then how will we be 

able to plan the long-term care after that? What kind of 

financial consequences? 

 

You've taken so much of your total budget and put it on the 

backs of these rural people in terms of municipal taxes. It's 

$450 million over the next four years. They say, how will we 

live with that if you're going to cut our health care, cut our 

schools, cut our prescription drugs, cut our safety nets and then 

abandon us like this. How will it work? And you've got to give 

some answers. Because they can't afford to raise the taxes 

enough to sustain themselves. 

 

So we're asking, is this just for $5 million this year; is this only 

$20 million from then on? That's 1.3 per cent of your budget; 

1.5 billion Health budget and you're saving $20 million a year 

with these 52 hospitals being cut. That's 1.3 per cent. Is that it? 

That's the best you got and the town's life is at stake, and other 

people's lives will be at stake? 

 

So, Mr. Minister, you'd think that you could begin to address 

some of these questions, some of those questions that would 

say, here are the savings we plan from restructuring. Close 52 

hospitals; here it is, $5 million. Is the 5 million accurate? Will 

it be 20 million next year? What per cent of the total budget is 

that? How will we fund this transition? Where will people get 

the money if we've quadrupled the municipal tax rate? Where 

will they get the money if we've cut out their other support 

programs? 

 

And obviously we've charged them a great deal for their drugs 

now. Where will they get the money to sustain their health 

capacity in those communities? Could the minister please give 

them some of those answers so that they could have something 

to hang some hope onto as we go through this closure where 

we're going to have this forced down the throats of 

Saskatchewan people — not the legislature, the people of 

Saskatchewan. Could he begin to address some of the questions 

that my colleague asked earlier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, the member from 

Estevan — not in a fashion that we're unaccustomed to in this 

House — has spent, I think, about 25 minutes or thereabouts to 

ask one question. I'm not even sure if it was a well-defined 

question at the end of all of that. It is apparent, I think, Mr. 

Chairman, to members of 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1225 

this House in any event, and to the people of Saskatchewan, 

that the member from Estevan for some reason or other has not 

yet understood that the election is over, that the election of 

1991 is over, and the people of this province rejected he as 

premier and the policies and practices of his party while in 

office. And yet consistently in this House, the member from 

Estevan, whenever he gets on his feet, we start reliving and 

refighting the election. 

 

Now I'm not sure what this was all about tonight, Mr. 

Chairman. Perhaps the member is poising to run for a 

nomination somewhere in the province or perhaps he's still not 

. . . he's still unhappy that he hasn't received a Senate 

appointment. I'm not sure what this is all about. But I want to 

address some of the issues that he raised tonight, and then we 

will talk about health care reform. 

 

He, tonight again, raises questions about the current Premier's 

very recent trip to New York and speeches made in New York. 

There is no doubt about it in Saskatchewan, his visit — the 

member from Estevan's visit to New York city some years ago 

— is remembered, when he went to that city and said, and said, 

Saskatchewan has so much going for it, you can afford to 

mismanage it and still break even. 

 

Now we know in the course of the 10 years or thereabouts, the 

9 years, that the member for Estevan and his party while in 

power certainly brought one half of that prediction to fruition. 

They sure showed us how to mismanage a province, but it sure 

didn't break even. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, without doubt the consequence of that 10 

years of mismanagement, misspending, profligate waste, is 

coming due now. The bills are coming due. 

 

Now the member from Estevan talks about the need for 

specific numbers in this House. This is the same man who, 

while when in office, refused to bring into this House a budget, 

a budget in his last year of government. He wants numbers. He 

refused to bring to the people of Saskatchewan an entire 

budget. And when they did bring numbers to the people of this 

province, what were those numbers like? 

 

Mr. Chairman, I ask you, I ask members present: what were 

those numbers like when they were bringing numbers to the 

people of Saskatchewan? I mean I remember the 1986 scenario 

when we were told that the deficit in that year would be $400 

million, that they had everything under control in the province 

and the deficit would be $400 million. 

 

What did it turn out to be after the election? $1.2 billion — 

$800 million out. And then former . . . the then minister of 

Finance when asked, well how do you explain a situation like 

that, he said, well we're politicians; what do you expect? What 

he should have said is that we're Tory politicians; what do you 

expect? 

 

Now the fact of the matter is, Mr. Chairman, under this 

government, when we're talking budgetary issues and 

budgetary numbers, we intend to be accurate in those numbers 

that we're presenting to this legislature and to this House. In 

terms of those very specific numbers that have been requested 

by the members tonight, those numbers will be provided and in 

an accurate form for the members tomorrow — tomorrow in 

this House. 

 

And the member from Moosomin says, we'll wait and see. 

You're right; you'll wait and see. And you will see accurate 

numbers and that's something I know that the member from 

Moosomin and his colleagues are not very familiar with in this 

province. 

 

Now the member from Estevan, before his departure from the 

Chamber here tonight . . . 

 

The Chair: — What is your point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — What is my point of order, Mr. Chairman, is 

simply that when the member specifically mentions the 

absence of members of this Assembly, is contrary to the rules. I 

would like you to rule him out of order. 

 

The Chair: — What is the member's . . . Do you want to speak 

to the point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think the Minister of Health 

obviously, in listening to the 25 minute-question, might expect 

the member asking the . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. If the Associate Minister of Health did in 

fact draw attention to the absence of a member, then I would 

suggest that's inappropriate. And if he did so, to retract that and 

to proceed with his comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, in fact I did. And I will 

retract that comment. 

 

What I did note, what I did note in the member for Estevan's 

diatribe there, it was mostly based on a number of headlines 

that he was quoting from, from a variety of newspaper articles 

and so on. What I note, what I note, Mr. Chairman, is the 

member from Estevan did not bother to quote, for instance, the 

article that appeared very, very recently in the Saskatoon Sun, 

the Saskatoon Sunday Sun, April 25, 1993, an article written 

by someone who's well known in Saskatoon and area, Mr. Roy 

Norris, and there are some parts of his observation and 

opinions that I wouldn't agree with or share. But I tell you what 

I do agree with; that's what Mr. Roy Norris says in the 

Saskatoon Sunday Sun, and I quote: the 10 tired Tory MLAs 

who are posturing daily in the Saskatchewan legislature may 

believe the nonsense they are spouting, but few other people 

do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now that's a comment of an experienced 

journalist in our province who pays particular attention and not 

one who is aligned or 



1226 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

described to be supportive of any particular party in this 

province, but an experienced journalist who watches attentively 

the proceedings of this House. That's his conclusion: the 10 

tired Tory MLAs are posturing daily in the Saskatchewan 

legislature. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, we could go on at length tonight with 

quotes from newspapers as the former premier did, but here is 

one that I find particularly helpful, particularly helpful when 

the members opposite suggest that this health care reform will, 

in their words, wreak mayhem on rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I note these observations of Pam Smith, which are reported in 

the April 24 version of the Leader-Post. She talks about the 

need for leadership, the need for leadership in all parts of 

Saskatchewan, the need for leadership in rural Saskatchewan. 

And she says: 

 

 "The ability of (the leadership) to figure out where the 

community is going and develop a sound economic plan" 

was essential to the community's future . . . 

 

Now I just wish, Mr. Chair, that members opposite would 

understand some of the role that they should undertake as 

members of the opposition but as leaders in their own 

community. Instead of going out to the communities and 

spreading the kind of misinformation that we know they've 

being doing, instead of coming into this House with all of their 

exaggerated rhetoric, we might be better served and their 

communities would be better served if they showed some 

leadership, some positive leadership. 

 

And that's what I note, Mr. Chairman, in the 25 minutes of 

remarks we've just been subjected to from the member from 

Estevan. Did we hear one positive suggestion? Did we have 

one creative idea for reform? Not a one. Now I tell you, Mr. 

Chairman, that's precisely why we're in part of the mess we're 

in today. Because in 10 years — in 10 years — that man, as 

premier of our province, did not bring creative, powerful, new 

reform to health care as is being brought today under the 

leadership of this Premier and this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 p.m. 

 


