


















































Hansard: May 10, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1551 

 May 10, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, 

I want to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, 

four members of the RWDSU (Retail, Wholesale and 

Department Store Union) who I see in the gallery.  I'm not 

entirely confident of all the names, so I'm going to excuse 

myself from that.  I know the Assembly will want to welcome 

these people who are here to bring to the legislature their 

concerns with respect to their treatment by Westfair Foods. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 

introduce to you 20 grade 7 and 8 students who are seated in 

your gallery, from the McNab School in the Elphinstone 

constituency.  They are accompanied today by their teacher, 

Wendy Tingle.  And I want to invite all members to welcome 

them here today for question period.  I look forward to meeting 

with them after question period for another question period that 

I know they're going to have with me at that point.  So 

welcome today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of the 

member for Rosthern, I want to introduce a group of grade 5 

students, 49 in number, from Martensville, and I want to 

welcome them here today.  I hope that you will find the 

proceedings in the Assembly enjoyable and you will find them 

informative.  Also I'll be meeting with you afterwards for a 

small visit.  And I want to ask you and the members of the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to join me in welcoming these grade 5 

students to Regina today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like 

to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, a friend 

and a former constituent of mine, Darryl Hovenak, who is 

sitting in the west gallery.  He is now working in Regina at the 

Sherwood Credit Union.  So I'd like members just to join me in 

welcoming him here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Government Shares in Cameco 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the minister responsible for the Crown Investments 

Corporation.  Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan government has 

a significant interest in Cameco, and the Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation, which owns the government's 

shares in 

the company, has over $350 million of Cameco's assets. 

 

Will the minister tell us please what plans he has for these 

investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The plans that 

we have for the investments in Cameco right now is to manage 

them well and to take care of them for the benefit of the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, Cameco shares have 

increased considerably, as you will note.  In light of the 

significant increase reported by all stockbrokers, it appears that 

Saskatchewan could make a substantial profit by selling these 

shares.  And given your great concern of the government with 

the deficit, why does the minister not sell these shares and use 

the money to reduce the deficit? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe that the member 

here from Greystone is certainly speaking on behalf of the 

brokers in Canada.  And the brokerage houses would certainly 

be interested in selling these shares; however there is no 

substantial profit to be made at this point in the Cameco shares.  

And if the member will just recall back a very short period of 

time ago, when Cameco shares were sold, the people of 

Saskatchewan sustained a substantial loss under the previous 

government and this government is not prepared to do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, you know it appears that 

your government would rather raise taxes in the tune of $193 

million on the backs of Saskatchewan people than to sell shares 

in Cameco to ease the financial burden of this province.  Now 

if you're not going to sell the shares to reduce the deficit, do 

you in fact have a strategic plan as far as the $350 million 

worth of shares are concerned? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Speaker, as we hold the shares and if 

the assets truly do go up, if the value of the shares truly go up, 

that doesn't mean to say that Saskatchewan people are losing 

any money; it means we're making money.  And I don't know 

where the member has this idea from that you are losing money 

by holding the shares.  We're making money as the value of the 

shares go up, and we anticipate that the shares will go up 

substantially.  Therefore we're not interested in selling them at 

this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, your government preaches 

about how broke we are in the province of Saskatchewan and 

how much we must do in order to reduce our deficit.  And at 

the same time, you are trying to tell us that we should not sell 

these shares even if it would substantially help us to reduce the 

deficit. 



1552 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

Now are you in fact telling us that you're quite willing to play 

the stock market -- and there are many, many people who are 

quite aware of what's going on here, who have come to me -- 

are you just continuing to play the stock market with people's 

monies and raising taxes, or is there actually some kind of 

hidden agenda for not disposing of them while they're at a 

profit and using the money to reduce the deficit for 

Saskatchewan people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Well I want to assure the member from 

Greystone that this government does not play the stock market.  

We think that we have an asset here which will grow, and we 

will allow this asset to grow.  And at some time in the future 

this government may decide to get rid of some of the shares, 

but at this point we are not interested in getting rid of any of the 

shares that we hold in Cameco. 

 

The fact that we have a deficit and that we have debts would 

not make any difference whether we sold these shares or not.  

Because these shares, if there were any profits to be made, 

would be made by the Crown Investments Corporation.  It 

would not go directly into the General Revenue Fund anyhow, 

and it would simply reduce the debt load of Crown Investments 

Corporation.  And unless we can make a substantial profit, we 

would be losing money on these and that would simply make 

the situation worse.  This government's not prepared to do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

when Cameco shares were first issued some two years ago, 

they were at $12.50.  On April 1 of 1993 they were valued at 

$18.  Last Friday the shares were trading at $21.25.  And today 

they're at $20.50 a share. 

 

Now given this particular information, what you're trying to tell 

us is in fact that either you played around with the numbers as 

they are on the books.  Or in fact, you're saying that something 

now has changed to say that you're not going to be working 

with anything that deals with profit, okay?  You're saying the 

book value is one thing, and now you're telling us something 

else. 

 

Now given all of this information and given the fact that these 

particular shares are rising in value . . . And some people 

disagree with you.  There are a whole load of different groups 

that are selling off these shares at this time because they would 

indeed be making a substantial profit.  Why is it exactly that 

you're choosing not to sell these off now and put the money 

toward reducing our deficit?  Or are you in fact more interested 

in cashing those in about 1995? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This 

government has no hidden agenda as far as the Cameco shares 

are concerned.  When the previous government sold shares in 

Cameco, they took substantial losses and the people of 

Saskatchewan have absorbed those losses. 

This government is going to have to make up for those losses in 

one way or another, either through taxes or else holding the 

Cameco shares until there is some profit to be made from it to 

cover those losses.  If the Cameco shares are worth that much 

and the company is going to produce some revenue, we'll get 

some dividends and those dividends will flow back into the 

Crown Investment Corporation.  And we'll use those dividends 

in order to cover the deficits that we have. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Purchase of Video Lottery Terminals 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 

responsible for the Gaming Commission.  Last week you 

finally took the action with respect to the association the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) government has been fostering with 

disreputable video lottery companies in the United States.  It 

was amazing, Mr. Speaker, the fact that the government 

opposite at every turn knew of these companies and the 

problems which followed their every dealing.  The four 

different ministers knew, Mr. Speaker, the two or three 

different gaming commissioners knew because we told them. 

 

The current minister said and I quote:  We have gone through a 

very in-depth process to determine that VLC (Video Lottery 

Consultants) would be a reliable supplier.  And as I said again, 

I concur with the decision of the Gaming Commission.  

Unquote. 

 

My question is to the minister responsible.  Mr. Minister, your 

directive to the Gaming Commission requested that the security 

division of SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation) review VLC's background, and you have also 

requested the Department of Justice to review the information.  

After repeatedly saying, Mr. Minister, everything was checked, 

double-checked, rechecked, why are you now requesting a 

second security report?  Are you admitting that your 

government botched the first one, the one you refused to make 

public? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to begin 

by saying that, as I have indicated in this legislature before, this 

government does do due diligence.  We have done an in-depth 

security check with respect to VLC.  Unlike that administration 

when they were running around the country dealing with Guy 

Montpetit and the GigaText operation, we do our homework. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I'm getting a little tired of 

the sanctimonious attitude of those crew and that crew that 

amassed a $15 billion debt by deals like GigaText. 

 

And I say today that this operation, this government, is doing 

all that we can to ensure that we are going to have a reputable 

gaming industry in this province.  It will be a clean industry or 

there will be no industry. 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1553 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I'm wondering 

why you never included GTECH in your second security 

check.  We informed you over a month ago that the federal 

grand jury in California is investigating relationships between 

GTECH, state legislators and lobbyists.  We informed you of 

allegations that GTECH made campaign contributions 

exceeding a half a million dollars, that they bribed state 

senators, that they gave the former governor of Missouri an 

$800,000 contract after GTECH won a tender, and the list goes 

on and on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If you, as you state now, want to ensure the gaming industry in 

this province is kept clean of the problems that have become 

well established in the United States, would you today, Mr. 

Minister, would you not find it necessary to conduct a second 

security report on GTECH? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that we will do all that is required to ensure 

that the gaming industry in this province will be clean.  And I 

want to tell you, Mr. Speaker; I say to the member from Morse 

and I say to all the members opposite that we don't do business 

the way they do business.  We're a different government; we 

operate in a different fashion, and we are going to do whatever 

it takes to insure that we have a clean gaming industry in this 

province, or as I indicated to him before, the will be no gaming 

industry if it can't be clean. 

 

And I want to say to the member from Morse that . . . I quote 

from a little newspaper article here: auditor's report reveals Hill 

deal, signed Shand 2 contract, a $4.2 million contract signed for 

goodness' sakes in the dying days of that legislature without 

authority.  We aren't going to do things this way. 

 

I want to say to the member from Morse that we will . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Will the minister responsible for the Gaming 

Commission and the SPMC also confirm to this Assembly that 

the same people that did the assessment on Guy Montpetit are 

the same ones that did the assessment on GTECH and VLT 

(Video Lottery Technologies Inc.)? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- No, Mr. Speaker, I can't confirm 

that to the member from Morse.  What I can say to him is that 

we put together an internal team from different elements and 

different administrations within the government to do whatever 

could be done to insure that we're dealing with reputable 

companies. 

And I want to say to the member from Morse:  I think it's quite 

clear that when I found out that there was an indictment handed 

down and when I was made aware of that, that there may be 

also two other indictments, I moved rapidly to ensure that we 

ceased negotiations with VLC until we are ensured that this is a 

reputable company. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Member from Morse, unlike your 

performance with Guy Montpetit and GigaText, we have 

moved rapidly and we have done what we feel is necessary to 

ensure a clean gaming industry in this province, and I assure 

the people of Saskatchewan that that's the case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, if you want to 

clear your name of all of the allegations, why don't you table 

the report that Mr. Egan signed?  Why don't you table that right 

now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member from Morse, if he is accusing me or any other 

government officials of any wrongdoing, I ask him to step 

outside the legislature and . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order.  Order.  Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Before we ask the next question, I do want to 

ask members to please tone it down a bit, particularly the 

member from Estevan.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, would you table 

that report for the Assembly and all the province of 

Saskatchewan to see, so that we can decide, as the people of the 

province who are the taxpayers can decide, that you are doing it 

right?  Would you do that for us today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say this.  The 

member is well aware under the freedom of information 

guidelines and under the process that is in place in terms of 

having this report released, he knows the process.  He knows it 

well.  As a matter of fact, one day I took pains to send over a 

freedom of access document for him to follow through, but he 

hasn't even seen fit to do that. 

 

Now I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the member opposite 

knows full well that we've been dealing with other jurisdictions 

who have passed on information, who have asked that that 

information be kept confidential.  And we will honour that, Mr. 

Speaker.  We will honour that because that is the proper way to 

do business. 

 

And I want to say to the member opposite -- and I'm going to 

repeat this -- if he's got any allegations or if 



1554 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

he's got any information that would lead him to believe that any 

member of this government or any official of this government 

has been involved in any wrongdoing, I ask him to stand 

outside the legislature, make those statements, and we'll take 

the appropriate action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, according to 

your own comments in Hansard on the record, the original 

security report recommended all short-listed companies.  Mr. 

Minister, can you tell this Assembly if Mr. Doug Egan or any 

other staff or consultants advised your government not to deal 

with either GTECH or VLC? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me answer this 

very shortly and very succinctly: the answer is we were not told 

or instructed not to deal with either of these two companies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, then we need to see the 

report to see exactly what Mr. Egan signed so that you had 

information that led you to take that to cabinet to get the 

consent of cabinet to do business with those two companies.  

And we want to see the report.  We want to see it in the 

Assembly, and the people of the province have a right to see it 

because you are spending 20 million of their dollars to access 

this opportunity for video gambling.  Now would you table that 

in this Assembly for us, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I've been through this 

with the member opposite no less than a dozen times in the last 

three weeks, and the answer is the same as it was before.  He 

knows the process, and he knows why I have not . . . I have 

indicated to him that he should use the process to seek the 

information. 

 

I want to say to you this, Mr. Speaker, and to the members 

opposite, that this government has done due diligence on these 

companies to the best of our knowledge.  At the time we did 

the investigation we were in a position to be able to negotiate 

the purchase of these machines with them.  And I say to you 

that to my knowledge there is no member of this government 

who would want to see it happen any other way. 

 

We feel that we have gone through a very fair process.  We feel 

the process has clearly indicated that we were in a position at 

that time to consider negotiations.  And I indicate to you just 

one more time, sir, that when the indictment came down 

against the lotteries official in West Virginia, we were also 

made aware that there was a possibility of two other 

indictments.  Now I don't know who those may be against; we 

have no way of knowing it. 

 

But to be on the cautious side, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

say that we halted negotiations with VLC until this matter is 

cleared up.  And I want to say, at the time when Mr. Egan . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, your inaction, 

your secrecy, your lack of understanding, your lack of 

investigation has done absolutely nothing to insure that the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan are getting a value for 

the dollar they're spending in taxpaying. 

 

And we want to know, number one, the report; number two, we 

want to know, in the interest of openness and accountability, 

will you table the proposals, all of the proposals which you 

received regarding the supply of video lottery terminals.  

Would you do that for us, please? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member from Morse, it's a strange time, after having sat in this 

legislature since 1986 and having watched the lavish 

expenditures, that now he becomes the watchdog of the public 

purse. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, when these people spend three and a half 

million dollars on Giga Text and $8 million on Supercart and 

5.2 on Joytec and a half a million on High R Doors, and 

Austrak for 700,000; 490,000 on Pro-Star Mills, and if you take 

the aggregate $15 billion, I say to the member, shame on you 

that you would even have the courage to stand up here and 

pretend to be the watchdog of the public purse. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, in the interest 

of openness and accountability, we'd like to have those 

proposals on the Table so that the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan can see where the 20 million that you're 

spending is going to be spent. 

 

Will you table a list to all the companies which supplied your 

government with a proposal?  List them.  If you're not afraid of 

it, list them here so that everybody can see.  Will you table a 

list of the principals of these companies including consultants, 

advisers, or staff members hired by these companies?  Would 

you include all of that so that the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan can really see what you're doing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, that I want to say what 

we have here seen demonstrated is an example of not only 

hypocrisy, but galloping hypocrisy.  Mr. Speaker, these now, 

the watchdogs and the protectors of the public purse who build 

a $15 billion debt, shouldn't be asking these; they should be 

hanging their heads in shame, Mr. Speaker. 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1555 

I want to say to you that, Mr. Speaker, the appropriate 

information with respect to this negotiation and these deals will 

be released at the appropriate time as we do with all dealings. 

 

We are very cognizant of the fact, Mr. Speaker, that people are, 

since your administration, very much concerned with how 

governments spend their dollars.  And I want to assure the 

people of Saskatchewan that we will not act as the former 

administration has done and will be responsible with the way 

we spend public dollars. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, will you table 

also for this big fiasco that you've got with 20 million of 

taxpayers' dollars being spent, will you table the report?  Will 

you table the information on the proposals that you received?  

And also, will you table for us who the gaming commissioners 

were that established that this was a good thing that was 

supposed to happen? 

 

Would you provide all of those details for this Assembly so 

that the people of the province of Saskatchewan can make the 

decision on whether it's a good deal or not -- not only you? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I think it's 

probably important to know, and for the member's information, 

unless he isn't aware -- and I'm sure he's more than aware -- the 

money that's been budgeted for the purchase of VLTs (video 

lottery terminal) has not yet at this point been spent.  But I want 

to say that hopefully we will be able to make these purchases 

and get this industry on the go soon. 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, rather than fearmongering and 

rather than half-truths that the member is so eloquent in 

spreading, that he may want to assist us in getting this industry 

on go. 

 

I want to say and I'll say this one more time, Mr. Speaker, that 

this will be a clean industry in this province; we will get value 

for the taxpayers' dollars when we finalize the deals and when 

we finally purchase these VLTs, unlike some of the deals that 

were made by that administration.  And I want to refer the 

member from Morse to the three and a half billion dollars . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Job Creation 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Labour.  Mr. Minister, the 

business community and the people all over Saskatchewan in 

this are asking you to facilitate some job creation in this 

province.  Your government's 

response is to completely ignore the problem.  Don't worry, be 

happy, you say. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have some figures here from the Saskatchewan 

Home Builders' Association.  You people remember those, 

those folks from the home builders' association.  The one the 

Premier said doesn't represent anyone.  Well those folks, Mr. 

Minister, say that based on your own government's 

calculations, the proposed changes to workmens' compensation 

will cost residential builders between 217 and $517 per 

employee, per year. 

 

Mr. Minister, how can adding 2 to $500 payroll tax per 

employee possibly help the construction industry create jobs in 

this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 

to the member opposite, that when it comes . . . to the member 

opposite, that when it comes to job creation across Canada, 

obviously you'll know that the most recent statistics show that 

there has been an increase in unemployment in Canada.  At the 

same time, Saskatchewan is bucking that trend, and the 

unemployment rate is actually going down. 

 

So I say to you . . . I say to the hon. member, clearly get off of 

this attack of being negative and gloom and doom, in light of 

the fact that things are improving in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to say clearly that today's editorial about the issue of a 

business meeting, or the meeting of business people with 

government, what they're saying is that the government and 

business people who are cooperating are in fact on track.  

That's the only way to solve the economic problems we see in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

That after 10 years of divide and rule and pitting one group 

against another, we've seen enough of that.  And I ask you, Mr. 

Member, to come onside, be positive about what's happening in 

the province and get off of this kick of gloom and doom, 

because most people do not appreciate it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

you and the Premier can brag all they like about the 

employment statistics for the last month, but the relevant fact 

here is, sir, you have to compare them to last year, not month to 

month.  The reason that employment statistics are favourable 

for this month is quite simply, Mr. Speaker, because spring 

seeding has started. The agriculture sector has kicked into gear 

for another year, and you, sir, can't take any credit for that, I'm 

afraid. 

 

There are 2,000 more people unemployed than a year ago -- 

2,000.  And there are 11,000 less jobs in Saskatchewan today 

than there were in April of 1991 under the previous 

administration.  Those are the facts, Mr. Minister. 



1556 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

Mr. Minister, rather than spending so much time trying to twist 

the numbers around to convince people of your facts rather 

than the real facts, I wonder if you would convene a meeting 

with the business community to create some real jobs in this 

province to start some economic development in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to indicate to the member 

opposite that we meet with business people all the time.  Last 

Thursday we met with the executive of the chamber of 

commerce in Lloydminster.  We met with business 

communities in Saskatoon, four or five different groups on 

Friday. 

 

And for the member's information, just so he gets his facts and 

figures straight on the labour force numbers, when he indicates 

that there are fewer jobs in Saskatchewan in April of '93 than 

'92, he is absolutely wrong.  And there's something about truth 

that really escapes these members.  There are 2,000 more jobs 

in the province today than there was a year ago.  That's an 

improvement. 

 

And I say to the members opposite, the gloom and doom that 

you perpetuate, try to perpetuate across this province, is not 

doing the economy any good, and I ask you to get off of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 70 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 

Act, 1984 (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend The Urban Municipality Act be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 71 -- An Act to amend The Local Government 

Election Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend The Local Government Election Act be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 72 -- An Act to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act be 

now introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

Bill No. 73 -- An Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I move An Act to 

amend The Crop Insurance Act be now introduced and read for 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 60 -- An Act respecting Condominiums 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to 

rise today to move second reading of The Condominium 

Property Act, 1993. 

 

This new legislation replaces The Condominium Property Act.  

That Act is 25 years old and predates a substantial increase in 

the number of people choosing to purchase a condominium unit 

as a home.  In recent years condominium owners, realtors, and 

condominium developers have asked the government to update 

the legislation to deal with problems arising in the development 

and operation of condominiums.  Several individual 

condominium unit owners and developers have also requested 

changes. 

 

In some cases the problem areas which have arisen are not 

covered by the current Act.  In other areas difficulties have 

been encountered in the interpretation and administration of 

provisions in the current Act. 

 

Buying a condominium is very different from buying a house 

because of the necessary interaction between owners for the 

purpose of maintaining the common property and making 

decisions respecting the administration of the corporation. 

 

The major thrust of this new legislation is to incorporate some 

significant consumer protection features governing the sale and 

administration of condominiums.  There are virtually no 

consumer protection provisions in our current legislation.  In 

this respect, Saskatchewan's present Act does not compare 

favourably to legislation in the provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, 

Ontario, and British Columbia.  All of these provinces include 

provisions such as a requirement for developers to give 

prospective purchasers information about a condominium. 

 

The legislation I'm introducing today will require developers 

selling a new condominium unit in Saskatchewan to provide 

the purchaser with a disclosure package.  The disclosure 

package will have to include a description of the by-laws of the 

corporation, any management agreement respecting the care of 

the property, any mortgage that affects the title, any units 

intended for non-residential use, the number and type of 

parking spaces or other exclusive 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1557 

use areas included in the purchase price, and the dates when the 

owners will be required to contribute to the common expenses 

and reserve funds. 

 

Accompanying the provision for disclosure to a prospective 

purchaser is a provision for a 10-day period within which a 

purchaser may rescind the agreement.  Provisions are also 

included to provide a remedy where a developer fails to 

complete the common property. 

 

The developer will be able to choose from a number of options 

to be established by regulation.  These options may include 

obtaining a bond or a letter of credit or putting a percentage of 

purchase money in trust.  This amendment will protect 

purchasers and also address developers' concerns about the 

present stringent requirements respecting bonding. 

 

Bonding is currently the only security option and it only applies 

to phased developments.  In the new legislation some security 

options will be available to protect consumers whether the 

development occurs in one stage or several phases. 

 

Another provision in the new legislation will require 

developers to hold the first annual meeting of all condominium 

owners within the period of time provided in the legislation.  

Presently the Act has no requirements for a first annual meeting 

to be called by a developer, or subsequent annual meetings to 

be called by the board of directors of the corporation.  This 

change will ensure that unit owners are aware of how the 

corporation is being run and will have a voice in decisions. 

 

This Act will also require developers to turn the following 

documents over to the corporation within a certain period of 

time.  Those documents are warranties relating to the real or 

personal property of the corporation; structural, electrical, 

mechanical, and architectural working drawings and 

specifications; plans showing the location of underground 

utility services; written agreements that the corporation is party 

to; and certificates and permits issued by the municipality. 

 

The present Act does not require owners to ever receive this 

information even though it is required to operate their 

condominium corporation.  Management contracts entered into 

by a developer will be able to be terminated by the board of 

directors of the corporation after the agreement has been in 

force one year.  This will address situations where a developer 

has one of his own companies managing the property at an 

unreasonable price which is paid by the owners of the units. 

 

Parking in condominium developments and the lack of clarity 

in the legislation respecting the developers' responsibilities 

relating to parking has been a source of numerous problems for 

condominium owners.  It has in fact resulted in litigation in 

Saskatchewan.  This new legislation provides that unless a 

municipality's zoning requirements are such that fewer parking 

stalls than condominium units are needed in a particular 

development, each unit will be entitled to a designated stall.  

Appropriate exceptions to this general rule are included in the 

Bill. 

 

Other changes will recognize that a condominium is also a 

corporation.  The present Act does not adequately reflect the 

fact that condominium corporations are also businesses that 

enter contracts, make investments, and in some cases manage 

very large sums of money.  Protection for the unit owners, who 

are comparable to minority shareholders in a business 

corporation, are included to provide guidance and additional 

consumer protection for unit owners vis-a-vis the corporation.  

For example, the board of directors is required to hold an 

annual meeting.  The board is required to prepare an annual 

financial statement and present it at the annual meeting, and the 

board members are required to comply with the 

conflict-of-interest provisions to be included in the Act. 

 

The new legislation also provides for minimum standards for 

by-laws to be set out in regulations under the Act.  The by-laws 

govern matters such as election of boards, voting rights, 

quorum, proxies, banking, and similar matters.  A number of 

issues in the existing legislation relating to the operation of the 

corporation will be addressed.  Corporations will be required to 

establish reserve funds to provide for major repairs and 

replacements so that unit owners are not faced with massive 

assessments when a major item must be replaced. 

 

This Act will also clarify that corporations are able to buy real 

property.  Thus a corporation could buy an available unit as a 

caretaker's unit, or buy adjacent land for a tennis court. 

 

A corporation will be able to place a caveat against a unit 

owner's title when condominium fees are in arrears.  Such fees 

pay for management expenses such as lawn mowing and snow 

clearing, as well as utilities, insurance, and reserve fund 

contributions.  If one or more unit owners do not pay their 

share, this places an additional burden on other unit owners.  

Presently a board can only enforce payment of fees through a 

court action. 

 

There's nothing in the present Act, Mr. Speaker, which 

addresses the relationship between a corporation and a tenant 

who occupies one of the units.  The new Act, or the Bill before 

us, specifically deals with the issue of tenants and provides 

corporations with some ability to handle problems relating to 

tenants. 

 

Condominium living frequently gives rise to disputes between 

the corporation and an owner, and between owners.  Provisions 

previously referred to will deal with many of the issues that 

give rise to disputes such as parking, arrears of condominium 

fees, and financial reporting. 

 

The current legislation does not provide for a way of resolving 

a dispute.  For example, if a corporation wants to enforce a no 

pets by-law, they must make an application to court.  As many 

of the disputes are fairly 



1558 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

minor in nature, a faster and cheaper method of resolving 

disputes is necessary.  The new Act includes a provision 

permitting the parties to submit to arbitration.  This is a more 

appropriate procedure in circumstances where the parties must 

continue living in the same condominium complex and 

cooperating in the future. 

 

This new legislation is the product of a considerable amount of 

consultation on a broad range of interests in relation to 

condominiums.  Consultation took place with condominium 

owners, developers, and managers, realtors, mortgage lenders, 

municipal assessors, surveyors, and land titles registrars. 

 

This legislation focuses on balancing the interests of developers 

on the one hand, and condominium unit owners on the other.  

The consumer protection focus of the legislation is 

acknowledged and generally approved of by the interest groups 

who provided advice and assistance in producing this 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting 

Condominiums. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'll be 

very brief in my comments about the Bill.  We're very pleased 

to see that the government is bringing this forward.  When the 

minister mentioned that there was broad consultation you 

forgot one very important player in it, which was the previous 

administration. 

 

I understand this Bill has been some five years in the making 

and has been brought about by a great deal of consultation by 

all parties, including the previous administration which played 

a large part in formulating this legislation.  It's a continuation of 

the direction that the previous administration was taking with 

respect to condominiums and we're very pleased to see that this 

is coming forward. 

 

So while there has been a great deal of consultation, Mr. 

Minister, as we said, we have basically no problems with it and 

we would address any of the concerns we may have in 

committee.  So we would have no problem in moving this 

forward to that stage. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1445) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Labour 

Vote 20 

Item 1 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister, at this time, to please 

introduce the officials who have joined us today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman.  Seated to my right is the deputy minister, Merran 

Proctor.  Immediately behind her is Janis Rathwell, associate 

deputy minister.  Behind me is Pat More, who is the director of 

administrative services.  On my left is Terry Stevens, the acting 

executive director of occupational health and safety. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, we are going to take a look at the way you're 

spending the taxpayers' money this afternoon in the Department 

of Labour.  And we have several areas that we want to cover.  I 

think we'll just delve right into some questions, though, and go 

from there. 

 

I noticed in the Estimates that under the Labour Relations 

subvote no. 2, a couple of numbers have jumped quite 

significantly.  One is personal services.  And when I say 

significantly, I mean in the personal services it went up by 

$108,000.  Could you please define exactly what personal 

services are, and why the jump in the funds? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I take it the member meant salaries 

when you referred to personal services. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Do you want to explain that a little further, 

what it was? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- In past years we've used the phrase 

personal services for a long time, which has generally referred 

to salaries.  In the new Estimates book, the term disappears 

and we have salaries and operating expenses.  Do I take it when 

you meant personal services, you were referring to salaries? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay.  Whose salaries would these be?  

Could you give us a list of the people that would be involved? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Okay.  And if I could clarify it again, 

you referred to subvote 1 and 2.  There are no salaries in 

subvote 2.  Do I take it the member meant subvote 1? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Likely we did. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Okay.  There are three additional 

positions that are shown, but they're only shown.  The three are 

the ministerial assistants working in my office.  These are in 

fact not new positions, but we no longer squirrel those people 

away in the Crown corporations, and they're shown.  So the 

three additional positions are in fact three ministerial assistants. 

 

One option for the member which might assist you . . . there's a 

list of standard questions which you've asked all of the 

departments.  I could give you a copy of that now . . . contains 

some of this information.  All right.  I'll ask the page to take to 

the member the answers to the standard questions. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  That was going to be 

one of our questions as we got along here anyway, so we 

appreciate that.  We'll peruse that as soon as we get a chance 

here. 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1559 

Also under the "Labour Relations" is a more than hundred per 

cent increase in other expenses.  Mr. Speaker, this category has 

jumped $152,000 from last year's 316 -- or two three hundred 

and sixteen thousand three hundred this year.  Just what exactly 

is considered other expenses, and why has this category 

received more than hundred per cent increase, and would you 

provide the detailed breakdown of this vote? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Perhaps the member could identify 

the subvote you're referring to.  We're just having trouble 

finding it here. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I have reference to subvote no. 2. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, thank you.  That is not an 

increase in costs.  That is a change in the way that SPMC 

display the cost.  There used to be a rebate went back to the 

departments; that no longer goes back. 

 

Thus the way in which the information is being displayed has 

changed.  It actually is no more . . . places no more material, 

nothing more from SPMC.  It's just a difference in the way 

SPMC bill us and the way we disclose it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I think you lost me there.  Are you suggesting 

there's a different accounting procedure used? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes.  Up until last year there had 

been in place something called the participation credit, and it 

was a controversial affair, but did not really assist members of 

the Assembly in understanding the true costs of SPMC. 

 

As a result of recommendation in the Gass Commission and 

elsewhere, the participation credit has been done away with.  

We now display the information in a more accurate fashion, 

and thus the figure has increased.  But we are not being billed 

for any more services or any more space or any more supplies.  

It's just an accounting change. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  I probably was asking 

questions about a different page than you were on because I got 

my notes kind of mixed up here. 

 

Anyway we've got some need, Minister, to talk about exactly 

where your portfolio is leading the general direction of the 

province in terms of things like job creation.  I know that that 

will fall in a more general way under the jurisdiction of 

Economic Development than those kinds of things, but the 

Department of Labour of course makes some very critical 

determinations in the types of legislation that control our 

province and our workforce and our unionized friends and the 

business community in general.  What happens in your 

department affects many, many possibilities of potential for job 

creation or the lack of it. 

 

Could you explain to us what you are doing to assist in the job 

creation through your programs? 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I say to the member from Maple 

Creek, that this department really does not have any 

responsibility any more for job creation.  Those matters are 

now handled exclusively by Economic Trade and 

Development.  And you will note that the questions in question 

period are fielded by that minister. 

 

We do keep some statistics with respect to the labour force, the 

size of the labour force.  We really do not bear responsibility 

for job creation.  That is really done by Economic Trade and 

Development.  I'd encourage the member to ask his questions 

of that minister. 

 

The short answer for this department is very little.  That's not 

our responsibility.  It's done by Economic Trade and 

Development. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay, thank you, Minister.  The other day in 

question period, I recall the Premier . . .  I guess the term that 

some people have used . . . he in some people's view declared 

war on the business community by making the statement that 

went something along the lines that the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business and the chambers of commerce did not 

really represent business in the province of Saskatchewan, that 

they really didn't know what was going on, and that business in 

general agreed with the policies and the direction that the 

government was taking. 

 

I want to get on record, Minister, the fact that these 

organizations are paid for in their total existence by the 

memberships that they represent.  As far as I know -- and you 

can correct me if I'm wrong -- no government dollars go to 

sponsor or to finance either one of these two organizations.  

And if that is true, would it not also then be true that if they 

weren't representing business fairly, the people that pay their 

way, would those businesses not withdraw that financial 

support, and wouldn't they disappear if they didn't properly 

represent them?  What is your opinion on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I wasn't present in the Assembly on 

Thursday, I think, when that exchange took place.  I doubt 

very, very much that the member from Riversdale declared war 

on the Saskatchewan business community.  I suspect that that is 

a characterization of the member from Maple Creek and not a 

fair characterization at that. 

 

With respect to organizations such as Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business and the chamber of commerce, one must 

remember to some extent these are lobbyists.  It is their 

responsibility to come to government and to get as good a deal 

as possible.  And they will therefore ask for as much as could 

conceivably be given. 

 

What I think the member from Maple Creek . . . or the member 

from Riversdale, rather, was saying was that we believe we 

have struck a reasonable compromise in the area of labour law, 

and we think that most business people in the province see it as 

a reasonable 



1560 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

compromise.  We don't necessarily expect lobbyists such as 

CFIB (Canadian Federation of Independent Business) and the 

chamber of commerce to acknowledge that; rather it is their 

responsibility to get as good a deal as they can on behalf of 

their members.  I'm not being critical of them.  I'm just saying 

one shouldn't necessarily take their comments and assume that 

those are the views of all business people. 

 

I think Mr. Romanow was saying is that we think we've struck 

a reasonable compromise.  We think most business people in 

the province see it as a reasonable compromise.  I think that's 

what he was saying. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Chairman, he can't use the Premier's 

name like that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If I used the proper name of the 

member from Riversdale, I apologize. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I'm sure the Chair will accept your apology.  

It kind of slips out sometimes when we're talking about friends. 

 

In spite of your explanation, which if taken by itself would 

seem a fair and reasonable approach, the reality is that these are 

people that represent business, that we're talking about, you 

may identify them as lobby groups, and that could be fair 

enough.  I mean I suppose that's a good enough term to use. 

 

But the reality is that everybody in our society has someone 

that represents them.  The teachers have a teachers' federation; 

the workers of our province have their unions.  Everybody has 

a professional group that they pay for that tries to get them a 

fair deal in society.  And so you can hardly fault these people 

for doing their job, and I think that's what they're doing. 

 

(1500) 

 

As far as your comments about being fair and reasonable and 

compromise and all that, I suggest that there's very precious 

few people in the business world that would agree with you on 

those explanations of what we are about to see in changes of 

legislation. 

 

In fact I think radical, extreme, unworkable, destructive, 

creating of unemployment, destruction of business, chasing 

away of economic diversification, and probably the demise of 

our province as a business community, other than to be the 

hewers of wood and drawers of water -- that might be a better 

explanation according to some other people in the province. 

 

So I think you should take a closer look, Minister, at whether 

your programs are in fact creating jobs, whether they are 

helping labour.  You represent the labour force in our province, 

and if what you're doing is counter-productive, then you are not 

doing your job well.  And I'm suggesting to you, because you 

brought it up, that what your measures are doing is very 

counter-productive to the job that you're supposed to be 

fulfilling, which is to help labour to fulfil its needs, which is to 

have better working conditions, better 

social and economic base from which to work. 

 

If we lived in a state-owned and state-controlled society, then 

the measures you are taking might work because the 

government would be the employer.  And the government 

would of course have to fulfil the mandates of all of the 

legislation that you are bringing in. 

 

Unfortunately for you, we don't live in a communist state.  We 

live in a free state where business works and operates 

independently through what you would hate to hear said, but 

the capitalistic system is the reality of the world that we live in, 

and businesses are a part of that free enterprise system. 

 

Businesses in the free enterprise are the key creator of labour 

positions and jobs in our society and in Saskatchewan.  And if 

you create an atmosphere where business can't work, if you're 

not in a position to take over everything as a government 

state-owned entity, then you will have to find ways to provide 

businesses with the opportunity to be able to be competitive, 

not only in Saskatchewan with one another, but from province 

to province and from country to country, because we are in a 

competitive market position and businesses have to be able to 

compete.  If we're not in that competitive position, we can only 

have enough businesses to serve our own immediate needs, 

which become very close and narrow. 

 

Anyway, the narrowness then means that we become nothing 

but the suppliers of raw products to the rest of the world.  We 

can never, ever create the secondary industries that would 

promote increased labour needs and increased prosperity and 

diversification.  And so, Minister, I think you're way off track 

in your judgement of how the system can work.  You can 

comment on that as we go.  I'm going to throw in another 

question so that you can also consider it. 

 

I have here in my hand a copy, from the Saskatoon Star-

Phoenix, of the paper.  It says: 

 

 Effective December 1, 1992, the minimum wage for 

Saskatchewan will be $5.35 per hour . . . 

 

And it goes on to give some numbers and all kinds of stuff.  

That was an ad that was carried in the major newspapers -- an 

ad which your department paid for. 

 

I'm wondering what productive game can there be to the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan for you to spend a whole large sum 

of money advertising that the minimum wage in the province 

went up.  As soon as that became law, would that not 

automatically mean that every employer would be notified by 

some direct form and that they in fact would be compelled to 

pay that minimum wage and that this advertising in fact was 

nothing but a waste of government money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The short answer to the member's 

question is we wouldn't necessarily write all employers, 

wouldn't necessarily have the names of 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1561 

all employers.  Some of the arrangements are fairly informal, 

shall we say.  We don't have all the names.  We do not write 

them all directly. 

 

We spent $5,000 on an ad just simply as a means of informing 

the employers and the employees that the minimum wage had 

gone up and that they ought to rearrange their affairs 

accordingly.  Indeed I think, if I may say so, this is the kind of 

way I think government advertising is justified, when one's 

giving out information about government programs.  We were 

simply giving information in the ad.  I don't think it was 

political; I think it gave information.  It gave information to 

employers and employees. 

 

Sometimes we have a feeling when we're in this Assembly that 

the whole world measures its existence by what goes on in this 

Assembly.  There are, as I'm sure the member will be aware 

coming from Maple Creek, there's a good percentage of the 

population don't follow these proceedings very closely, or at 

all.  And so we took the opportunity with the ad to inform all 

Saskatchewan people that there had been this change in the 

minimum wage. 

 

But it was purely informational and it was the only monies I 

think we spent informing people of this important change. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well you didn't wreck my day by suggesting 

that everybody doesn't watch what we're doing here because 

I'm quite aware of that fact.  I haven't been here all that long 

and I can remember a very short while back being just an 

ordinary Joe Citizen out in the community and rarely ever paid 

any attention to the immediate happenings of this Assembly, 

and I guess I was probably about average. 

 

The reality is though that important things are covered and the 

minimum wage increase was broadly, very broadly covered by 

the media in its own right and I rather doubt that you would be 

able to live in Saskatchewan without having heard when it went 

up; it was carried that extensively by the media. 

 

And so the advertising campaign may have been stretched a 

little bit, but even granting that you can justify having done it, 

your government did campaign that you were going to do so 

much better, especially in the area of advertising and 

promotions and those kinds of things. 

 

Now having said that, I recall also in the election campaigns 

that you suggested you could save anywheres up to 80 per cent 

of the taxpayers' dollars in those areas.  So if that were true at 

that time, could you suggest to me some places where you 

should be saving some of these dollars that you said you could 

do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well the government has done a 

pretty fair job of saving dollars in areas such as this.  We have 

cut back very extensively in terms of advertising.  The period 

prior to the election was characterized by a lot of ads which did 

not give much information but which some detractors of the 

former 

administration said were somewhat self-serving and were an 

attempt to promote the government as distinct from providing 

information. 

 

We've cut back on almost all of these and almost all advertising 

now is informational in nature.  We have I think, if my memory 

serves me correct, the former government was spending some 

$20 million a year on advertising.  We spend a fraction of that, 

almost all of it in this form which is simply providing 

information. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I 

just want to ask the minister a few questions here on clause 1 

pertaining to some comments that the Premier made last week, 

and the minister has informed us that he wasn't here and he 

thinks the Premier said such-and-such. 

 

Mr. Minister, even though your department isn't directly related 

to job creation per se, you are absolutely right in the fact that 

what your department does has a very large effect on 

employment levels in this province, in the number of people 

that leave our province, the number of people that come into 

our province for various reasons. Because North America today 

is a very competitive market-place for most things that we do.  

Our labour market, our job market, is as competitive as the 

people that invest money daily on the stock exchange.  So what 

you do, Mr. Minister, in your department has a very large effect 

on our ability to compete. 

 

But the open letter to the Premier last week said, was that in a 

number of areas you are impairing the ability of people to 

invest and do business in the province of Saskatchewan, which 

is counter to your own document. 

 

They were simply saying, we would like to discuss your own 

document which laid out certain parameters -- which everyone 

heartily endorsed, by the way, Mr. Minister, when it was 

released eight or nine months ago. 

 

Now what the business community is saying is that there is 

some major betrayal going on from what they were told when 

the document was released when they all signed on, and what is 

actually happening.  Part of that betrayal, Mr. Minister, is the 

area that you are in charge of, the two Bills that are before this 

legislature, and some ancillary areas attached to Labour. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, if the Premier succumbs to the pressure of 

a business summit in this province -- and I believe that he 

should -- that means that your role in this exercise is going to 

be under a very fine microscope. It's going to be visible to the 

public in a way that it hasn't been in the present. 

 

And I would say to you, Mr. Minister, and I'd like your 

comments on this, the numbers which you use in this 

legislature pertaining to the two Bills and the amount that they 

will . . . the cost of doing business that will be associated with 

them, are you absolutely firm on those numbers, that those are 

the maximums?  Or is there a 



1562 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

potential under certain circumstances for those numbers to in 

fact go higher than what you used in the legislature today?  Are 

those bottom-end numbers, are those average numbers, or are 

you standing hard and fast and saying to the legislature in 

Saskatchewan that over the next five or six years those 

numbers will not change? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't mean to be flippant to the 

minister . . . or the member from Thunder Creek when I say 

that I am absolutely certain about two things:  that I was born 

and I will die.  The rest is I guess a matter of probabilities. 

 

Let me tell you what . . . well taxes is somewhere pretty close 

to that.  Let me tell you what we've actually done.  We have 

hired the best advice we could get which was the senior 

managing partner of Price Waterhouse in Saskatoon.  We 

worked with . . . the individual's name is Don Rosten.  I don't 

think he would object to me using his name in this Assembly.  

We worked with him from the very beginning.  We're assured 

by him that our estimates as to the cost were as good as they 

could be. 

 

I want to say to the member from Thunder Creek that I think if 

we are out, I think we have erred on the conservative side.  I 

think if we're wrong our costs, we will have overestimated the 

costs and not underestimated them.  If you say are you 

absolutely dead certain? The answer is no. I'm quite confident 

though if we're wrong, we will have been overly conservative 

and not overly liberal in our approach to estimating the costs. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay, Mr. Minister, did your consulting firm 

provide all of the numbers that you have used or are some of 

those numbers that your own department has provided as part 

of that study and the analysis? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, Price Waterhouse provided them 

all.  They had access to all the information in the department.  

But all of those figures were theirs and their name went on the 

bottom underneath all those figures. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well the part the public and particularly the 

business community is having trouble understanding, Mr. 

Minister, is that they also have had fairly detailed analysis at 

great cost to their own membership done which show a 

different set of numbers.  And that's why I asked you, are we at 

the bottom end or are we in the middle or are we at the 

average?  You tell me that you're conservative with the 

numbers that you use. 

 

They have analysis which seems fairly in depth that shows that 

they have a high-end number.  And it's a number that you're 

familiar with, okay, that we're talking about close to $200 

million.  Now given that they can be so high, I think that you 

should be able to tell the Assembly and the taxpayers of this 

province that you in no way could possibly be near that level 

because of certain factors and that you could outline those 

factors for us which then would maybe give the 

business community some confidence that you aren't . . . 

 

I mean, who knows who the next minister of Labour's going to 

be and what the policy's going to be.  And Finance may change 

their mind on certain things.  And instead of the employer 

simply picking up the health costs, he may be asked to pick up 

something else next budget; meanwhile you've had your 

legislation through and the numbers go all wonky. 

 

So I want you to give us a more in-depth explanation about 

certain factors that would go in and would prohibit those costs 

from going up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- All actuarial studies are based on 

assumptions.  An actuarial study is no better than the 

assumptions.  So I just say the obvious, that the assumptions 

upon which that study was outlined are set out in the very 

beginning of the study. 

 

I want to say for the benefit of the member opposite that some 

confusion has occurred, and it is regrettable.  What happened 

was that the Workers' Compensation Board did a review of the 

Muir report or the at least of the Muir report as they understood 

it.  And that report done by the Workers' Compensation Board 

by William Mercer and company, produced a rather startling 

increase in cost. 

 

(1515) 

 

To some extent that report was premature.  It was premature 

because the government hadn't adopted the Muir report in its 

entirety. It was also premature because I'm not sure the WCB 

(Workers' Compensation Board) understood the report 

properly, although I don't want to put too fine a point on that.  

The question of deeming, I think they misunderstood.  So I 

think the Mercer report was not as useful as it might have been. 

 

It was however taken into consideration by . . . and so I think 

that's why the business community have this very high figure.  

It's because it came from the WCB.  But the WCB prepared 

this report without having discussed the matter with the 

department and without knowing what the government was 

intending with respect to the report.  To that extent I think the 

report, the study done by William Mercer last fall, was 

premature.  It does suggest a very startling increase of some 

200 per cent. 

 

When we began to devise the legislation, clearly an increase of 

200 per cent is not on.  I wouldn't recommend that to anyone, 

and if I did I don't think I could persuade very many people to 

adopt such a regime. 

 

What in fact we did was hire Price Waterhouse and worked 

with them closely in preparing the legislation.  So Price 

Waterhouse have costed the legislation. 

 

William Mercer last fall costed what the WCB understood to be 

Muir's report, and there is quite a difference between what they 

understood and what 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1563 

we're doing. 

 

For the benefit of the member, I can get into what the 

difference is in practical terms if you want, but that's why one 

report which the business community has is so high, and this 

one appears so much more modest. 

 

It's not that we looked at exactly the same thing and arrived 

with different figures.  They are a study of two different 

phenomena.  The first one was a study of the Muir report; the 

second one is a study of the legislation. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Chairman, I 

don't think we need to do that because I'm sure under detailed 

discussion of the Bill there'll be ample opportunity for you to 

enlighten us on those details and the differences. 

 

But I think what we do in clause 1 of your estimates here is that 

we need to understand some general parameters of policy and 

where you're going.  People in the business community, and 

particularly the five organizations which sent the open letter to 

the Premier, are saying that there have been developments 

since the beginning of the year which give them some cause for 

concern. 

 

And certainly the Mercer report was done last fall.  But I would 

remind the minister that you're dealing with a Workmen's 

Comp Board who have a surplus in the account, have run an 

actuarially sound operation which until very recently, I'm told, 

had some of the highest benefit packages available to 

Canadians. 

 

Now I would suggest to you that people that had been able to 

run that type of operation when so many other provinces are in 

very large deficit positions, which mean that workers don't 

have the same privileges that they had here, that in fact are in a 

catch-up position, tells me that we should listen to any analysis 

that they happen to do. 

 

It was also very interesting on the question of deeming, when 

one finds out the ramifications of the practice over the last year 

and what percentage of people deemed actually went to an 

arbitration stage and what percentage at the end of the day were 

unhappy with the entire process.  I am told that we could 

handle that entirely on the fingers of my two hands as far as . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well maybe hands and toes then.  I 

mean we're not talking about hundreds of folks here, or even 

literally dozens, that were totally unhappy with the process the 

other day. 

 

It is a very important policy component that we're dealing with 

here that your government has launched off on, which has 

necessitated this open letter to the government saying that 

people are angry, that they are ready to not work with the 

government. 

 

I'm wondering if you could, since you've had the Price 

Waterhouse report, since you've had some of this feedback 

from business, if you could tell us in a general policy way and 

perhaps stake some ground 

out, of deeming if you wish and others, about sort of how far 

you're prepared to go with this practice and maybe give some 

of the confidence back that business people would like to hear 

from a Minister of Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I spoke to well-attended meetings of 

business people in every city in the province except Melfort.  

Melfort was only missed because I simply didn't get there -- we 

ran out of time.  But apart from Melfort and Lloydminster, I 

spoke to reasonably well-attended meetings of business people 

in every city in the province. 

 

I think they were reasonably satisfied at the end of the meeting 

that our figure was credible.  I don't think they necessarily buy 

it as being inevitable, but I think they found our approach to be 

credible.  That's probably the best . . . that in fact is what . . . I 

met with a group of Regina business people,  That in fact, I 

think, was the word they used at the end of the meeting, was 

that the figure we were using was credible.  And I think that is 

what they found. 

 

I can go in . . . If the member wants, I will describe the scheme 

of the legislation now, and how the legislation is going to work, 

and why we think the figure is accurate.  I don't know quite 

how much detail the member wants to get into in this 

committee.  I don't frankly care. 

 

If you want to do it, I'll do it now.  We're going to have this 

conversation.  It doesn't matter to me whether it's done in 

Committee of the Whole or in Committee of Finance.  So if 

you want to do it now -- I don't have the officials present, and 

that may be one limitation -- but I'm quite prepared to outline 

for the member, in what I think, what I hope, are 

understandable terms, what the change is. The changes are not 

those which the Workers' Compensation Board in 

commissioning the report thought.  They had, I think, 

misunderstood the Muir report.  And I think that was the basis 

of that very exorbitant increase in cost. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Well tell us about the misunderstanding. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- They thought we were going to end 

deeming.  And that's not the case.  The change is not that we're 

going to end deeming.  Deeming would normally be used only . 

. . we're going to restrict its operation, and it will be used only 

in rare cases, but that's not really the change.  The change is we 

are going from . . . 

 

Well okay, let me take five minutes and explain the thrust of 

the legislation.  Prior to 1978, what we had was -- the name 

describes it -- Workers' Compensation Board.  It provided 

compensation. 

 

If you were injured and you were like . . . just as if you were 

injured at SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance).  If you 

are hit by a drunk driver and you get a broken knee, then you 

get $10,000 or some such figure and that's it, it's the end of the 

story.  They are done with you.  You got your compensation.  

That really was how the Workers' Compensation Board 



1564 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

operated, was that they compensated you.  It was more likely to 

be done in the terms of monthly payments, but they settled for a 

compensation figure; and then apart from cost of living 

increases that's normally . . . it was not revisited. 

 

And what happened in '78 was that the inflation increased very 

rapidly, which meant some of the compensation levels were no 

longer appropriate.  But if you increased the level of benefits, 

you get caught on increasing assessments which create a 

pressure.  That led to quite a change in the system, and this 

changed system was that it was no longer a compensation 

system although the name was retained.  What it was, was a 

rehabilitation system.  The emphasis was on rehabilitating 

workers, and thus someone who was a steelworker and who 

was injured as a steelworker -- could have got a bad back, can't 

lift steel any more -- might be retrained to be a locksmith where 

you sit all day and fiddle with the locks.  I don't mean to be 

critical of people who work at locks, but it's a different kind of 

employment. 

 

And that's what we had between '78 and '82; we really had a 

workers' . . . really a better name would have been the injured 

workers' rehabilitation scheme.  What happened during the '80s 

was that we wound up with neither fish nor fowl; somewhere 

we'd lost the rehabilitation aspect, but we retained the rest of it.  

And we've wound up with something that was neither fish nor 

fowl.  What Judge Muir recommended we do . . . and just to go 

back to the '78 to '82 scheme, deeming was a part of that Bill.  

It was rarely used, but it was always there.  It was a way of 

pushing a reluctant worker out the door, who maybe didn't 

want to be a locksmith. 

 

Some people -- I think they're not common -- but some people I 

guess are inherently lazy and would rather sit at home and do 

nothing.  I think that's a rare person.  A more common type of 

problem was psychological.  Injured people don't always feel 

comfortable going back to work.  They're not the same.  They 

don't walk the same, can't do all the same things.  Sometimes it 

becomes psychologically impaired.  For those people, deeming 

was a way of pushing them out the door, back into the 

workplace, and it really was used only for those rare people 

who wouldn't take the rehabilitation, who insisted they were 

going to go back to be steelworkers or nothing at all. 

 

What happened between '82 and '92, I guess, was that we lost 

the rehabilitation aspect but kept all the rest of the scheme.  

Without the rehabilitation, the scheme didn't make much sense 

which brings me to the Muir report.  That's what Muir 

identified.  What Muir recommended is we go back to a system 

of rehabilitating workers.  But if the member looks at the 

section dealing with the Workers' Compensation Board and 

look at the word deeming, you will see that it doesn't look very 

different than what was in the old legislation; it looks much the 

same.  It's still there.  What will change very, very much is the 

way the whole thing's approached. 

A steelworker -- to take the example -- a steelworker who can't 

lift any more, he's not going to go back to doing steel.  The 

board will sit down with him, discuss what sort of retraining he 

might want.  And then when he gets his retraining, be given a 

reasonable period of time to find a job as a locksmith. Again 

I'm only using this as an example, I emphasize.  But once 

they've had a reasonable opportunity to find a job, then the 

compensation comes to an end.  It's not a lifetime 

compensation scheme any more, it's rehabilitation. 

 

The real change which Muir recommended was not an end to 

deeming.  The core of his change was an emphasis off 

compensation onto rehabilitation, and that's what was 

misunderstood. 

 

I don't know whether that makes it any clearer for the member 

or not. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I appreciate the explanation, Mr. 

Minister.  And I think the fact that you aren't changing deeming 

all that much will be some reassurance to people.  It's the other 

component that you only lightly touched on that does have 

them worried though, and it's a little bit like your Minister of 

Finance's budget -- we don't get the whole view; the chips just 

keep floating to the surface at some point down the road. 

 

You were talking about a system that had a totally publicly 

funded medicare system attached to it.  What you've had in the 

last couple of years with de-insuring of so many areas and a 

clear direction, that you're saying: Mr. Employer, you are going 

to be responsible on the medical side and the educational side. 

 

And one only has to look at the respective budgets to see the 

changes in the Education budget and other areas where they 

used to be responsible for retraining.  I mean there's 44, $45 

million missing out of your Education budget this year that 

used to go to those things. 

 

So you're then dealing with employers.  And typically where, I 

am told, you have workers who happen to be in that 50- to 

60-year age bracket, in many cases when back injuries, knee 

injuries, those type of things occur, then not only will you be 

faced with the ongoing medical costs, also the retraining 

component. 

 

Now if one is familiar with the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute 

of Applied Science and Technology) system these days, some 

of the co-op programing that's available and other things, you're 

looking at four- and five-year educational sojourns for folks 

that could easily be at the . . . in the last ten years of their 

ability in the workforce; and yet all of these costs, which many 

of them were publicly funded previously, will now be on the 

back of the employer. 

 

Now that's why the employer is having some difficulty when 

you put this little minimum number on here and say, now this 

is it boys; it isn't going to grow from that.  When they all see 

the medical system in Canada, in Saskatchewan, changing from 

a totally publicly funded one to something else, particularly in 

our 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1565 

province, and they also see the educational system where 

retraining was a publicly funded thing, both by provincial and 

federal governments, now becoming less so.  And your own 

budget is an indication of that.  So those are the areas, Mr. 

Minister, which you lightly identified but which business are 

feeling very uncomfortable with. 

 

Now I think what they need from you is some assurance that 

those total costs, that that money removed from your Education 

budget on retraining isn't going to end up on their shoulders.  

And the same in the medical system, that as chiropractors and 

other people -- optometrists and on and on and on -- are 

de-insured that those medical costs aren't going to land 

squarely at the feet of the employer. 

 

And so far no one has given that assurance and I'd like you to 

touch on those areas. 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well let us remember from whence 

we came on this whole matter.  This is not . . . workers' 

compensation was not part of the welfare state; it preceded it.  

This was not . . . this was never part of the welfare state.  And 

again, I'm going to take five minutes and explain to the 

member, who may know, and to members of the Assembly or 

the watching audience, who may not, from whence we came on 

this whole matter. 

 

Up until the middle of the last century, a business person's 

liability was based on contract.  You were only liable for 

obligations you assume, which worked well in a small 

market-place.  When English businesses began to trade around 

the globe, and it was the first economy to become global 

traders, it didn't work very well. 

 

A gun, in taking an example, a gun that was made in England 

which blew up in the Punjab, no richness in judicial 

imagination could base liability on that, on contract.  Neither 

one had any idea of the other. 

 

So what the English courts did in a celebrated series of cases 

was change the basis from contract to tort, to negligence.  

When they changed it to negligence the workers . . . the 

employers developed a serious problem in the workplace 

because now employees began to sue the boss when they got 

hurt and courts began to find them liable.  So this was actually 

promoted in England, but it spread around the world.  And it 

was very successful. 

 

The deal was workers can't sue the boss.  On the other hand, 

the boss, the employers, must contribute to a fund to pay the 

injuries.  It was one of those many cases, and I find them 

throughout the whole area of labour, where if they only knew 

it, employers and employees have the same interest. 

 

Employees got compensation quickly, didn't have to wait for 

the interminable delays in the court system.  From the point of 

view of the employers, it was a lot cheaper to administer this 

system than it is to go to 

court.  So this is the compact.  The compact is that employees 

cannot sue their employer; the employer must contribute to a 

fund. 

 

So to the extent that the workers' rehabilitation -- and don't 

forget we're not now talking about compensation as much as 

rehabilitation -- to the extent that the rehabilitation relates to 

the workplace, the cost may be borne by the employers.  But 

that's entirely consistent with the compact. 

 

Again workers and . . . the employers and the employees have 

the same interest, if they only knew it.  Their interests are to . . . 

the employees want to be rehabilitated; they want to be 

productive members of society.  If they can't do one line of 

work, however much they might have enjoyed it, they still want 

to be a productive member of society doing something else.  

And so the employees have an interest in rehabilitation.  The 

employers certainly have an interest in rehabilitation because 

it's a lot cheaper. 

 

I said I spoke to . . . I spoke in each city to members of business 

. . . I had three meetings in each city:  one was business people, 

one was trade unionists, and the other was injured workers. 

 

I said to all three groups, one way of looking at the cost of this 

thing is to consider what would be the result if we just repealed 

the Act.  I think every business person knows what would 

happen if we repealed this Act.  The cost of their liability 

insurance would simply go through the roof.  And so again it's 

another area where the employees and employers have the 

same interest. 

 

The whole thrust of this department is to try to get employers 

and employees to realize that in many ways they are partners.  

When I would speak in the morning . . . and meetings with 

business people was usually in the morning.  That's the time 

when they want to meet.  It's the easiest time for them to get 

together.  When I would meet with the employers in the 

morning I would point this out, and I would point out that: 

what do you people want?  What do they want at the end of the 

day?  Better business climate, better profits.  No doubt about it. 

 

When I meet with the employees in the evening, I would say to 

them: at the end of the day what do you folks want?  What they 

want is more jobs, better-paying jobs.  That's saying exactly the 

same thing.  It's just a different way of looking at the same 

goal. 

 

The thrust of this department is to get employers and 

employees to realize that we are in a lifeboat.  We're talking 

about the survival of this province and its economy, and we've 

got to work together. 

 

And what we want to get this . . . what this department wants to 

do is to get employees and employers realizing that they have a 

mutual interest and we want to get them working together.  But 

that's true in the area of workers' compensation.  It is true in 

virtually every other area.  What we want to talk about is 

partnerships. 



1566 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

My long-run goal as Minister of Labour is to meet with 

employers and employees in the same room and not as I was 

doing this year -- meeting with them at different times of the 

day.  Because it is my hope that we can get people to realize 

they have the same interests and they need to pull on the oars in 

the same direction in this lifeboat we're in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I think we all share the wish.  

Your version of British industrial society is the same as the one 

I took at university too, so we probably had the same profs.  

Okay?  And we understand the compact.  But what you skated 

around so nicely was that you said yes, the employer is 

responsible for that part of the compact. 

 

What I'm saying to you is that the compact is changing because 

of other forces out there, other budgetary forces.  The changes 

in how re-education and rehabilitation vis-a-vis health, the cost 

and the implementation are changing, Mr. Minister, and I'm 

sure you were told that. 

 

If you did your meetings around the province, both the 

employees and the employer would say, lookit, there are certain 

things that aren't the same as they were even two or three years 

ago.  And if I'm to receive my educational component to make 

my switch from a steelworker . . . I like to think of them as a 

computer operator, not a locksmith, but someone who is 

making a job shift, you have your agreement between the union 

and an employer in the case of a big one. 

 

And in many cases you have the smaller employers who simply 

follow the unions' agreements that were negotiated in the 

province in order to set the parameters for their employees, or 

they might have them on profit-sharing or all sorts of different 

mechanisms. 

 

The fact is that that guy has been bargained at a certain 

position.  He gets hurt.  He is going to be retrained as a 

computer operator at that rate.  It's either that or the whole 

bumping process starts and the various things that happen in an 

organized workplace.  But those health costs and those 

re-education costs, if they are totally the employer's compact, 

then his compact, I say to you, Mr. Minister, has changed 

because of decisions that federal and provincial governments 

are making and are making quickly and rapidly, and they have 

far-reaching consequences economically.  The ability of that 

employer then to compete in a market-place with someone who 

is treated differently, changes. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I simply want you to give us the assurance 

that that change that's occurring out there isn't all going to land 

squarely at the feet of the employer because you simply don't 

want to take the time to rejig the system properly and perhaps 

lay some of the blame where the blame should properly lay. 

 

And I don't think that that says that any employer or employee 

in the province wants to work in an unsafe 

environment.  I mean when I hear allegations made about 

trenching companies that have never had an accident but they 

should have their rates jacked up because they look like they 

might have one, I find that a little bit nonsensical.  And I know 

it's been said by some of your officials. 

 

So if you'd sort of tell folks how this is going to work. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I may not have dealt with that as 

directly as I had intended to.  The Price Waterhouse study is 

based on the assumption that there will be no change in the 

costs assumed by . . . there'll be no change in the kind of costs 

which are assumed by WCB. 

 

At the present time they assume . . . some of the costs of 

rehabilitation and care are now assumed by WCB; some aren't.  

I give you and I will give you the assurance again in 

Committee of the Whole when we deal with the Bill, there's no 

change contemplated in that.  The sort of costs they've assumed 

in the past they'll continue to assume.  Those which have been 

assumed by the public, the public will continue to assume.  

There'll be no change in that. 

 

To that extent I guess I can give you the assurance which you 

asked for. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

want to point out that when I first started with my questions I 

had inadvertently picked up Estimates from the wrong 

department.  And fortunately the figures were close enough that 

the principles did apply and so your answers more or less 

answered the same questions that I was supposed to ask, with a 

little adjusted figures.  I'll just run the right figures by you just 

to let you know that we have managed to get our mathematics 

correct. 

 

Okay, under the administrative costs we notice that they went 

up substantially; in fact it was by about $108,000 I think over 

last year -- about 100,000 anyway.  And you did give us an 

answer to why that happened and I appreciate that answer. 

 

Also it was under vote 2 that we noted that there was a 

$500,000 difference from last year, and I think your 

explanation there had pretty well cleared that up, and I just 

wanted to get the right numbers on track here.  We'd hate to 

have the Department of Highways paying the Labour 

department's bills or anything like that. 

 

But I did find another little question here that leads out of that.  

Could you give an explanation of what is considered operating 

expenses, and a detailed list as just to where this money is 

going and what the purpose of this expenditure is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Two comments. One, if the member 

can find any way that the Department of Labour can access the 

budget of the Department of Highways, I'd like you to let us 

know because we sure could use the extra help.  On a more 

serious note, which subvote was the member referring to?  

Two. 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1567 

I would admit that the explanation was not very easy to follow.  

What I'm going to do is give the member a written explanation 

which was actually the one provided to me in the briefing book.  

I think I'll just give it to the member. It outlines in detail how 

we arrived at the costs we did.  If I could have the assistance on 

one of the pages to take it to the member, could I? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  I think that was where 

you made some reference to the accounting being different and 

that sort of thing.  So I appreciate that, because I really hadn't 

quite got that through my head, so maybe this will help.  We'll 

study it through later on. 

 

Okay, subvote LA04 shows an increase in the salaries of almost 

$100,000 for the Labour Relations Board.  What is the reason 

for this increase? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The difference was that the status of 

the chairperson changed from a personal service contract 

employee to a fee for service contract employee, and that 

resulted in the matter being shown differently.  There's no more 

people involved; it's just a different way of showing the . . . just 

a different status for the chairman, whose name is Beth Bilson. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- What you're saying is that one person's salary 

went up by $100,000, or the cost of having a chairperson there 

is $100,000 more money. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think I'm going to give this to the 

member as well because I think that would be easier.  If I could 

have the assistance of the page again.  You'll notice that the 

bottom line here is the same.  The total spent in the area is 

$440,000.  What has changed is that 100,000 was taken from 

other expenses and put in personal services -- again just a 

different way of showing the same expenditure.  The bottom 

line is the same. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I expect that we'll probably find that some car 

expenses and things like that have gone from one category to 

another then.  Okay, I think I catch your drift of what you 

mean.  It does seem like an awful odd way to do the books, to 

change that much.  It makes the man appear to be overpaid.  I 

don't know if that's justice to him, whoever he is.  But anyway, 

I guess if that's the way you're going to do it, he'll have to 

explain it and try to survive in his job as being overpaid some 

time in the future. 

 

Now the former minister of Justice, Mr. Minister -- or the 

Minister of Justice rather, now, was the former minister of 

Labour, when he held the portfolio that you presently hold, he 

stated that union-only contracting was the general direction that 

he was going to lead the province.  I'd like to know where does 

that decision that he made presently lie in your philosophy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We believe that everybody is entitled 

to a fair wage.  We believe that all employees 

are entitled to organize for their mutual benefit and that trade 

unions are simply a legitimate expression of the freedom of 

association which we all enjoy. 

 

Farmers are members of a wheat pool -- many of them are.  It's 

a voluntary organization which they joined to promote their 

interests.  Lawyers are members of . . . the member from 

Saskatoon Fairlight and I are members of the Canadian Bar 

Association.  We join to promote the interests of the legal 

profession and, we think, the interests of society at the same 

time. 

 

Trade unions are a legitimate expression of people's right to 

join together for their mutual benefit.  It's an organization of 

employees to bargain on their behalf, and we believe that trade 

unions are legitimate and that they should be encouraged 

indeed.  That is our approach to trade unions.  There's nothing 

to be discouraged and no reason to apologize for it.  Trade 

unions are a legitimate organization of employees to promote 

their interests.  And to that extent, we defend them.  We do not 

criticize them. 

 

With respect to the construction industry specifically, this 

matter is under consideration, and a number of things are being 

considered, one of which is . . . some of the arrangements 

which other provinces have, the Allied Trade Agreement which 

has been successful I think in Manitoba, I think is endorsed by 

both business and trade unions in Manitoba.  It's one of the 

approaches we're considering. 

 

So I hope that's an adequate answer . . . is that with respect to 

trade unions, you don't blanch from defending them, defending 

the whole concept of trade unions.  They're legitimate, a 

legitimate expression of freedom of association.  With respect 

to the construction industry generally, the matter is still under 

consideration, and one of the things we hope our department is 

able to . . . When we get the legislation through and we have a 

little more manpower to devote to some of these other 

problems, that's one of the problems we're going to devote 

ourselves to.  We haven't quite resolved it yet. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  I would agree with the 

first few statements that you made about the general principles 

of people having the right to work collectively to better their lot 

in life and to get what is fair and what is equitable and what is 

right.  And obviously no one would be foolish enough to go 

against that kind of thought or feeling or wish for our people in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

However we do have examples of things that are not always as 

easy as that.  You mention the construction industry yourself, 

and you know probably then that we have situations that 

develop where the unions have negotiated that people have to 

be paid for travel time and travel distance costs from Regina, 

say, to Estevan, if they happen to have been working at the 

Shand power plant.  And those workers might in fact live in 

Estevan and never have been to Regina in their whole life, but 

if they were hired through the union negotiated contract, the 

contractor would have to pay, as part of his cost, that travel cost 

back and forth. 



1568 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

Somehow the unions have philosophized that that makes it fair 

and equitable for all workers to be on that same level when in 

fact what it does is drive the cost of construction -- not this 

specific item but all of the items that can be put into this 

package -- it drives the cost of construction up by about 25 per 

cent.  We have some estimates.  In fact I have an estimate that's 

mentioned in the Star-Phoenix here.  Contracts awarded to 

non-union firms -- 30 per cent is mentioned as the range in that 

particular article. 

 

So I guess that's a debatable figure, but obviously it's 

significant.  Now what I want to know is, has your government 

done any studies or analysis regarding this issue?  If you have, 

I'd like to see them.  If not, I wonder why you would go around 

making promises before you find out if the move towards all 

union contracting is in fact viable for the province. 

 

And you might also throw into the mix while you're thinking of 

this, how do we remain competitive with other provinces like 

Alberta for example, or American firms that will tender for 

contracts in our province?  I've heard your other minister say 

that you're going to have a fair and open tendering policy in the 

province as a general rule.  If we have that, then obviously if 

someone who comes in from outside and tenders without 

having to follow the same cost formulas tenders lower and gets 

the job, is that not then going to take jobs away from our 

workers in Saskatchewan?  I'll just let you comment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There's no question but what the legal 

regime which was in place prior to last summer made the 

organization of the construction industry extremely difficult.  

We amended that.  I won't try to match the eloquence of the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview when he outlined the reason 

for the amendments to the construction labour relations Act, 

but they were passed.  Again, we believe in the legitimacy of 

unions and in the legitimacy of employees organizing for their 

mutual benefit. 

 

I can't comment on the travel allowance.  I only say to the hon. 

member what I think is obvious, and that is that if these are 

contracts negotiated between adults and if the employer has 

agreed to it, it must be legitimate or the contractors wouldn't 

have agreed to it.  I mean it takes two to reach agreements.  So 

I don't know specifically, but I do believe that most union 

contracts acknowledge legitimate expenses and exclude 

illegitimate expenses.  So I suspect that's probably the case in 

the majority of cases.  I frankly don't know the nuances of 

every single union contract in the province. 

 

I would simply say with respect to your question about, is there 

any studies on the issue of union contracting -- none, I think, 

that are completed enough to be able to table with the member.  

And I hope this is a conversation which will be more 

conclusive next year.  It's an issue which we haven't got to the 

end of yet but are striving to do so. 

 

And part of the reason is the rather lean nature of 

government these days.  In the '70s this department had about 

twice the manpower it does now.  We are a department with 

very lean manpower, as only a few hands to do a lot of tasks.  

And so we're not going to start this one until we finish the 

legislative agenda which we now have.  And that's part of the 

reason why we haven't resolved it as quickly as I think many 

people would like us to. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, maybe you can explain to me 

by taking my side of this argument, where do the people who 

advocate that there is a 25 per cent or 30 per cent saving with 

non-unionized contractors, where do they get those figures 

from?  What do they base their argument on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't know.  Perhaps the member 

might like to ask them.  I mean these are not our statistics.  I 

don't know how I defend or criticize figures.  The statistics first 

of all which I don't have, which the member relates to me I'm 

sure accurately, but you've got to ask them where they got the 

figures from.  We don't have any really solid statistical base 

which would tell us how much, if at all, union-only contracting 

would increase costs across the board.  We just don't have any 

solid statistics. 

 

It's one of the things we're trying to put together, is some facts 

which everyone can agree upon.  That, I may say, was one of 

the problems with The Workers' Compensation Act 

amendments, was we were working . . . the business 

community and the government were working with two 

different set of facts.  I think we're now to the point where, 

apart from some exceptions, we're all working with the same 

set of facts.  And I think we're reaching an agreement on where 

we ought to go. 

 

I just don't know where the member's getting those statistics 

from and I'm unable to justify them or refute them actually.  

We are in the process of doing this ourselves, trying to figure 

out what exactly a union-only contracting policy would cost the 

taxpayer.  We don't have a very good statistical base. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, just to carry the argument a 

step further, spin-off companies were allowed to hire 

non-unionized people in order to do their work.  During that 

period of time when they were allowed, I think from your own 

figures, the union contracting dropped down to about 20 per 

cent of actual participation, and about 80 per cent of contracts 

were being done by the spin-off companies that didn't have to 

have the unionized workers. 

 

Now that leads me to the conclusion that spin-off companies 

obviously were very successful in achieving their goal, 

whatever that goal was supposed to be, and the net result was 

that unionized contractors and the union control had diminished 

to 20 per cent.  Now if there wasn't a cost saving, how did that 

happen? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well it's one of the reasons why we 

want to approach the matter with care.  There are two separate 

issues here.  One is whether or not 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1569 

wages are higher in a union-only policy.  One might suspect 

they would be.  But the secondary question is whether or not 

the costs are any higher.  That's a very different question. 

 

One of the reasons I'm anxious to talk to the people in 

Manitoba is, I gather their experience has been that while 

wages go up, so does productivity, and the net cost of a 

union-only policy is actually less. 

 

Now that's very much second-hand information.  I've not got 

that personally, so I don't necessarily stand behind it.  But one 

wants to be careful that you don't confuse wage costs with the 

cost of production -- they're two different items. 

 

There are many countries in the world where some industries 

pay more.  I could name a number of areas where Japanese, 

German workers are paid more than Canadian workers.  Those 

industries are more than competitive.  Why?  Because they're 

more productive.  The workers are simply more productive. 

 

So one has to be careful.  We're talking about cost of 

production and not wage costs.  They are two different things.  

Because the former of those two concepts also includes 

productivity. 

 

There are other benefits to a union-only contracting policy.  It 

is much, much easier to ensure that Saskatchewan workers get 

the jobs.  It is also in many cases easier to assure that you have 

trained workers doing jobs which are sensitive and where you 

can bury problems that will cause you headaches in the long 

run.  So there are some workers . . . There are other advantages 

to a union-only contracting policy besides the sheer fairness to 

workers.  There is quality control; there is productivity; and 

there's the issue of Saskatchewan people getting the jobs. 

 

But I just caution the member not to assume, because wages 

costs are higher, productivity costs are higher.  If that was the 

case, there would be many industries in which Germans and 

Japanese people simply couldn't compete.  But of course they 

do because they're very, very productive. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, it seems to me that the only 

way you can assure Saskatchewan jobs is if in fact you don't 

allow tenders to go outside of the province, and that wouldn't 

be fair and open tendering.  So I think you're going to have to 

jigger with the process and not allow fair tendering because all 

of the material that we find in terms of past performance 

indicates that the spin-off companies were extremely successful 

because they were able to produce cheaper.  And if that's a fact, 

then in order to go to fully unionized control and keep the jobs 

in Saskatchewan you are going to have to have a closed 

tendering policy, and that just seems to follow through. 

 

You talked about incentive.  And true enough, higher wages 

will motivate some people, but they won't 

motivate everybody.  Better incentives to motivate people is 

pride in ownership, pride in your work -- those kinds of things 

are the things that the Japanese and the Swiss have been very 

good at promoting in their societies.  They provide people with 

the feeling that they are part of the whole process, other than 

being just a hired worker; they are a part ownership in the 

whole system and that pride of ownership can somehow in 

those societies be spread. 

 

They use lots of techniques.  For example, I know the Japanese 

often provide holidays outside of the country; that is guaranteed 

as a part of your work package.  And those kinds of incentives 

seem to work better than high wages even because people have 

that sort of plan for the future and they have something to look 

forward to, and their productivity seems to go up as a result of 

these initiatives. 

 

So I'm going to suggest to you that rather than union control, if 

you had union ownership in our businesses and promoted that 

sort of thing -- and of course, I'll take you to the brewery in 

Saskatoon -- if you had that sort of thing promoted more, I 

think you'd probably find better productivity and better security 

for our workers in the province.  But that's just an observation 

that I would make and I know it wouldn't work in every case. 

 

I want to move into another area, Minister.  I understand that 

there are offices that have been opened up in Saskatchewan, 

called labour resource centres.  Is that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I'm informed that there is a 

labour resource centre.  It's on the ground floor of the building 

where these folks work on the corner of Albert and 12th.  And 

it's a library with information of use to workers.  It's a resource 

centre available to workers and their organizations, the unions, 

and is intended to provide them with the kind of information 

which we provide to the business community through the 

business resource centres. 

 

It is our belief that the more information and the more 

resources they have, the better off this province is going to be.  

So we don't apologize for the resource centre.  Indeed we 

would rather there were more of them rather than just one, but 

budget limitations limit us to one. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I also understand that 

there are business centres that have been closed right here in 

downtown Regina, close to the Microage business centre used 

to be located.  There's a labour resource centre, Mr. Minister.  

If business resource centres aren't considered viable, why 

would the labour resource centres be considered viable? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member will have an opportunity 

to discuss that with the Minister of Economic Trade and 

Development in his estimates.  It is not so much that the 

business resource centres -- and I think this is what he will say 

although I shouldn't be speaking for him -- is not so much that 

they are being closed out but that the approach will involve 



1570 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

more partnerships with the communities in terms of regional 

business development . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . regional 

economic councils, that's right.  Thank you. 

 

So that it's not so much that we're taking the resources away, 

but it's being done on a regional basis in cooperation with the 

communities and less directly from the government.  So I think 

the comparisons are not apt.  They're really . . . I am not 

entirely sure how we would provide the labour resource centres 

in partnership with the communities.  It's a different milieu 

really. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, when you set these labour 

resource centres up, you outlined a purpose for them, I'm sure.  

And what did you outline as their mandate that they were 

supposed to accomplish?  How would that differ from the ones 

that we had before?  And how much money is it going to cost 

us to open up and fund these kind of facilities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It would take a bit of analysis to give 

you the cost of it.  I mean, it's on the ground floor of the 

building which houses the department, and so we don't have a 

separate lease for it and we don't necessarily have separate staff 

for it.  If the member wants an estimate of what the labour 

resource centre costs us, I can provide that.  I can't do it today; 

I'd have to do that in writing later on to the member.  So if you 

want that, ask for it and I'll provide it in writing. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister. I will accept your 

invitation to provide that answer in writing.  I must have 

missed what you said about the mandate, or did you cover that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We'll undertake to provide you with 

the cost of the labour resource centre.  My attention was 

distracted and I missed the member's question. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I just simply wanted to know what your 

instructions were to the people that work in this labour resource 

centre as to what their mandate is and what they're to 

accomplish. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The mandate of the labour resource 

centre is to provide information and education to the labour 

component of the economy. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Then how would that differ from the business 

centres? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well the business resource centres 

have the same mandate except that they focus on the employer 

side of the economy. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Wouldn't it have been a lot cheaper just to 

change their mandate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well perhaps that's the long-run goal.  

I talked a little earlier about developing a sense of partnership 

between employers and employees, and perhaps the long-run 

goal is when 

employers and employees realize that they have a commonality 

of interest. Perhaps the long-run goal is to get them using the 

same centre.  At the moment however, we've got a distance to 

travel before we're able to develop the kind of atmosphere in 

which that could take place. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I guess it would be an 

admirable direction for you to work in because obviously 

you're correct; I think everybody will agree that if people 

cooperate and get along, things will get a lot better.  So I hope 

you will work in that direction. 

 

I want to get a little more personal now, Minister.  I would like 

a detailed list of your travel expenses in this portfolio, your 

destinations, your staff accompanying you, costs involved, 

purpose of trips, how trips benefited the people of 

Saskatchewan, and all those kinds of details that would go 

along with what you've been doing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm going to send this to the member.  

This is the detail of it.  I would point out that there is one 

individual named on here, Marian Morrison . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Is she not the defeated candidate in 

Moosomin? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, she most certainly isn't.  She's a 

very able assistant to the Minister of Justice.  And her essential 

information appears herein because she attended a meeting 

with the Minister of Labour when he was minister. 

 

So I point out to the member . . . I think I'm going to send you 

this; it's got all the detail of it.  I would just point out that the 

last individual mentioned, Marian Morrison, if there are 

questions about her expenses, they really should be directed to 

the Minister of Justice.  That individual's still employed in the 

office of the Minister of Justice. 

 

While the member's looking at that, you asked about my staff.  

Perhaps what I'll do is give you a list of my staff, their 

positions, their salaries, and their background, because I guess 

it's relevant to the question which you just asked.  So if I can 

get the assistance of a page again -- thank you -- I'll send the 

member from Maple Creek this information as well. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Do you have a Mary McGuire employed?  I'll 

repeat the question, Minister.  My colleagues would like to 

know if you have a Mary McGuire employed in your 

department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, you'll find her name on the list 

that I just gave you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Can you confirm that this is the same person 

that was the defeated NDP candidate from Moosomin. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  We just 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1571 

wanted to make sure we didn't have her mixed up with 

somebody else.  What is her specific duty here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'd invite the member to read the 

document which I just gave you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- What does a ministerial assistant making 

$2,893 in salary, I'm presuming per month, do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, what she has . . . we're going to 

get into some partisan comment here, but what she has done 

almost exclusively is try to unravel problems with the Workers' 

Compensation Board.  She spends all day, she spends virtually 

her entire time, 100 per cent of it, trying to unravel problems 

which have been caused by the administration which you 

bequeathed to us. 

 

I sincerely hope that in the very near future that workload will 

ease considerably and she will no longer be required to spend 

her entire day trying to solve those problems, because we have 

in place a new board and we will soon have in place new 

legislation.  So I hope that workload eases.  But at the moment, 

handling complaints that come to my office about the Workers' 

Compensation Board is a full-time job. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Is she the only one that does that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, she's the only person in my 

office; she handles them all. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well I was going to suggest at the beginning 

that perhaps you should just lay her off and save the taxpayers 

a bunch of money, but now that you have explained what her 

job role is, and having many, many letters on my desk from 

people who have had problems, I will concede that she does 

probably have something to do.  And most likely rather 

important at that. 

 

It's no laughing matter really, guys, because there are 

apparently 1 per cent of the people who have claims with 

Workers' Compensation have problems.  Now that's not a big 

percentage, but if you're one of the 1 per cent and you can't get 

your life into order because of an injury and things aren't going 

well and you have a dispute between your doctor and the doctor 

with Workers' Compensation and it leads to litigations and all 

kinds of problems.  And I've got, as I said, many, many letters 

on my desk explaining many of the personal problems that 

people do run into. 

 

I guess no system is perfect and we're bound to have some 

people that drop through the cracks, but it does seem, when I 

look at that pile of letters, that the crack has gotten bigger than 

it needs to be.  And I'm not so sure that changing the legislation 

is the only answer to that.  I think maybe we have to have two 

people doing Marion's job and make sure that these people 

have their individual cases weighed on their merit of their own 

individual problems, because I see an awful lot of these 

situations where they seem to be one of a kind.  There doesn't 

seem to be a hundred people all in the 

same boat, and yet they seem to have gotten lost in the shuffle 

of being bunched in with a whole big bunch of people. 

 

So I guess my question here is, once the mess has been 

straightened up though and if your legislation works the way 

you have said it would, would you then terminate her 

employment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- My relationship with my . . . the 

agreement I have with Ms. McGuire . . . it's Mary, not Marion.  

Marion is the very able person who works with the Minister of 

Justice and was in this department when the Minister of Justice 

was also minister of Labour.  This individual's name is Mary -- 

M-A-R-Y. 

 

My relationship I have with her is we'll see what happens when 

we get this system corrected.  It is not at all clear to me . . . I 

just want to say that I associate myself with the comments 

made by the member from Maple Creek, the ones you just 

made.  It is not a lot . . . The severely injured workers are not a 

large percentage of the claims at the WCB.  But on an 

individual basis, these are very severe problems and they need 

to be handled and handled sensitively.  I think the way the 

member put it was a very sensitive and appropriate way to 

phrase it. 

 

My relationship with Ms. McGuire is we'll see what comes.  As 

soon as we get the problems resolved, we'll then see if there's a 

job left.  I've told her if there isn't, you may want to be looking 

elsewhere.  If there is, we'll stay.  So we're just going to wait 

and see what happens when the problems are resolved.  And 

we'll see when they're resolved. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thanks, Minister.  I'll apologize to Mary for 

using the wrong first name.  I think my colleague gave me a 

bum steer there. 

 

I just want to say, Minister, that if your legislation works as 

well for the Workers' Compensation Board aspect as you say, 

Mary will indeed be without much work to do and you will 

have achieved success and you can be happy about that. 

 

I'm going to suggest to you though that the burden that this 

kind of success will cause business will mean that you will 

have many litigations with the business community attempting 

to be treated more fairly, and as a result Mary will have a 

full-time job working with the Department of Justice 

challenging those litigations.  And she probably will have more 

work than she can handle over there. 

 

So you're just transferring the problem really.  What is your 

success will probably become the Achilles' heel of the 

Department of Justice and they will end up suffering for your 

success.  So I'm not sure that you can have anything but some 

kind of a balance here. 

 

I guess in reality we have gone through about as much as we 

need to to be realistic about covering the taxpayers' needs and 

knowing where the money's 



1572 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

been spent.  Obviously you can't account for each and every 

individual dollar, but to have a general view of what's going on 

is important.  I feel that I know more about this portfolio now 

than I did before the day began and I appreciate your answers 

and the candour with which you have given them. 

 

I want to thank your assistants for coming in and helping us 

today, as well as yourself, Minister.  And while it appears only 

to be a small amount of money in terms of the whole budget -- 

9 million-and-some dollars perhaps isn't a big pile of money 

compared to $5 billion -- but if it's out of my pocket it would be 

an awful bunch and I think the taxpayers want to have it spent 

prudently and carefully.  And I know that the people that work 

in this province certainly want their interests protected through 

your department.  And we wish you well in providing them a 

better working atmosphere and a more cooperative situation in 

the workplace in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- First of all, I want to associate myself 

with your comments about the officials.  They have been of 

assistance to us and we appreciate them being here. 

 

Also I just want to express my appreciation to the member 

opposite for what I thought was a thoughtful and candid and 

fair approach to these estimates.  So I thank you as well for 

your approach. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 20 agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- If the minister would like to formally thank the 

officials for their participation in estimates. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I formally do what I think was done 

with considerable sincerity by both myself and the member for 

Maple Creek earlier. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I'll just reiterate my thanks to everyone 

involved, and we appreciate your coming. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Education, Training and Employment 

Vote 5 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, 

Madam Minister, for sending over the general questions that 

we had submitted to you earlier.  We appreciate the fact that 

you took this upon yourself to answer them. 

 

Before we get into the main meat of the estimates, I would like 

to ask you what -- if any topics, any questions that we 

submitted to you -- did you not answer? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe that the only 

portion of the questions that we did not 

respond to was that relating to questions with respect to legal 

actions that might be ongoing.  And I would suggest that a 

number of them, if there are any, would be confidential and 

might be before the courts. 

 

But if you have any specific questions that you want to ask, we 

will undertake to answer those that we can. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  In the past 

year, in these estimates, there's been quite a change to the 

Department of Education with the cuts to funding, 2 per cent in 

this budget and an estimated 4 per cent for next year.  It's 

affecting a large number of people across this province: the 

teachers, the students, the university students, people in SIAST.  

The whole system, Madam Minister, is being affected by these 

cut-backs, and, a lot of people feel, in a negative manner. 

 

The fact is, just in the paper on Saturday, from the Saskatoon 

Star-Phoenix, it talks about tuition fees being up by 10 per cent 

at the U of S (University of Saskatchewan).  And the president 

there, George Ivany says as many as 100 faculty positions may 

be eliminated because of these cut-backs. 

 

(1630) 

 

Madam Minister, when you lose this many professors or 

faculty people from an institution, it is going to have a dramatic 

effect on the quality of education at that institution.  If it doesn't 

have, well then obviously we had people there who weren't 

necessarily needed. 

 

So, Madam Minister, when you look at a loss of 100 positions 

in an institution like the University of Saskatchewan in 

Saskatoon, what is the impact that loss will have?  Are 

programs going to be cut?  Are less students going to be 

educated?  Is less research going to be done?  Or were these 

people redundant and not necessary? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, on the University of 

Saskatchewan's budget specifically, I can't comment on the 

numbers.  I've just read . . . their board of governors meeting 

where they established their budget was held on Thursday and 

Friday -- it concluded on Friday of last week -- and so I have 

not seen the detail yet. 

 

But what I would say is that last year, for instance, we reduced 

funding to both universities on a global basis by 1 per cent, 

which amounted to 1.78 million.  The universities -- 

respectively, the U of R (University of Regina) and the U of S 

-- raised their tuition levels last year in differing amounts, but 

the net effect was that they raised $5 million additional through 

tuition fees and still referred to every book they didn't buy and 

every program they didn't have as being as a result of 

government cut-backs; where through the increase in tuition 

fees, they actually had an increase of 3.2 million. 

 

Now at the U of S I'm not sure, as I say, the specific numbers 

yet; I haven't been advised.  But at the U of R, which struck 

their budget some two weeks ago or so, 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1573 

again the reduction in government funding to the U of R this 

year was $900,000. And they will get an additional -- as a 

result of increases in their tuition fee structure -- an additional 

1.7 million.  So they have made up for what they see as the 

shortfall in the provincial contribution -- and then some  

_- through the increase in their tuition fees. 

 

With tuition fees, we do regard access to a post-secondary 

education by those students who are able and who wish to avail 

themselves of that opportunity as being very important, and we 

made it one of the focal points of . . . in the mandate of the 

university program review panel, headed up by Dr. Johnson, 

which made some recommendations in that respect that the 

quality of university education should not be compromised by 

some efficiencies in the operation, which is what we're asking 

them to do, but they should look carefully and selectively at 

their programs and perhaps try to target the money differently. 

 

So in answer to your question, we hope that the universities and 

the other educational institutions in this province will respond 

to the reductions that we've unfortunately had to make in their 

funding by looking at their operations very closely, trying to 

trim administration, and not affect the quality of programs or 

accessibility by students. 

 

I would just add one more thing, is that in terms of student 

access, tuition fees are fully recognized in the student loans.  So 

while it's not desirable to get through school with a huge debt 

load, the increases in tuition fees are recognized. 

 

The Chair: -- If I may, I've noticed that two of the minister's 

officials have joined the Committee of Finance, and I'll ask the 

minister to introduce them to the committee. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  I 

haven't developed eyes in the back of my head yet, so I didn't 

see them come in.  Directly behind me is Arleen Hynd, the 

deputy minister of the new Department of Education, Training 

and Employment; and the acting director of finance, Robin 

Johnson. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, I'm glad to see that your officials are here.  I didn't 

have a lot of confidence in the other assistant that you had here 

earlier. 

 

Madam Minister, in your answer you stressed that accessibility 

should continue, that quality was an imperative, but with the 

loss of a potential of 100 faculty members at the U of S, you 

never answered as to what those people were doing that they 

can be released and what effect their release would have on the 

education provided at the U of S. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't want to 

avoid the question, but I really have to say that I know nothing 

more about the budgeting process that the U of S board of 

governors did last Thursday and Friday except what I've read in 

the newspaper.  And I 

understand that what they're doing is rolling out a four-year 

plan. 

 

And I do know from previous discussions with the president 

that they were discussing a multi-year plan which I had 

encouraged them to do.  And he is quoted in the press as saying 

that the first phase of the four-year program could result in as 

many as 100, but I would assume that in that there might be 

some early retirements, there might be some scaling down of 

programs where the enrolment is extremely low and where the 

programs have been identified as not having high priority. 

 

So overall I have confidence in the board of governors of the 

university to make that kind of priorizing of how they handle 

programing at the university to maintain the highest quality, 

although recognizing at the same time that with a proliferation 

of programs, we may not be able to be all things to all people 

and that they should and are refining the process. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, are you saying then 

that you would support the idea of the elimination of some 

programs from the U of S or the U of R to meet budgetary 

requirements? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, this was the 

subject of some of the recommendations in the Johnson panel.  

And a number of those recommendations, in fact most of the 

recommendations that the panel made, were directed to the 

universities and not to the government.  And those 

recommendations asked the universities to examine very 

closely their priorities and to consider the elimination of some 

very small faculties and some very specialized programs where 

the enrolment is low and the professor/pupil ratio extremely 

high. 

 

So I would think that in this exercise that would be what they 

were trying to accomplish. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I wonder if you could 

give us some examples of what you would consider to be small, 

specialized, and programs that would be provided at the 

university but are not needed. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I didn't say that they're 

not needed, that any programs are not needed.  But in the whole 

scheme of things with the fiscal realities we face, there may be 

some things that we can't afford, some areas where we can't 

afford to continue doing everything at the same level and that 

we need to have some priorization.  And I wouldn't know; I 

certainly wouldn't identify those programs. 

 

The universities will know the enrolment in undergraduates, for 

instance, that might be moving up, what the potential for a 

program is that looks quite small right now.  So I think it would 

be beyond my purview and within the university community to 

identify those options. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  

Perhaps we're starting at the wrong end of 



1574 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

the questioning on universities.  Perhaps you could describe to 

me the process you go through in providing budgets to the two 

universities in Saskatchewan.  What kind of criteria and what 

kind of information do they provide for you? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the way that we are 

funding or making our contribution towards the universities has 

evolved over the years into a less and less prescriptive method 

and more and more a matter of global funding, where we 

provide a certain level of funding and then the board of 

governors makes those determinations upon the advice of the 

faculty and the administration. 

 

It's a parallel to what's happened in recent years in the regional 

colleges and in SIAST, where it was your previous 

administration which introduced in 1987 those Acts 

establishing those institutions as being self-governing with 

appointed boards to make those decisions, and with global 

funding, essentially global funding from the government.  So 

the decision-making process, as recognized by your 

administration even as recently as 1987, was more and more in 

that direction. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, we will get into SIAST 

and the community colleges here after a bit.   Are you telling 

me then that the universities submit a number to you, and that 

you simply provide them that much money and say, do what 

you want with it, this is what we're giving you?  Or do they 

give you some idea of what they're going to spend the money 

on -- that they need so much for administration, so much for 

programs, and so much for all the other things that the 

university does? 

 

I find it very surprising if they would simply tell you, we want 

X number of millions of dollars, and you write the cheque out 

for them.  What is the process, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we have to take 

one step backwards even from that, is that they don't come to 

us with a request.  We tell them what the level will be, usually 

based on last year, plus or minus.  Last year, in the spring of 

1992 in March, we announced that their funding for 1992 

would be reduced by 1 per cent -- I'm talking about the 

universities specifically now -- that it would be reduced by 1 

per cent, '92 over '91.  And we told them also on that very same 

occasion in March of 1992 that our contribution, the province's 

contribution in 1993, in order to give them a year's advance 

notice so they could do their planning, would be reduced by a 

further 2 per cent, '93 over '92. 

 

Then it's their responsibility under the governance scheme we 

have now for their board of governors and their administration 

to determine how they can best maintain quality and 

accessibility within their total budget including that size of a 

provincial contribution.  They do provide us with a budget and 

a projected operating plan that we can make comments on if we 

wish.  But basically the funding is global, and those 

determinations are made by their governing 

bodies. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So, Madam Minister, you're telling me 

that it's based on what was spent the year before, and you 

adjust that according to what you feel you have funding 

available, not according to what programs the university is 

going to provide or not according to how many students might 

happen to be in that institution. 

 

If for some reason, Madam Minister, the students who attend 

the U of R decided they were no longer going to attend that 

institution and went some place else, would there be a change 

in the funding, or would you simply say, well last year we gave 

them X number of dollars; this year the Minister of Finance is 

asking us to cut 5 per cent out of the budget, so you cut 5 per 

cent and provide them with their dollars even though they're 

not providing any educational services?  There must be some 

more accountability than that in the system. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it certainly hasn't 

worked that way in recent years where the demand for entrance 

into the universities and all of our post-secondary institutions 

has been a virtual explosion.  There are so many people seeking 

access to post-secondary education that we're not concerned 

about running out of students in the near future. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- But are students, Madam Minister, and 

are programs accounted for in the funding?  Surely if you have 

10,000 students on a campus, it's going to cost you a certain 

amount of money to provide the educational services to those 

students.  If you have 20,000 students, that's going to be a 

different figure, and so you'll have to provide funding based at 

least in portion, I would suspect, on that.  Is that part of the 

formula? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, unlike funding in the K 

to 12 system, which the member opposite is aware of, an 

important factor is the per pupil grant in the provincial 

government's contribution towards K to 12 education.  But we 

don't have a parallel situation in the post-secondary 

community.  And that certainly is a factor that has put in recent 

years a great deal of pressure upon the post-secondary 

institutions when the numbers of people who wish to gain 

access to those institutions is growing very quickly and the 

funding, the provincial contribution and tuition fee increases 

have simply had a very difficult time keeping pace, which has, 

as the member knows, given rise to quotas in some colleges for 

university entrance, and that sort of thing. 

 

(1645) 

 

But specifically that is a difference between the K to 12 

funding and the post-secondary funding, is that there is no per 

pupil or per student allocation per se.  We just know that it 

creates a difficult environment for the institutions when they 

have less money and more students asking for access.  But we 

think they've been coping with it as well as they can and that 

we will 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1575 

come out of these times of restraint with a better and stronger 

system. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, the institutions 

may survive with funding cuts, but there is a good number of 

students who will suffer because of that.  They will not have 

the opportunities to attend post-secondary education that they 

would have had, had government funding continued as it was 

previously. 

 

You talked of the cuts that you had made to the U of R and the 

U of S.  You mentioned U of R was $900,000 less in this 

budget, I believe it was, than last year, but that through tuition 

changes they were going to gain $1.7 million.  Now you also 

said that there had been a gain of $5 million last year and this 

year on the tuition fee increases at the U of S and the U of R. 

 

Madam Minister, that comes out of the same taxpayers' pocket 

that was paying the government taxes that provided the grants 

to the university.  So while you as a government have saved 

some money, the taxpayer of this province has just spent an 

additional sum of money up to $5 million minus whatever it 

was you cut out of the budgets in the last two years. 

 

So the taxpayer of this province hasn't saved themselves any 

money.  But what it's done is those taxpayers who don't have 

the resources to pay for their child to go to university has been 

excluded from the system.  And that eliminates the accessibility 

that you were talking about, Madam Minister. 

 

That's where your system is breaking down.  People who would 

like to attend a post-secondary facility such as a university are 

being denied access because of your funding cuts to those 

institutions. 

 

Madam Minister, what are you prepared to do to provide those 

people with the access that they rightly deserve? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the universities raise 

approximately 20 per cent of their total revenue through tuition 

fees.  And as I said earlier, tuition fees are fully recognized as 

costs under the student aid program so that . . . That is the 

purpose of the student aid . . . provincial student loan program, 

which tops up the Canada student loan program, is to make 

sure that any student that has the ability who wishes to access 

post-secondary education will not be prevented from doing so 

because of lack of means. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I won't get into it 

yet but as I look through the Estimates book, there has been a 

cut to student aid funding.  What effect on the student loan 

formula does tuition fees have?  Is it a direct correlation?  If 

tuition fees are increased by $200 a semester, there's a $200 

increase in student aid, or is it just proportional? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, for the most part . . . 

Well tuition fees are fully recognized.  If there is a weekly 

maximum . . . and so if the student's in 

college with a very high tuition fee, it would mean that the 

amount they would have for living expenses and the other costs 

associated with receiving an education, particularly if they're 

living away from home, would be affected. 

 

But we are still carrying on a review of our student aid 

program.  We won't likely have any dramatic changes in place 

before this fall's classes begin, but we're looking closely at 

correlating the recognition of tuition with higher cost colleges 

-- for instance, medical college and the College of Dentistry 

where the tuition fees are higher. 

 

But that's the effect it has.  But very few students reach the cap, 

so I think it's fair to say that for the most part tuition fees are 

fully recognized and an increase in tuition fees should not be a 

barrier to students entering the college of their choice. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, will you answer: 

if a college's tuition fees go up by $200, is there a 

corresponding increase of $200 in the student loan? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, again my answer is the 

same -- that as long as they haven't reached the maximum 

allowable amount, then the tuition, whatever it is, is fully 

recognized within that weekly cap. 

 

Actually one of the things that is causing a bit of a delay in our 

review of student aid is that the federal government, your 

counterparts in Ottawa, are considering some dramatic changes 

to the Canada student loan program which students have to 

access first; then the provincial plan is a top-up to that.  So in 

order to finalize our plans for streamlining the provincial 

student loan program, we first have to know the nature of the 

changes that will be taking place in the Canada student loan 

program because they go together. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  It 

seems that the students that contact me are the ones that have 

reached their maximum.  When their college increases their 

tuition fees, will they receive some additional benefits, or will 

they simply be capped at a certain level and they cannot exceed 

that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as of now, they are 

capped at a certain level.  And that's the way the program 

works. 

 

But I'd like to refer the member to page 128 as well, in that we 

are estimating this year a $47 million allocation to be available 

for student loans, as compared to $2 million less last year at 45.  

So we're allocating or estimating $2 million more to be 

available because no student has ever been denied student aid 

because the pool of loan money was gone.  And this was not 

based upon higher tuition fees but more upon an anticipated 

increase in the numbers of students who might want to take 

advantage of the student loan program.  So we have attempted 

to 



1576 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

provide for that by increasing the budget. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I don't 

remember the name of the program, but it's a program to aid 

handicapped adults.  I had a lady phone me last year who could 

not get into the program because funding had run out.  Has 

funding been increased for this program?  And will those who 

need to access this particular program be able to do so? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the program is the 

VRDP (vocational rehabilitation for disabled persons program).  

And the problem with that program is that as the students who 

enter two or three or four-year programs . . . Okay, the first 

year there was a certain allocation.  Everybody that entered it 

was obviously in the first year of a program.  It was the first 

year of that long program. 

 

Then the second year, the same students were in it taking their 

second year.  So that there has not been room for new entrants 

without increasing the size of the pool.  And that's, as you 

know, been difficult to do because we just simply don't have 

the funds available to meet our budget targets. 

 

We looked last year and had a number of consultations with 

groups who represent disabled people.  We consulted with 

seven community-based agencies in trying to work together for 

training on the job.  There was the paraplegic association, 

services for hearing impaired, the mental health association, the 

Saskatchewan Abilities Council, the Saskatchewan Association 

of Rehabilitation Centres, association for the mentally retarded, 

and the Wascana hospital.  We did our best to work with them, 

to try and refine the program, to target it to those people with 

the most need who had the highest likelihood of success. 

 

They all agreed to the principles that there be a commitment to 

recognize disability-related goods and services as a priority; 

that funding eventually as the program matures should be 

available at any time during the year; that it be distributed fairly 

and equally to all people with vocational handicaps, which is 

why we worked with that whole group to make sure that 

whatever funds were available were not available out of 

proportion to people with one certain kind of disability to the 

disadvantage of others. 

 

So we did work with all of those groups to try to make a 

resolve, and I think that as the program matures and gets more 

refined that we will be able to do a better job. 

 

But that describes for you the reason why we had to limit the 

entry level funds until it begins to revolve and people start to 

graduate and are not in need of the program any more, because 

they're in the workplace, then there'll be room for new entrants. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, it's a very good 

program, but there's a flaw in the fact that for three more years 

no one new can enter the program because the initial students 

are utilizing all 

the funds the way you describe it.  Is there not any provision to 

enrol new students above and beyond the ones that initially 

signed up?  And how many students are in that initial group 

and what is the funding? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the program this year 

in '93-94 is budgeted to be $3.6917 million.  The number of 

students, just to give you an idea, is in the year '86-87 when the 

budget was 1.5 million, had 654 applications approved and then 

they've gradually increased to the point where in '91-92 there 

were 1,050 students in the program.  And we estimate in '92-93 

-- some of them wouldn't be quite complete yet -- but the 

estimate is 1,100. 

 

So we did transfer $300,000 from the educational outreach 

fund in previous years.  Last year it was 242,500.  And we're 

hoping to, with the help of our consultations with these various 

groups that represent handicapped people, to make some 

refinements and hopefully some additional allocations to the 

program. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I would certainly 

encourage you to do so because this, I believe, is a very 

worthwhile program.  It allows a number of people that because 

of an injury or a handicap that they may have received either at 

birth or since then, it gives them the opportunity to attend an 

educational institution to upgrade themselves and to expand 

their horizons beyond what they are now. 

 

In a number of these cases these people are or have been on 

social assistance.  And this gives them the opportunities to 

better themselves and move beyond that point, which is very 

important because it also provides for society a new taxpayer.  

And that is very important, Madam Minister, when the 

government is looking for new funds to be able to provide more 

monies for programs such as this. 

 

And I would encourage you to take a serious look at the 

number of applications you receive on this program.  And 

perhaps that's one of the things I should ask is: how many 

applications do you receive for this program compared to the 

number of people who are receiving assistance? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, last year by June 1, 

1992, the VRDP funds available in that fiscal year's budget 

were already committed.  A hundred and forty-three 

applications were on hold.  They were submitted after the cap 

had already been reached.  And those were the applications that 

were the subject at that particular time or the focal point of our 

consultations with the different organizations that represent 

them. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  It now being 5 o'clock, the Committee of 

Finance will stand recessed until this evening at 7 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


