




















































Hansard: March 26, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 633 

 March 26, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm 

delighted to introduce to you and through you to members of 

the Assembly this morning some students sitting in your 

gallery. These students are members of Students Against 

Drinking and Driving and they're from Pilot Butte School. 

 

This SADD (Students Against Drinking and Driving) chapter 

has grown to 183 members, the highest in the province, Mr. 

Speaker. With them in the gallery is Mrs. Carolynn Gaudry 

who is their adviser; Melissa Shanks is the president; Allen 

Gillespie is the vice-president; and Mark Scantlebury is the 

photographer. 

 

I'm looking forward to meeting with them after question period 

to discuss Impaired Driving Awareness Week and to receive a 

petition from them. I would ask all members here to join me in 

welcoming them to the House this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

hope my laryngitis will not prevent me from making myself 

heard. But it is my pleasure to welcome 44 students from grade 

11 and 12 from Osler, Saskatchewan, from the Valley Christian 

Academy in Osler, and the teacher, Wilf Loewen, with whom I 

have had the pleasure of teaching for many, many years; his 

wife Anne; Kenton Letkeman as the chaperon. 

 

And I hope that the students enjoy proceedings here this 

morning and I'm looking forward to meeting with them later on 

for pictures and drinks and so on and so on. 

 

I'd ask all members to help me welcome these students from 

Osler. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy to 

introduce to you and through you to the Assembly this 

morning, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Jim Chase, the president of the 

Saskatchewan Construction Labour Relations Council. With 

him also today is Mr. Ted Zarzeczny. Mr. Zarzeczny is the 

counsel for the Saskatchewan Construction Labour Relations 

Council. And I would ask you to join with me in welcoming 

them today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I too would like to welcome the gentlemen to the Assembly 

today. I've had the privilege of chairing 

the Saskatchewan construction panel to try and assist the 

construction industry in the province in its relationship with the 

provincial government. As minister responsible for 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, I am now 

minister in charge of that panel. Mr. Renaud is now the 

chairman, and I look forward to working with the association in 

the future. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

would like to have your permission and that of the House to 

make an introduction of personal friends. This particular person 

I'd like to introduce is the mother of a very distinguished 

Canadian. She is distinguished, I would say, in her own right. 

Her name is Mrs. Elizabeth McMurtry, the mother of the 

Associate Chief Justice of the province of Ontario, Roy 

McMurtry who, for a long time, was the Attorney General of 

the province of Ontario. 

 

Mrs. McMurtry is sitting in the gallery with her granddaughter, 

the daughter of Roy, Janet McMurtry. They're here to visit . . . 

she's here to visit -- please stand up, Mrs. McMurtry -- to visit 

here their grandson and family. 

 

The McMurtrys are prominent Canadians who have contributed 

a lot to Canadian life and I'm very, very pleased to see Mrs. 

McMurtry and Janet here in Saskatchewan, visiting our 

beautiful province. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Rural Hospital Closures 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question, Mr. Speaker, this morning is to the Minister of 

Health. Madam Minister, more details of your government's 

iceberg budget are beginning to float to the surface. 

 

Yesterday officials from your department met with the Souris 

Valley Regional Care Centre board of directors. This meeting 

confirmed, as I suggested a couple of days ago, that Souris 

Valley will be forced to close within five years due to massive 

funding restrictions from your government. 

 

You refuse to take responsibility for this betrayal. You say this 

is a board decision; the board controls the entire situation. But 

when your government, Madam Minister, cuts off funding and 

forced the facility to freeze admissions, what other choices, 

Madam Minister, does the board have? 

 

It's bad enough that you have completely betrayed your 

commitment to health care in this province. What's worse, 

you're now washing your hands of responsibility and you lay 

the blame on the doorstep 



634 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1993 

of the board of directors, local men and women who would 

want nothing more than to keep the facility open. 

 

Will you own up, Madam Minister, to what you have done? 

Will you at least admit that it is you, not the board, not the 

local people -- it is you -- who are forcing the closure of this 

facility? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't know how many 

times I'll have to explain to the members opposite what is 

occurring with respect to the development of district boards. 

The government has put out a document on the institutional 

sector with bed targets. We are establishing policy, direction, 

and guidelines as to where we are to move with respect to bed 

targets in the province. 

 

This Weyburn area has a very high bed ratio per 1,000 

population in the long-term care area -- very high compared to 

the rest of the province. Therefore they will receive funding 

reductions in a greater amount than areas that are at the 

provincial average or closer to it. That is rational, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the fact is, is that this may very well mean in the long 

term that we have to . . . that Souris Valley is closed and we 

move to some other sort of facility. It may mean that, Mr. 

Speaker. However we are establishing . . . The members 

opposite just don't want to listen, which is why they can never 

get their facts straight, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are setting up district boards. We are providing them with 

the guidelines and the directions the members opposite wanted 

us to. And ultimately the decision will be that of the district 

board, whether they want to keep a portion of Souris Valley 

open or whether they want to move to another facility. We will 

be reviewing those options with them. 

 

Yes there are funding reductions. Yes there are guidelines and 

direction, but we will establish district boards and the final 

decision will be made by them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, it's 

not just the citizens of Grenfell, but all of Saskatchewan is 

holding their noses at that answer, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, health care in this province is ailing badly. I 

would suggest to you it's a very, very sick patient. And now 

you come along and remove all the remaining support systems 

and then you say that the patient has died of natural causes. 

 

Madam Minister, you have become the Dr. Kevorkian of 

Saskatchewan health care. You go around the province giving 

nursing homes and hospitals government-assisted suicides, and 

then you say, it's what they wanted; it's better this way. 

Madam Minister, the people in rural Saskatchewan don't want 

their hospitals closed. They don't want their nursing homes 

closed. And the district health boards are not the ones who are 

making the decision to close them. You, you are making that 

decision, Madam Minister. You have made that decision and 

now you are carrying it out and trying to blame others, trying to 

turn community against community. 

 

And I ask you, Madam Minister, will you table a complete list 

of facilities targeted for your government-assisted suicide 

procedure. What other Saskatchewan communities can expect 

to lose their hospital? Will you table that list today, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, we are not blaming 

anybody for anything, except the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) caucus and their inability to understand, number 

one, the need for health reform and exactly how it is 

implemented, and their inability to understand the devastating 

effects that their $15 billion debt has levelled on the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- It there is any . . . we are not blaming 

anyone in Saskatchewan except for the Tories and their 

inconsiderate . . . their mismanagement over the last 10 years, 

Mr. Speaker, that is devastating the province of Saskatchewan, 

the legacy that they have left us. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that as we move through health 

reform there is a cooperation and a consultation process taking 

place with communities and boards. We're not blaming anyone. 

We're setting out targets. We're setting guidelines. We establish 

the funding. And the boards implement plans within their 

district, and they have choices within those plans. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. Next question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A new 

question to the same minister. Madam Minister, you're not 

blaming anyone, but the people of Saskatchewan are blaming 

you for your choices, your bad choices that you are making the 

people of Saskatchewan pay for. And you are hiding, Madam 

Minister, behind bed target ratios, and your so-called wellness 

model is trying to hide the truth -- the truth that is becoming all 

too apparent. 

 

You are closing hospitals. Your target of 1.5 beds per thousand 

people means that hospitals must close. In the south-west 

corner of the province, Madam Minister, between Eastend, 

Assiniboia, and Maple Creek, there are far more beds than your 

government-imposed ratios would allow. That is also a massive 

geographic area to cover. 

 

Madam Minister, when people get sick, when people have 

heart attacks or farming accidents and the 



March 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 635 

hospital is 150 miles away, you don't care much about how 

many bed ratios there are and how many beds there are -- you 

want coverage and you want protection. You want to know that 

help is nearby. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. I want the member to put his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you for that admonition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Madam Minister, my question to you is this: which of the 

hospitals in the south-west have you targeted for your 

government-assisted suicide program? Eastend? Assiniboia? 

Maple Creek? And who will be left out in the cold when they 

really need you -- the government that they elected to protect 

health care -- and you're not there when they need you most, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, nobody is going to be left 

out in the cold in Saskatchewan. People will have access to 

acute-care services and long-term care services when they need 

them and nobody will be left out in the cold. And the members 

opposite are involved in scare tactics and attempting to do what 

they can to destroy the health . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. Could the members please come 

to order. Give the minister a chance to answer the question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I think it's important to note 

that in the last 10 years some $489 million was spent in capital 

construction in this province, which increased our operating 

costs by some 80 million, and we only use a very small portion 

of that rated bed capacity. I think that is important to note. 

 

We have, for example, the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The Murray Commission report, for 

example, showed that Nova Scotia had 132 beds per thousand. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- One hundred and thirty-two beds per 

thousand, as opposed to 165 per thousand in Saskatchewan. In 

Manitoba . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, 147 beds per thousand, as 

opposed to Saskatchewan's 165. 

 

We have, sir, one of the highest bed ratios per capita of any 

province in this country, and we have the highest provincial 

debt of any province in this country. It is time for a government 

to show some leadership and move us towards national 

averages, averages that our people can afford to pay for. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Construction Industry Legislation 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP opposite 

has exhibited an appalling degree of partisanship, hypocrisy 

and betrayal. The iceberg budget presented by the Minister of 

Finance and her Premier is the best example of that, Mr. 

Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, some of the NDP (New Democratic 

Party) partisanship and economic madness is taking place 

outside of the budget process. 

 

Recently, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Labour made a 

completely unilateral decision with his self-appointed powers. 

The minister has forced his will onto construction contractors 

as it relates to the minister's Construction Industry Labour 

Relations Act. My question to the minister responsible for this 

Act, Mr. Speaker, is this. Mr. Minister, what possible reason do 

you have for giving yourself absolute power to force 

contractors into bargaining units against their will? What 

service does this provide? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the . . . I'll answer this 

question on behalf of the Minister of Labour. In the last session 

of this House this Assembly passed, with the unanimous 

consent of the whole legislature, the legislation which gave to 

the Minister of Labour the power to do the things that he has 

done. As a matter of fact, that legislation was a subject of 

extensive consultation in which you yourself were involved. 

And in the end you yourself voted for the legislation. So that's 

where the minister gets the power, indeed the responsibility, to 

do the things that he has done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, 

I've got news for you. We may have passed a piece of 

legislation but your interpretation of that legislation is what 

counts here. And you are circumventing that very legislation. 

You are not following the rules in that legislation. Mr. 

Minister, one of your most repeated arguments for justifying 

your support for closed-shop unions is that these shops are 

formed and selected based on a democratic vote of the workers. 

 

Now we have heard your government state that you value 

democratic principles, and that the collective bargaining 

process must also be democratic when it involves multiple 

parties such as many workers in one union. Mr. Minister, why 

shouldn't this apply to employers? 

 

You recently used your ministerial powers to designate the 

Unionized Mechanical Contractors as the exclusive agent for 

most sectors of the construction industry. You know full well 

that the Unionized Mechanical Contractors do not represent the 

majority of unionized employers in the construction industry. 

Simple question, Mr. Speaker: how is this democratic, Mr. 

Minister? How possibly can you justify this kind of action? 



636 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1993 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well the member will know that in the 

preparation of that legislation and with respect to the 

consultations that surrounded it, the legislation had to . . . the 

system had to start somewhere. In some way there had to be 

some organization named to represent employers. But the 

member will also know that there is a democratic procedure 

included in the Act for contractors to change their bargaining 

agent if they don't have confidence in the bargaining agents 

they have, just like The Trade Union Act has got provision for 

working people to change their bargaining agent if they so 

wish. And the procedure is laid out there and it's available to 

everybody. 

 

But the point is that the Act had to start somewhere. And just 

as the Act in the 1970s, which was arrived at through an 

extensive consultation process, provided for that same starting 

mechanism, so the Act last year -- with the member's approval 

-- provided for that type of a start-up mechanism. But the 

democratic rights of contractors are preserved in the legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, 

if your idea of a starting place is to break the rules of your own 

legislation, then it will be a long, frosty Friday before you'll get 

the support of this opposition again. 

 

Mr. Minister, it's shocking that you believe you should have the 

arbitrary power to make the most important of collective 

bargaining decisions, notwithstanding what the majority of 

those affected by the decision may think. And we simply do 

not accept your answer, Mr. Minister. Your government has 

political opportunism as your primary motive for everything 

that you do. That's the simple truth, Mr. Minister. 

 

You threatened SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association) for not towing the NDP line and now you're firing 

Crop Insurance agents for not regurgitating your rhetoric. Now, 

Mr. Minister, you are after the Saskatchewan Construction 

Labour Relations Council, an organization which has 

represented employers since 1969. 

 

Question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will you not admit, Mr. 

Minister, that you have not allowed this council to represent 

one trade division and is it not true that through your absolute 

power you are eliminating 80 per cent of the council's 

membership? Is that not the case, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think that not to be the case, Mr. 

Speaker. I don't know who wrote the member's question but I 

suggest that he review their employment and their competence 

because that seems to be a pretty wild kind of a question. 

 

But I know, I know that the minister through his own office 

and through the department conducted 

extensive consultations as to what organization should be 

designated with respect to the various trade divisions. Now the 

minister went through a very lengthy process in coming to that 

decision and I believe came to a decision which is satisfactory 

to the unionized contractors in this province. Now it may not 

be satisfactory to the non-union contractors, but as the member 

will know, they are not covered by this Bill. This Bill only 

applies to unionized contractors. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- First of all, Mr. Minister . . . Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Minister, first of all I'll tell you that you have 

thrown a slander at some people that you really shouldn't be 

doing that to. 

 

Mr. Jim Chase, the president of the Saskatchewan Construction 

Labour Relations Council, was in consultation in the writing of 

these questions. Are you saying that he and his attorney don't 

know what they're doing? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. I ask the . . . Order. I ask the . . . 

Order. I ask the Premier . . . Will the Premier and the former 

leader of the opposition please come to order. The Premier, the 

Premier and the former leader. 

 

Order. Will the member from Estevan please come to order. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, there 

are some basic truths that you are ignoring or that you are 

choosing to turn a blind eye to. 

 

The original process was voluntary. Your process takes the 

bargaining rights of all of the unionized employers in each 

trade division from them and requires them to pay dues without 

the right to join or participate in that organization. 

 

It is highly questionable that even a significant minority can be 

forced to give up their constitutional guarantee of free 

association. However, to force the absolute majority to give up 

that right is unconscionable. 

 

Mr. Minister, you were involved in constitutional negotiations. 

You should understand that, but your actions tell us otherwise. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister. Mr. Minister, will 

you do the right thing, the democratic thing -- will you rescind 

your order and allow a supervised vote of the employers to 

determine their wishes regarding the representation in the 

collective bargaining process? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- As I said to the member, what has been 

done under this Act is the same process as was done during the 

. . . under the previous Act. And the member knows the process 

that was set up and 



March 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 637 

knows the reasons why it was set up, knows the reasons why it 

was set up. There had to be some starting point for the structure 

for collective bargaining under that Act. Now the member also 

knows that there's a procedure under that Act for unionized 

contractors to change their bargaining agent. Just like working 

people in this province can change their bargaining agents, so 

can the contractors. So what's the big deal? 

 

If the minister is mistaken as the member suggests, then the 

contractors have got an opportunity within a very short time in 

order to rectify the situation, to change a bargaining agent and 

have another one in there in which they have confidence. That's 

for them to determine. It's not for you and I to determine in this 

kind of a debate. 

 

The minister went through consultations that covered months. 

His department went through extensive consultations. And he 

made appointments which he thought represented the interests 

of unionized contractors in this province. Maybe not 

non-unionized contractors. But the member will know that the 

non-union contractors are not covered by this Act. This Act 

applies only to unionized contractors. 

 

Now I don't know how many times I have to explain that to the 

member. Democratic procedures, democratic procedures are 

available to change bargaining agents if there is a lack of 

confidence. And the member himself stood in this House after 

weeks of negotiation and supported the very system which is in 

place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, 

you just hang on to your hat, because I'm going to tell you what 

the big deal is. 

 

Minister, your answer does not surprise me. It is quite apparent, 

Mr. Speaker, that these people want to pay their political debts 

before they pay the provincial debt. That is the scheme here. 

 

Mr. Minister, democracy does not interest you and fairness 

does not interest you. You have made that abundantly clear 

here today. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: Mr. Minister, will 

you rescind your order and allow the employers to freely and 

democratically apply to have the organization of their choice 

designated by the Labour Relations Board to represent them? 

Will you allow people who have interests other than politics 

and power to decide the fate of the collective bargaining 

process in this matter? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, if the party to which I 

belong owes a political debt to any construction contractor in 

this province, I am not aware of it. I am not aware of it. So the 

idea, the idea 

that you would think that anything that the minister did here 

was pursuant to a political debt to any contractor or any 

contractors' association is just a laughable proposition. 

 

Now as to whether the minister will rescind his order or 

whatever it is you would have him do, I doubt it. After months 

of consultation, I think the minister made a reasoned and a 

considered decision. And as I keep pointing out to you, Mr. 

Member, if you'd just listen to my answers instead of reading 

your next question, there is a process under the Act for 

contractors to change their bargaining agent in the event that 

they lose confidence in the bargaining agent that is designated. 

 

That's the way it should work; that's the way we thought it 

should work; that's the way you wanted it to work; that's the 

way it's working. So what's the problem, member? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The problem, sir, is 

quite simple. It is how you manipulate the Act to decide who 

qualifies. Your manipulation of who qualifies eliminates 80 per 

cent of the people involved in this issue from having any rights 

except to pay their dues without a voice. That's the issue. 

 

Your priorities, Mr. Minister, since taking power has been 

political debt over provincial debt. This is quite clear, Mr. 

Minister. Your absolute power has made you absolutely blind 

to the reality. 

 

Mr. Minister, farmers have taken you to court over your 

disregard for democratic individual rights. Now it appears that 

the Saskatchewan Construction Association will have to take 

you to court to quash your ill-advised, unilateral decision. 

 

Mr. Minister, my question: your government appears to be 

going to court too often these days. Will you rescind your order 

and allow reason to prevail rather than force another element of 

Saskatchewan society to sue your government for their access 

to democracy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I was glad to see that the 

member was able to restrain himself from hammering his desk 

in connection with that question. 

 

I take exception to the fact that the member suggests there was 

any manipulation here. There was extensive consultation; that's 

what there was. And if whoever it was was advising you in the 

preparation of those questions thinks that the organizations that 

have been designated do not have the support of the legitimate 

unionized contractors in this province, then, Mr. Member, it's 

my understanding they're badly mistaken. 

 

My understanding is that the minister and department plumbed 

very carefully the extensive support that organizations in this 

province do or do not have on the 



638 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1993 

question of representing unionized contractors. 

 

Now I hope this time you're able to listen to my answer 

because I want to give it once more. Don't worry about your 

next question; just focus on this: the way in which this matter 

has been handled is exactly in accordance with the legislation 

which was agreed to unanimously by everyone in this House. If 

the minister's consultations have yielded to him information 

which is wrong, the mechanism is there in the Act to correct 

the situation. 

 

You know that, I know that, the contractors know that. And if 

we end up in court, fine. I mean it's the right of every citizen in 

this province to go to court if they have been wronged, and if 

that . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 40 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Employees' 

Superannuation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that a Bill to amend The Municipal Employees' 

Superannuation Act be now introduced and read for the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member from Rosthern got up after we 

had stood the first Bill. Could we go back to a point of order? 

The member wishes to raise a point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a point of 

order that is a concern of this side of the House and that deals 

with the matter of fairness and consistency in regulating the 

interpretation of the rules of this House. 

 

I draw your attention, Mr. Speaker, to page 605 of March 25 

where you made a ruling, Mr. Speaker, yesterday saying that: 

 

 In debate, members have characterized each other as . . . 

(wolves), rats, and dogs. I should not have to remind 

members that such language is inappropriate and causes a 

deterioration of the level of debate. 

 

Now we have no problem with that part of the ruling, Mr. 

Speaker, and we would certainly concur with that. 

 

However, on March 25, the same day, the Minister of Finance 

in her speech, on page 630, says that: 

 

 The members opposite have been speaking out of both sides 

of their mouths. 

And that's debatable of course; nothing wrong with that. 

 

 They want the cost of government cut, yet they howl like 

wounded wolves when anyone loses their jobs or a facility is 

closed. 

 

What the members' reaction opposite is, is indicative of what 

this House is facing, Mr. Speaker. Now in the face of fairness 

and consistency, I ask you, Mr. Speaker: why would you let a 

statement go like that right after you have made your own 

particular ruling? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, not to belabour this 

most important issue of whether the opposition are called 

wolves or other disparaging words, but I listened carefully to 

the Speaker's ruling yesterday where he said we should not call 

them rats or wolverines or wolves or dogs -- I don't think he 

said skunks. But I would understand that they shouldn't be 

called any of those names of various animals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in seriousness, I listened very carefully and I 

intend to abide by not calling them such names as wolverines 

or rats. However, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance had left 

the Assembly when the ruling came down and was not in the 

House to hear the ruling. She then returned to the House later 

that day to give a speech before, obviously, she had had a 

chance to review the Hansard whereby the Speaker said that 

members of the House should not call each other wolverines or 

rats. 

 

Now I want to assure the members opposite that we will make 

every attempt to refrain from calling them rats or wolverines in 

the future. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. I just simply want to say to the 

members of this House, I can only attempt to be as fair as I can 

in making this Assembly work. 

 

Let me say to the member from Rosthern, if he will just listen, 

that yesterday immediately after I made that statement, one of 

his own members referred to the back-benchers as sheep. And 

all I'm saying . . . And I didn't agree with that either, but I can't 

constantly interrupt. Members know what the parliamentary 

rules are, and I ask all members to please abide by them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it would relate to 

question no. 91, I hereby table the response. 

 

The Speaker: -- Tabled. 



March 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 639 

Order. Would the members please come to order. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 3 -- An Act 

respecting Health Districts be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now that we've got the 

important issue of the barnyard cleaned up, we'll address the 

important issue of the Bill at hand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm forced today to rise on a Bill that is totally 

unacceptable to this Assembly, the people of this province, and 

every principle upon which health care is based -- every 

principle about health care that these people opposite promised 

in speeches around the province over the course of the number 

of years some of these members have been involved in political 

life, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They have always talked about being the guardians of health 

care, the guardians of health care. And now what do we see, 

Mr. Speaker? A Bill before this House that will completely and 

utterly destroy health care as we know it in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. A Bill that will damage the credibility of the NDP 

Party, I predict, forever in this province, and something that 

they deserve more than ever now in light of the kind of actions 

that they have taken with respect to health care in this province. 

 

This Bill is unacceptable first to this Assembly because it 

proposes to dilute both authority and responsibility of this 

Assembly. It proposes to do that, Mr. Speaker, by providing 

executive government, in the person of the Minister of Health, 

an escape hatch to blame on local residents for unpopular or 

difficult decisions. Mr. Speaker, and I think the evidence is 

becoming very clear to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We see the Wascana Rehab Centre under attack from this 

government, Mr. Speaker. And it was only because of the 

actions of the children's parents, of children that are in that 

hospital and because of the opposition actions, that the 

government was forced -- forced, Mr. Speaker -- to change 

their mind on that important thing . . . important wing of that 

hospital. Myers House is under attack, Mr. Speaker, in this 

province as a result of government actions. The Souris basin 

valley hospital is under attack, Mr. Speaker, because of this 

government's actions. 

 

Hospitals all over this province, Mr. Speaker, are under attack 

because of the minister's actions in this province today as we 

see them. Mr. Speaker, the government likes to say it's difficult 

choices that they 

are making. But, Mr. Speaker, the difficulty that they're placing 

on health care in this province is the issue, not the problems of 

the Minister of Health. It's the difficulties that are being 

experienced by the people of this province that need, need 

health care services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see throughout this province, Mr. Speaker, health care 

regions being forced on the people of Saskatchewan -- forced 

on them. The minister says to them on one hand that you go 

ahead and form these health care units, and on the other hand, 

but you have a deadline date and you better get it done before 

then or we will appoint them ourselves. 

 

In the constituency, Mr. Speaker, that I represent, and 

surrounding constituencies, we now see that it appears that a 

health unit is being forced on them as well, Mr. Speaker. 

Kindersley, Eston, Eatonia, Kerrobert, Dodsland, and perhaps 

Leader, will form a health care unit, Mr. Speaker, against the 

wishes of those people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, further to that, the minister now says to 

those people, we will provide you with funding, but we're only 

going to provide you with a very limited amount of funding 

and you go out and make the cuts. You go out and make the 

cuts to those hospitals and the acute-care beds around your 

health care unit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health doesn't want to take the 

blame when these folks have to come with the difficult 

decisions. It isn't her that's making difficult decisions, it's the 

boards that she's forcing to make difficult decisions. And it's 

little wonder, Mr. Speaker, it's little wonder that they can't find 

anyone that wants to serve on these boards except 

NDP-appointed hacks. Mr. Speaker, it's little wonder that the 

people of this province don't want to join in their wellness 

model. It's little wonder the people of this province don't want 

anything to do with this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There will be an important meeting this evening in Leader, 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, where the people of this province 

will start the ground swell of opposition to this actions that 

you're bringing forward today, Mr. Speaker. The ground swell 

of public opinion I believe will start in Leader tonight and 

move throughout this province in opposition, in opposition to 

the actions this government is taking, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister is suggesting that the health care, 

acute-care beds in hospitals around the province should be 

reduced to 1.5 beds per thousand residents, Mr. Speaker. Do 

you know, do you know member from Regina Lakeside what 

that will do to rural Saskatchewan health care? Do you have 

any idea what that will do . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Lake Centre. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Lake Centre, sorry. Do you have any idea what 

that will do to health care services in rural Saskatchewan? 

Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe I can enlighten that member and a 

few other members 



640 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1993 

throughout this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, what it amounts to is 

1.5 beds times 17,000 residents, and the health care unit that is 

being proposed in my area will amount to 22 beds -- 22 beds is 

what it will amount to. 

 

Do you know what we currently have? Something in the order 

of 85 beds, acute-care beds, something in the order of 85 beds, 

Mr. Speaker, and we will be reduced to 22. And that member, 

along with a whole bunch of other members of this Assembly, 

stand up and say, that's good for them, serves them right out 

there in Kindersley. 

 

They've got 55 beds in one hospital alone in Kindersley and 

now we're going to be reduced to 22; 55 beds in Kindersley 

alone that are occupied on a very, very, regular basis, Mr. 

Speaker, and we're going to be reduced to 22. 

 

(1045) 

 

Do you know what that also means, member from Regina Lake 

Centre? You know what that also means, some of these other 

members opposite? 

 

That means the closure, that means the closure of the hospital 

in Eston, that means the closure of the hospital in Eatonia -- 

incidentally, Mr. Speaker, the hospital in Eatonia was just 

opened, just opened last summer, and the member from Biggar 

and I attended the opening of that hospital, in spite of the 

efforts of members opposite to try and make it so I couldn't 

attend. 

 

In spite of efforts they made to make it so I couldn't attend or 

speak, the good folks of Eatonia stood up and said, no, they felt 

that the government did not have the right to silence opposition 

in their area. They wanted an opposition member to speak that 

day, and so I did, in spite of the opposition from the 

government members to try and stop that action that day. Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the member from Biggar attended that 

day and I attended that day and we spoke, both of us, to the 

crowd that was there. 

 

And let me tell you about rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the 

entire town turned out that day. They closed school, they 

closed the public school that day, Mr. Speaker, so the entire 

town, the entire town could turn out for that meeting, that 

public meeting, Mr. Speaker. And everyone was there. The 

entire town was there. They had a big celebration, Mr. Speaker. 

Because finally, finally an administration, the previous 

Conservative administration, recognized the needs of those 

folks with respect to health care. Finally somebody recognized 

those needs and built a hospital for them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know how far people have to travel to that hospital, 

Mr. Speaker, in spite of the fact that there is one in Eatonia 

now? They still have to travel 75 miles one way to get to that 

hospital. And you know how much further they'll have to travel 

now as a result of the actions of the Minister of Health for the 

closure of that hospital? They'll have to travel an additional 50 

miles to Kindersley, for a total of 125 miles one way to get 

health care services. And these members don't think that that's 

a problem. 

 

From Empress, Saskatchewan, to Kindersley, Saskatchewan, 

member from Shaunavon. If you don't believe it, look it up on a 

road map to find out the distance. It's something in that order, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Can anyone in this Assembly tell me, when someone has a 

heart attack at Empress and an ambulance from Kindersley has 

to go down to Empress to try and administer health care to that 

unfortunate person, how long it's going to take them to get that 

person the desperately needed acute care that they're going to 

need to survive that heart attack, or farm accident, or 

oilfield-related accident in that area? How long will it take? 

 

I remember last fall, Mr. Speaker, there was a big controversy 

in the city of Regina here about the time that it took for health 

care services, ambulance services, to arrive at the door of a 

person in Regina here. And it's something in the order of a few 

minutes, Mr. Speaker -- seven, ten minutes, something like 

that. And people were saying that that time has got to be 

reduced. People were saying that that time has got to be 

reduced because the health care needs of that person have to be 

met in a life-or-death situation immediately, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that's great. We applaud health care services in Regina if 

they are able to respond that quickly. But what about the 

person in Empress? What about the person at Major, 

Saskatchewan? What about the person at Shaunavon? What 

about the person at Eastend, Mr. Speaker? Those people have 

health care needs too. 

 

We're talking about fairness here. We're talking about 

compassion -- something this government likes to stand up and 

say that they know all about, Mr. Speaker. But the health care 

needs of those people will not be met, I say, by the actions of 

this government. It's be 150-mile, one-way trip, first of all, 

from the ambulance from Kindersley down to Empress to pick 

up that person -- two hours, two and a half hours perhaps; two 

and a half hours that that person is laying there in absolute 

agony in a life-or-death situation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And these people talk about compassion, these people talk 

about compassion. Where's your compassion for the people of 

Empress, Saskatchewan? Or where's your compassion for the 

people of Eatonia, Saskatchewan? Where's your compassion 

for the people of Major, Saskatchewan? 

 

There isn't any compassion on that side, Mr. Speaker. The only 

thing they can think about doing is restricting -- restricting the 

needs of the people of rural Saskatchewan, restricting the needs 

of the people of Saskatchewan that will be most, most, I 

predict, affected by this Bill, Mr. Speaker. Those people 

deserve and want and need health care services as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 



March 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 641 

And they have a beautiful hospital built in Eatonia, 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, a beautiful hospital built there. 

And do you know what else, Mr. Speaker? Those good folks of 

that community and surrounding municipalities put up $1.2 

million of their own money -- of their own money, Mr. Speaker 

-- to help fund that hospital. 

 

And this government talks about compassion. These folks out 

there know more about compassion than any of you will ever 

know about compassion, Mr. Speaker. The needs of those 

people must be addressed too, I say, and they say as well. 

 

And that's why, Mr. Speaker, they are not in support of this 

kind of regionalization of the health care services that you 

people are talking about. That's why the people of Eston now 

are beginning to realize what health care and wellness means to 

them. That's what they're saying, Mr. Speaker, in my 

constituency now. 

 

The people of Kerrobert are realizing that their hospital is not 

safe any more with an NDP administration. The people of 

Dodsland are sure now, absolutely convinced now, Mr. 

Speaker, that the health care needs of the area that they are in 

will not be met, Mr. Speaker. The people of Eatonia are 

convinced. 

 

And it was interesting that day -- and the member from Biggar 

may want to comment when he has an opportunity about the 

day in Eatonia -- the people were going around saying the 

opening of this hospital is at 2 o'clock in the afternoon. When, 

Mr. Member from Biggar, will the closing be? That's what they 

were asking that day. That's what they were asking of me that 

day. And I suggested maybe a few of them should go over and 

talk to the member from Biggar that day. 

 

And I suspect they likely did go over and talk to him and asked 

him, when is the closure of health care services in this area 

going to take place under your administration? And he got up, 

Mr. Speaker, and he spoke glowingly about the achievements 

of this government and the wellness program and how the 

needs of health care in this province are going to met only by 

an NDP administration. 

 

And now, Mr. Member from Biggar, what do we see 

happening? What do we see happening? I challenge you, sir, to 

come with me to a public meeting in Eatonia one of these days 

at your earliest convenience and we'll see, we'll see what the 

people of Eatonia think about your glowing remarks about your 

wellness model. We'll see what the people of Eatonia think of 

you, sir. 

 

And I challenge you as well . . . there's a meeting tonight, 

there's a meeting tonight that I'll be attending in Leader, 

Saskatchewan, and the member from Shaunavon isn't all that 

far away, may he'd like to attend as well. I challenge you to go 

to that meeting tonight and tell those people about your 

wellness program. 

Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan will realize 

that he won't attend. The member from Biggar will not attend 

because they know very well what the outcome of that meeting 

is going to be. You people are no longer the guardians of health 

care in this province. You no longer are the guardians of health 

care, you are the Doctor Death of health care in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that's what the people of Saskatchewan are saying. That's 

what the people of . . . the good folks of Eatonia, Dodsland, 

Kerrobert, Eastend, all sorts of hospitals throughout this 

province now realize what the NDP wellness means. It means 

wellness for some people, Mr. Speaker, and it means closing of 

the hospitals for other people. That's what wellness means to 

the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is absolutely reprehensible. The people 

of Saskatchewan are beginning to see that. They're beginning 

to see that the mask of wellness is being removed from the 

NDP. They're beginning to see, Mr. Speaker, that this 

government does not believe in the health care needs of rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

These people are beginning to see that this government is not 

the great protectors of health care that they've always said they 

were. Look down the list. Look down the list of cuts to health 

care, Mr. Speaker. Just take a moment, everyone in this 

Assembly, to look down the list of cuts to health care and it's 

not too hard to draw the conclusion, Mr. Speaker, about who is 

the real villain in this, Mr. Speaker, who is the people that are 

going to destroy health care as we know it, in this province, 

particularly in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And it is that government, Mr. Speaker. The member from 

Riversdale, he talked time and time again throughout the last 

number of years in opposition and during the election 

campaign that it is only the NDP who will protect this province 

with respect to health care. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there's quote after quote: we will not charge 

premiums or deterrent fees or utilization fees as they are called 

for, for a number of reasons. Basically the fundamental is that 

they are not a way to finance the health care program. That's a 

quote from the Premier on the Harasen line, October 3, 1991, 

just days prior to the election. 

 

Is that what you people are all about, Mr. Speaker? Is that what 

they are all about, this government? Say one thing to get 

elected and do another thing immediately after. Is that what 

you're all about? Is that what made you people want to run for 

the NDP Party? Is that what made you stand up and go through 

a nomination process? And we all realize in political life how 

difficult the nomination process is and we all realize the 

sacrifice that you must go through to win an election in this 

province. Is that what motivated you? Is that what got you on 

your feet and said, I want to make some changes in this 

province? Is that what made you people want to run for the 

NDP? 



642 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1993 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the member talks . . . from 

Turtleford about mismanagement. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 

people of this province are beginning to see what your 

management is all about. They're beginning to see what a 

hospital closure in their area . . . and how it will affect them. 

That's the NDP's management style. 

 

That's what their NDP management style is, Mr. Speaker. 

Stand up in opposition and say one thing, stand up in an 

election campaign and say one thing, and then immediately 

after you do whatever you think is necessary to slash 

government spending in rural areas. That's what you got 

elected for. That's the legacy that you people will generate in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. That's the kind of thing that you 

will go down in history in rural Saskatchewan as. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it will be a sorry day in this province when people 

start seeing hospitals around rural Saskatchewan start closing. 

And that isn't all that far off, Mr. Speaker. One can only 

wonder which one of them will be first. Mr. Speaker, I wonder 

which one in my constituency will be first. Have you made 

some decisions about that, some value decisions? Which one 

will be the one that you think, Madam Member from Regina 

Lake Centre, which one do you think should close first? Which 

one do you think should close first? Which one does the 

Minister of Health think should close first? Should it be 

Eatonia because it's only got five acute-care beds? No, no, it 

probably won't be that one, Mr. Speaker, because it's 

brand-new; you just finished opening that one. So we'll let that 

one linger on for a little while. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, is it going to be Eston? That's my home 

community, the community that I was born and raised in, went 

to school in, and now live with my family. Is that the one it's 

going to be? Are you going to punish the people of Eston, 

Saskatchewan, for voting for a Conservative? Is that what it'll 

be? Is that the criteria that you will use with respect to the 

closing of that hospital? We've got to cut off that hospital in 

Eston because that's where that mean-spirited Conservative 

lives. Is that the one that'll be the first? 

 

Or what about up in Dodsland? Will that be the one, Mr. 

Speaker, that they close first, the Dodsland hospital, because 

there's never hardly a single NDP vote in that area anyway? 

There's never a vote in that area for the NDP and hasn't been 

for decades and maybe that'll be the first one that'll have to 

close. That's the criteria that's going to be used, is it? Is that the 

criteria that you will use to decide? Well, Mr. Speaker, I think 

the people of that area are wondering. 

 

Kindersley, brand-new wing put on to their hospital -- beautiful 

facility. I invite anyone in this Assembly to come and tour, 

come and tour the health care facilities in my constituency. Just 

come out of your shell of Regina that protects you from all of 

the vagaries of rural Saskatchewan. Just take a moment, Mr. 

Speaker, just ask to take a moment to come down to Eatonia, 

Saskatchewan, and see the pride that these people and the 

sweat and the toil and the money that they have put together 

and sacrifice that they have 

gone through in order to build that hospital in there. And just 

see. 

 

(1100) 

 

And the member from Biggar, I'm sure he recognized the 

absolute pride that day that those folks had when they opened 

that hospital, the absolute pride that they had that the 

accomplishment was finished, the completion of the hospital 

was there. The school, as I said, closed down. Everybody in the 

entire community and surrounding area turned out that day. 

And there was speech after speech after speech about the health 

care needs and how important it was for the people of that area 

to have this hospital, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I attended the SUMA convention not long ago, Mr. 

Speaker. And while I was attending that convention, Mr. 

Speaker, health care was very definitely a very high priority of 

those people that day. 

 

I'll never forget the comments that day of the mayor of 

Macklin, Saskatchewan, just north of my constituency, in the 

constituency of Wilkie. Those folks, Mr. Speaker, have the 

fastest growing town or city -- fastest growing on a per capita 

basis community of anywhere in Saskatchewan. 

 

Notwithstanding Saskatoon or Regina, their community is the 

fastest growing community in all of Saskatchewan. The most 

number of per capita building permits of anywhere in 

Saskatchewan. The most vibrant community -- small may it be, 

but the most vibrant community of any place in Saskatchewan 

at the current moment. 

 

And they want a hospital. They have one right now, built by 

the good folks of the Catholic faith out in that area, Mr. 

Speaker, back in the early years of this province. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that hospital is not meeting the needs of those folks 

any more because it is old. And those folks have said, Mr. 

Speaker, that they want a new hospital. 

 

The fastest growing community in all of Saskatchewan wants a 

new hospital, and the mean-spirited Minister of Health in this 

province says no. And you know what the mayor of Macklin 

said that day? He said, we have $1.2 million in the bank 

account that has been raised by the people of this area and this 

town and surrounding area and we're going to build that 

hospital no matter what this minister says. 

 

That's what the mayor of that community said. We're going to 

go ahead with the construction of this hospital. I don't care 

what the Minister of Health thinks. I don't care what the 

Minister of Health wants. It's going to be done. 

 

Because he recognizes the needs of his community. He 

recognized the needs of the surrounding area. If the members 

that live in the cocoon of Regina here don't recognize the needs 

of those folks in rural Saskatchewan, at least they recognize 

them. At least they recognize the sacrifice that they have gone 

through to raise that money for the construction of that  



March 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 643 

hospital. 

 

And I challenge each and every member of this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, to take the time, take the time to visit some of these 

real rural hospitals. Take the time to go out and see that they 

are meeting the needs of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while in opposition the NDP made all kinds of 

claims, all kinds of promises about what they would do if they 

formed government, with respect to health care. They would 

increase spending. They chastised the previous administration 

at every opportunity -- every single opportunity, Mr. Speaker, 

they chastised the previous administration for not spending 

enough money in health care. That's what they did. They stood 

in their place, each and every one of those members, while in 

opposition and during the election campaign and said, we will 

spend more in health care. And that was their solemn promise, 

Mr. Speaker. And now, Deputy Speaker, now we see that 

promise is being broken. 

 

The betrayal of the election promises and of this party, the 

NDPs on the government benches today, is unprecedented. 

Never before in the history of Saskatchewan have we seen so 

many promises falling one after another, as they have done in 

the last number of months that they have governed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

 New Democrats (will) . . . continue (to) . . . fight to restore 

social programs such as medicare, the dental and drug plans, 

to their former place of leadership in Saskatchewan. 

 

That's a quote from the now Premier in the NDP newspaper 

The Commonwealth, March 1988. That was his promise. That 

was his promise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what do we see? We see they have completely abdicated 

all responsibility to anything they said during the election 

campaign and prior to that while in opposition, completely 

destroyed all credibility they may have ever had with respect to 

health care. 

 

And we all know the NDP did have a great deal of credibility 

with respect to health care in this province. But no longer, no 

longer, Mr. Speaker. You've destroyed, you've destroyed your 

credibility with respect to health care -- something that your 

party took decades to build up, absolutely decades. And in the 

course of a year and a half, you've taken it away entirely. And 

the people of Saskatchewan realize that now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 While it's still 3 years away, the new leader Roy Romanow 

has begun building the platform for the next election. He's 

starting with healthcare and promises to restore the 

prescription drug plan and the children's school-based dental 

program, changed or dismantled by the PC government . . . If 

the NDP forms the next government, healthcare will be its 

number one priority. 

That's a quote from the Star-Phoenix, November 9, 1987, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

They promised to do those things, Mr. Speaker, in opposition. 

And what do we see? The complete betrayal of that promise. 

And, Mr. Speaker, they stand in their place day after day in this 

Assembly, and they say it's because we didn't know what was 

going on in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale has served in this 

Assembly for how long? -- I don't know what it is now -- 

20-some years. And he stands in his place now and says to 

everybody in Saskatchewan, I didn't know what was going on. 

I didn't know what the debt of this province was. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no one believes that. I'm surprised 

that you people will continue on that tack of denial with respect 

to what the deficit of this province was. How do you stand in 

your place one of you after another and completely deny the 

fact that you didn't know what was going on -- absolutely 

absurd, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Member after member after 

member stands up in here and says, for everyone to hear in this 

province, I didn't know what was going on. They probably 

didn't. They should have though. 

 

Every time there was a budget presented in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, over the last number of years, there's an outline of 

what the debt is in the province of Saskatchewan -- every 

single time for everyone to read, for everyone to see. And yet 

member after member of this Assembly stands up and says, 

there was a bigger debt, we didn't realize it was that high. 

 

And yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, during the election campaign, 

what did your leader say? What did your leader say in the 

leadership debate, the debate between the Leader of the NDP, 

the Progressive Conservatives, and the Liberals, what did your 

leader say? He said that day that there was a $13.2 billion debt 

in this province, and he knew it and it had to be addressed. 

 

But now when he sits in the government benches as Premier of 

this province, he stands up and says, I don't remember that any 

more. I forgot that. And therefore we have to completely start 

changing our ways in this province. 

 

Well nobody believes you. Nobody believes you. You got 

elected on a whole bunch of promises; nobody believes that 

you're going to keep any of them any more. You've destroyed 

every bit of credibility you've ever had in this province because 

of the betrayal of promises that you've gone through, the litany 

of broken promises. 

 

How do you people stay in your seats everyday and listen to 

this kind of stuff from the member from Riversdale about he 

didn't know? Every one of you and every one of us on this side 

of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we knew what the debt was; 

they knew what the debt was; and now they're trying to tell 

everybody in this province they didn't know, Mr. Speaker . . . 



644 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1993 

(inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Biggar chirps 

from his seat, he didn't know. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We didn't tell the public. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- He says, we didn't tell the public. We didn't tell 

the public. Well the public knew what the debt was in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. It was in the budget addresses . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . And he still chirps from his seat. 

Well, Mr. Member from Biggar, I'd be happy to share my car 

tonight with you, to come out to Leader and we'll discuss 

health care. There's a seat in my car reserved just for you, just 

for you, Mr. Member. Come on out there and we'll discuss 

health care with the real people of Saskatchewan, with the 

people of Saskatchewan that are most in danger of losing 

health care services. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that member doesn't have the courage, I 

predict, to take me up on that offer and come to Leader, 

Saskatchewan, tonight and hear what the people of 

Saskatchewan know and believe and realize now what you're 

going to do and your government's going to do to this health 

care system. 

 

There's only 16 or -- how many cabinet ministers? -- 18 cabinet 

ministers and there's 55 members of this Assembly on the 

government side. And yet 18 members of that government . . . 

It is probably less than that because a number of ministers don't 

know anything about health care and that's evidenced by their 

comments they make about it in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's more back-benchers than there is cabinet 

members. Why is it that you people allow these people to direct 

you down a path of destruction? Why is it that you allow them 

to do that? Why is it that you want to believe what the member 

from Riversdale has to say with respect to the deficit and why 

all these kinds of cuts in rural health care services are needed 

now. Why do you believe that? 

 

You have an opportunity -- I think, anyway -- in your caucus. 

Maybe they don't -- maybe they don't have an opportunity. Do 

you get an opportunity to stand up and say what you think in 

your caucus or does the Premier just get up in caucus and tell 

you what's going to happen? Is that what happens in your 

caucus? 

 

Does the member from Biggar or the member from Shaunavon 

or the member from one of the Regina seats here, does she get 

an opportunity to stand up and say what she thinks, or do you 

think anything? Do you really think anything, Madam Member, 

about what's going on in health care in this province? Do you 

have any opinion? 

 

Do you have any opportunity to say to this Premier and his 

Health minister, let's just take a step back here and have a look 

at the needs of health care in rural Saskatchewan and the hurt 

that it's going to cause, exactly. 

 

You've got a whole host of rural MLAs, Mr. Speaker, and yet 

we haven't heard any of them stand up and say, I'm concerned 

about the direction that this 

province is taking, with respect to health care. Not a single one 

of them has, Deputy Speaker. None of them. 

 

I predict in caucus as well, it'd be interesting to just sit in on 

your caucus for a few days and hear what goes on. Is there any 

dissenting voices for anything that you people do? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Move your chair up. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And the member chirps from his seat, move my 

chair over to their side. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wouldn't move 

my chair over to that side of the House to join that NDP Party. 

I would rather resign my seat than move over to that side of the 

House. I wouldn't want to be a part of what you people are 

doing, and I'm surprised that some of you people want to be a 

part of what you're doing. 

 

What do the people, what do the people in your constituency 

say to you when you go home? Or do you go home any more? 

Do you actually take the time to drive out from Regina and 

visit your constituencies any more? I really doubt it. 

 

Well come to Leader tonight then. Take the time to jump in the 

car with me and we'll head off to Leader. I can wind this up in 

a few minutes, if you like. We can be out there in a few 

minutes . . . we can be out there in a few hours, sorry. We can 

be out there in a few hours and we could go around; we could 

probably visit their hospital. We could take the time to visit 

their hospital and see the needs of the people out there. 

 

But no, no. These people don't want to hear about the problems 

they are creating. They go home, if they do go home on the 

weekends, and they sneak into their constituency. And they go 

home and they don't darken the doors of any place in their 

constituency other than their home, I predict, Mr. Speaker. The 

health care needs of this province are not being met by an NDP 

government, and that's becoming clear. 

 

(1115) 

 

Another quote from the things that these members have said 

over the last number of years, and this one comes from the 

Minister of Health herself: "Why should the sick and elderly 

carry the burden for your incompetence?" Louise Simard, 

Leader-Post, April 19, 1991. That's a direct quote from her, 

Mr. Speaker. That's in the Leader-Post, April 19, 1991. That's 

what she said, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Why did she say such a thing when now the evidence is clear? 

The evidence is clear, Mr. Speaker, it's her incompetence and 

the member from Riversdale's incompetence that is shining 

through. 

 

People of this province don't want the things that you're doing. 

They don't want these changes. They don't want to lose their 

hospital. They don't want to lose the health care services that 

they've built up over the years, Mr. Speaker. 



March 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 645 

And this quote comes from the Star-Phoenix of September 30, 

1988, and I quote:  

 

 Simard suggests the province is moving towards a 

fee-for-service system where quality health care will be 

available only to those who can afford it. 

 

Only to those who can afford it. And that is ringing very, very 

true today, Mr. Speaker, now that we have an NDP 

administration. I saw just the other night, just the other night on 

television, there was a report about what's happening in 

Saskatchewan with respect to private health care services. Blue 

Cross . . . And good thing they are in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. Good thing those people have decided to pick up the 

slack that this government has imposed upon the health care 

people of this province. 

 

They have decided to offer programs with respect to 

prescription drugs. They've decided to offer programs with 

respect to children's dental care in this province. And it's a 

good thing they have. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, that a lot of 

people in this province will be taking them up on this, on their 

offer to provide those kind of services in this province. 

 

It was something in the order of -- if my figures are correct -- 

about $39 to join a program that would be similar to the 

prescription drug plan of old. It was something like 59 or $60 

for a family to join a dental plan, to receive comprehensive 

coverage. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these folks while in opposition said that that 

is exactly what would happen in this province. And I guess 

they're correct. She must have realized, back in 1988, if they 

ever got into government, this is what they would do. Because 

this is what's happening. Mr. Speaker, the people of this 

province realize the utter betrayal of the promises this 

government has made. 

 

In another quote from Hansard, the minister said this right in 

this Assembly, right while sitting in opposition. 

 

 The opposition is going to fight these (health care) cutbacks 

and . . . changes to medicare. I'm going to fight the erosion of 

the principles of medicare . . . I feel rather certain we'll be 

having a change of government next time around and then the 

public is going to have to worry . . . isn't going to have to 

worry about these problems. 

 

The member, the Minister of Health herself, said that. When an 

NDP administration takes over in this province, they won't 

have to worry -- won't have to worry about health care in this 

province because they're the great guardians of health care. The 

great guardians of health care are going to look after the needs 

of this province with respect to health care, and no one has to 

worry. 

 

Well every single family in this province and every single 

person in this province now realizes how hollow those words 

were. They realize particularly in 

areas that are in jeopardy of losing their hospital. 

 

And let's just take the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to find out 

which hospitals are likely to close in this province. They're all 

over the place, Mr. Speaker, wherever you look. Every one of 

the rural constituencies of this province will have a health care 

unit, health care hospital, health care acute-care bed, shut 

down. Every one of these constituencies will have health care 

services cut back. And the members, even though they 

supposedly represent the people of their constituency, are going 

to sit back and blindly accept that as at face value. Has to 

happen, in their minds. 

 

Some more things that were said by NDP people throughout 

this province while they were in opposition or while they were 

in the election campaign. This one comes direct quote from the 

Leader-Post, April 14 of 1992, not all that long ago: 

 

 As the party which pioneered universally accessible health 

care in this province -- designed to respond to need, not 

ability to pay -- we categorically reject the concept of health 

care deterrent fees. 

 

Well what do you have today, Mr. Speaker? What do you have 

today in this province if it isn't health care fees, deterrent fees? 

It's just a fee with another name on it. The kinds of cut-backs 

that you have made in this province have indeed been the same, 

exactly the same kinds of things as what a deterrent fee is. 

 

Another quote from the Premier while in opposition, January 

31, 1991: 

 

 . . . he doesn't believe health care costs in this province are 

skyrocketing. "The cost of medicare is well within the 

budget". 

 

Well within the budget. Well we see now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that he wasn't correct. 

 

He was saying those kinds of things only to get elected, only to 

get elected in this province, Mr. Speaker, so that he could sit in 

the chair that he coveted ever since the very first day that he 

thought about politics. Ever since the very first time he stepped 

into this Assembly, he coveted that chair. And now he has it. 

And he went through anything to get it. He would do 

absolutely anything, say anything, do whatever it took, make 

whatever sacrifice was necessary to get to that office. And he 

got there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He eventually got there. 

 

And now we see the true colours of this man. Now we see what 

this man is all about. Now we see what this Premier is doing to 

health care. The very thing that he said was fundamental in an 

NDP administration, they would protect those things. But now 

we see the true colours of that man. Now we see what an NDP 

Premier would do to health care in this province. 

 

He coveted that chair so much, Mr. Speaker, he would say and 

do anything it took to get elected to that chair. And the people 

that sit around him, they've coveted 



646 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1993 

their responsibilities so much as well, Mr. Speaker, it didn't 

matter what it took to get there. The ends justified the means. 

 

Yes, and the member up there is pointing to his counterpart 

from Shaunavon. Not surprised. Not surprised. One-term 

member, one-term member. And I recall, I recall last summer, 

Mr. Speaker, that there was a meeting about health care 

services in his constituency -- Eastend, wasn't it? -- Eastend, 

that's right. Eastend, Saskatchewan. And that member was 

there. The one or two occasions that he's taken to go home 

since he was elected, he showed up at that meeting. He showed 

up at that meeting. And I have to give him credit that day . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Absolutely. He's chirping from his 

seat, Mr. Speaker. He doesn't like to be exposed with respect to 

health care. But we're going to take a little time to dwell on his 

comments. We're going to take a little time to dwell on what 

that member has to say about health care. 

 

And he stood up and he said, this is going to be all well and 

good, and the people of this province are widely accepting it. 

And what happened? You practically caused a riot with that 

comment. I'm surprised you were able to get out of there. He 

must be quite an athlete, Mr. Speaker, to get out of that meeting 

that night. 

 

He stood in his place when he had the opportunity to speak and 

he said, the Minister of Health will be out here. There isn't 

going to be anything happen in this area without the Minister of 

Health coming out here and talking to these people. Well have 

you got her out there yet? Has she taken the time to attend a 

public meeting there? No, no, Mr. Speaker, no way. The 

Minister of Health has never darkened the door of a public 

meeting in Eastend. 

 

Never been there yet, and never will be I predict. Even though 

she knows she's got a member that his neck's on the line out 

there. Never been there, never will be there. 

 

The only occasion that she might be there . . . I wonder if she 

has the courage to go out there when they close the hospital. 

Do you think she does? Do you think she'll have the courage to 

go along with you, Mr. Member, when you're out there closing 

down the hospital and telling everybody how good it's going to 

be? She'll be there to lock the door, put the padlock on the 

door. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that's a fine way to run health care services 

in this province, and that member, I predict, when we get to the 

conclusion of this Bill, if we ever do -- and I'm not so sure 

we're going to -- if we ever get to the conclusion of this Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, he's going to stand up, he's going to stand up, I 

predict, and say: this is good for us. We don't need any health 

care services in Eastend. Even though I represent that 

constituency -- we need that hospital -- the padlock's got to go 

on the place as quickly as possible. 

 

That's what he's going to say. Or is it, Mr. Speaker? 

No, I think he'll stand in his place and support his minister in 

direct, in direct conflict of every principle, in direct principle of 

. . . in direct conflict of every principle your party has ever 

stood for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and we hear him chirping from his seat, chirping 

from his seat, chirping from his seat about coming down to his 

area. I'd be happy to come down to Eastend to the closure of 

that hospital because that's what's going to happen. 

 

We'll go down there and we'll try and say to the people of that 

area, we'll try and do what we can to save your hospital even 

though your member won't, even though he won't stand in this 

legislature and speak out against the closure of his hospital. 

We'll go down there and try and defend medicare and try and 

defend health care services if you won't. 

 

There's room in the . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, there's room in 

the car for him, too, tonight to go to Leader. There's room in 

the car for him, too, if he likes to come along. Let's take the 

member from Shaunavon and the member from Biggar and let's 

just head on out to Leader tonight, and we'll find out about 

health care. We'll find out what those people want in health 

care. 

 

And here's an interesting quote from Hansard. The member for 

Saskatoon Broadway -- is it? -- the member of Social Services, 

and here's what she said in this very institution, this very 

Assembly, while she sat on the opposition side: The health care 

situation in this province is out of control. We have a drug plan 

where people are making decisions between groceries and 

prescription drugs. Too little, too late. 

 

Well if they were making decisions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

between prescription drugs and groceries in 1987, if that was 

actually true in 1987, what kinds of fundamental decisions are 

they making now? Are they deciding between groceries and 

prescription drugs or clothing and prescription drugs or health 

care services and prescription drugs? Or are they deciding 

between shelter for their family and prescription drugs? Are 

they deciding between schooling for their kids or prescriptions 

drugs? Are they deciding between putting their children into 

programs like figure skating or hockey or those kinds of 

things? Are they making those kind of decisions? Are they not 

allowing their family to take part in everything that everyone 

wants to take part in society today, or are they deciding to buy 

a prescription drug? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it's something in the order of $1,720 is the 

amount of prescription drugs you have to have used in this 

province before the government will help you now -- $1,720, 

150 bucks a month roughly, that you have to spend in this 

province before this government will help you. 

 

And the member had the audacity at that time to say that 

people have to choose between groceries and prescription 

drugs. Well everywhere in this province, Mr. Speaker, people 

are realizing the choices that have been forced upon them by 

this administration with respect to health care. 



March 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 647 

The list goes on and on and on. These people were pretty 

prolific when it came to talking about health care in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. They were the great defenders of 

medicare. And they were so proud of that. Every time that they 

stood up in this Assembly . . . and the Minister of Health, she 

used to parade people in here on a regular basis and plead their 

case for all to see. 

 

(1130) 

 

And they did have a case, a legitimate case, a lot of times. She 

would point out in the most serious tone she could bring to her 

lips about the kinds of things that health care are doing to 

people in this province, Mr. Speaker. She would say to the 

people of this Assembly how terrible a situation that the 

previous administration has put people in. And now, Mr. 

Speaker, we see that member for what she really is. The Dr. 

Death of health care services in this province. 

 

She made all kinds of comments about what her plans were for 

health care in this province. The Moose Jaw Times-Herald, 

February 27, 1989, reported, and I quote: 

 

 Romanow said the Devine government has caused 

considerable harm to "the finest health care system in 

Canada" by "destroying" the prescription drug plans and the 

dental care program and providing hospitals with inadequate 

funds. 

 

Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. That Premier, the fellow who 

sits in the most coveted chair that he can think of in 

Saskatchewan, stands up and makes those kind of comments. 

And now when he gets into government, he will preside over 

the closure of not one but literally dozens of hospitals around 

this province. 

 

That kind of reprehensible action, Mr. Deputy Speaker, should 

allow this member from Riversdale to go down in the history 

books of this province as not the man who protected health care 

but the man who destroyed health care in this province. 

 

Twenty-two beds is what our health unit will be restricted to in 

the Kindersley and region -- 22 health care beds. Eighty per 

cent of the funding for the province of Saskatchewan's health 

care goes to seven base hospitals in Regina and Saskatoon; 20 

per cent goes to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And now they're saying that we're going to restrict that even 

further. We're going to cut it down to about 50 per cent or less 

of what there is out in rural Saskatchewan. And that's fair? 

That's the wellness, compassionate model that you're preaching 

around this province today? That's what you're telling the 

people of Saskatchewan is good for them? 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of this province I think 

would like to see at every one of those hospital board meetings 

a member of this government sitting at the table and telling 

them what their plans are for 

health care. Because I think it's becoming very clear what their 

plans are. They're going to tell them . . . they're going to force 

on these boards the decision to close the hospital. 

 

It's little wonder in my area that you can't find anybody any 

more that wants to sit on the board. You can't find anybody. 

They don't want to do your dirty work for you. They don't want 

to have to be the one that stands up and says, we're going to 

close the hospital in Eatonia, we're going to close the hospital 

in Eston, we're going to close the hospital in Dodsland, we're 

going to close the hospital in Kerrobert, and we're going to cut 

back 50 per cent or more of the beds in Kindersley. I'm not 

surprised that they don't want to serve on those boards, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I sure wouldn't want to have to be the one to 

do it. 

 

And then member for . . . or pardon me, the Minister of Health 

should be the one, she should be the one, if she wants to make 

the fundamental changes in this province, to stand in her place 

and tell people what they're going to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a whole number of people in this 

opposition group that would like to speak to this Bill. And I 

think they have a lot of concerns that they'd like to address to 

the folks of this Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan. 

There's a whole bunch of things that need to be said about this 

Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but prior to that I would like to 

move, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

 That we move to Bill No. 10 to allow discussion on further 

health care decisions in this province. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 11:35 a.m. until 11:45 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

-- 8 

Nays 

Thompson Pringle 

Wiens Lautermilch 

Simard Calvert 

Tchorzewski Murray 

Lingenfelter Hamilton 

Teichrob Johnson 

Koskie Whitmore 

Anguish Sonntag 

Solomon Cline 

Mitchell McPherson 

Penner Kujawa 

Upshall Crofford 

Hagel Knezacek 

Bradley Harper 

-- 28 



648 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1993 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, the member for Kindersley in 

his speech indicated that no one was prepared to speak in 

favour of this particular motion. I'd like to point out to the 

Assembly that I think that what he is doing is demonstrating 

what a typical Tory would do. He would fight to the death to 

protect what his grandparents fought to the death to stop from 

coming in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, during the past 40 years or so 

there's been a substantive change in how health is delivered to 

individuals in the province of Saskatchewan. In fact the health 

delivery system is changed significantly all throughout North 

America. And we're no longer in a position where we need to 

be able to warehouse an individual while they heal up after an 

operation or after they've had a bout of a disease, because of 

the fact that the medicine that we now have is much improved. 

And in the sense the impact of being in a situation where 

you've found yourself in a hospital, you do not need the 

requirement of being in there for a large number of days. 

 

And that's what basically the changes that are occurring here 

amount to. Well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday, along with the 

Minister of Health, I had the opportunity of going out to 

Paradise Hill and looking and observing while the agreements 

were signed between the local people and the Department of 

Health to bring about the implementation of a new health 

district. And I think that that's one of things that we have to do 

if we are going to have things done in a systematic manner that 

people would appreciate. 

 

Now having the larger districts in place will allow for decisions 

to be made at a local level. And these decisions then will reflect 

what the people of that area want. Now that's totally different 

than the mismanagement that the previous government in this 

province did when they went ahead and built schools and 

hospitals with political rationale behind it, and not based on the 

reasonable and analysing what the real need was in an area. So 

we end up in that particular case with health facilities being 

built which did not have a need and were not being used. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I started out with in saying that the member 

from Kindersley represented a true Tory in the sense that he 

was trying to stop improvements in a system that his 

grandparents stopped to come in, I'd like to say that the . . . 

give a little bit of information as to what was happening with 

the hospitals over the past 40 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they're fighting against restructuring the health 

care system in the province of Saskatchewan to remove the 

inefficiencies, and fighting against implementing services that 

are cost effective and implementing it in a manner that we can 

as a society 

support. This budget, the budget that was implemented in this 

Assembly, provides for that particular direction. 

 

I have to ask whether the members opposite realize that the 

present system is no longer functioning in providing efficient 

health care. Because the medical technologies that we have, 

have changed and we are no longer providing health care that 

in essence is a nursing care. That was what was the basis of the 

health system as it was developed in the '40s -- a place where 

you could bring an individual in, keep them in an environment 

where the temperature was controlled, where their food was 

delivered to them, where they had assistance in other areas of 

their needs. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, you find that the average home will be 

able to provide that type of an environment at a far less cost 

than what the hospitals of the '40s were able to provide, and we 

are simply in a different environment and at a different time. 

And I think that it is in essence that we have to recognize that 

the improvements that have taken place in health care, in 

surgery, in techniques, simply mean that we must adjust our 

system to fit with that particular improvements that have come 

along. 

 

One of the things that we have to do is implement larger . . . 

more areas where we have personnel that are qualified and 

well-trained and they're backed up by a number of support 

individuals so that they can provide the services in a high-tech 

basis of medical services. You might even call it a Star Trek 

type of health care where we use the operations that today . . . 

that 40 years ago would have taken probably three or four 

weeks to recuperate from, today three or four days and the 

individual can leave the hospital. 

 

So when the members opposite are saying that they need 

basically warehousing facilities for people to lay in, they are 

also in the same time saying that they don't need the improved 

technology that's available, the services of trained personnel, 

the supporting staff that are in place to make the health care 

system work. 

 

They also are saying that they're not prepared to look at 

providing other facilities for moving people quickly to these 

facilities, for supporting them in their own home after they've 

had the operation or after they've been sick and maintain a 

system that is functional and yet is economically possible for 

them to . . . economically possible for this society to 

implement. 

 

I find that the member from Kindersley in his speech appeared 

to be spending most of his time supporting the concept of 

having a facility in place, rather than looking at providing 

health services to the individual. And I think that that's one of 

the reasons why he has approached it in this direction, is that 

part of the policies of the Conservative government in the '70s 

had in place was to build large buildings and then put large 

signs out in front of them and receive the benefits from this, 

because in essence they were building edifices to what they 

were doing. 



March 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 649 

But, Mr. Speaker, that is not what good management is all 

about. That is very poor management. Especially when you tie 

the construction of these facilities in essence to political 

decisions rather than studies that indicate that they're needed 

there. 

 

You will find in this province at different locations in the 

school system where the division board has just finished 

building a school, barely gotten the paint dry on it, and they are 

now making suggestions that they are going to have to close 

down the school because they don't have the sufficient students 

to keep it open. 

 

The former government did not put in place and maintain in 

place studies and recommendations as to what was really 

taking place. So they built the buildings and wasted the funds 

that were available, where the good management would have 

said that you should not have gone ahead. 

 

I find that the members opposite basically were working on a 

ribbon-cutting process, pork-barrelling, and that particular type 

of politics will only last so long before people begin to 

understand and realize that it is not working. Because if you 

keep spending the funds in that direction, you will end up 

eventually wasting a lot of revenue that could be put to a far 

better use. 

 

The understanding that I have of this new health program 

called wellness, is one that to me indicates that there is a need 

for it in this province. And if you go out and meet the people 

out there that are dealing with it, they will tell you that there is 

a need for it. They will also tell you that someone had to take 

the bull by the horns, to say and do something in this particular 

manner. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Close a hospital. 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from Kindersley 

indicates that he would close a hospital. And I find that when 

he is chirping from his seat, it's totally different than what he is 

doing when he is speaking. In fact what he said from his seat, 

Mr. Speaker, is identically what some individuals in the 

communities will say when they are trying to assess what is 

needed and what isn't needed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Kindersley was attempting to 

shift the discussion in these districts from something that 

related to providing a good health care system to going back to 

their policies of having buildings and ribbon-cutting 

ceremonies. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order. Why is the member for Regina 

Wascana Plains on her feet? 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- I would ask leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, a constituent of mine, Ms. Josie Howard, who has 

with her today guests from Toronto who are planning to move 

to Regina. And I would like the members of the Assembly to 

join me in greeting Justo Opulencia and Edna Alejandro, a 

brother and sister-in-law who will be moving to Regina. 

 

And I ask that they give them a warm welcome, and I would 

like to also extend my welcome and look forward to a time to 

meet them when they're in Regina. I would like to be able to 

ask the members of the Assembly to join with me in giving 

them a warm Regina welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1200) 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 (continued) 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, what this government is moving 

forward in the area of health care is to bring health care from 

basically a structure that was implemented in the '40s, a 

structure that met the conditions of that time very effectively, 

and then changed and improved over a period of four decades. 

But the improvements that came were improvements to a 

system that had been implemented. 

 

Today there is a very great need to readjust the whole system to 

fit into the improvements, technological improvements, health 

care advances that have occurred and adjust the base structure 

to fit these new improvements that are there. And some of that 

will mean displacement. But in essence, if you look at the 

objectives of it, it is to maintain good health care to the citizens 

of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the members opposite are using their time in this debate 

like a number of spineless mice, attempting to win political 

points rather than going ahead with improvements to a health 

care system. It is without thought and with only political 

objectives in mind that they have done this. 

 

I would think that you would find, Mr. Speaker, that more of 

the members on this side of the House will be speaking in 

favour of the changes that are occurring and speaking from that 

direction because they have an understanding, unlike the 

members opposite who bring to this particular discussion the 

same sensibility as you would find the animals in a jungle. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to 

rise today to join in the debate on this very important matter. 

 

I'd just like to make a few comments on the comments 



650 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1993 

made by the member from Turtleford. We went through this 

House yesterday with the Speaker making a ruling on the use 

of animal names in this House. And again the member from 

Turtleford uses the term spineless mice in descriptions. Mr. 

Speaker, if that is indeed the case of the members in this 

House, I would suggest that relates directly to the Minister of 

Health in her lack of attending any meetings in the rural areas 

to discuss health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation will enforce the NDP member for 

Regina Hillsdale's new health districts on this province. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this Minister of Health, as pointed out by my 

colleague, the member from Rosthern, is the Dr. Kevorkian of 

the Saskatchewan health care system. Her statements are, let us 

help you; let us help you commit suicide, is her message, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I'd like to speak to a Bill that will entrench the NDP's new 

health structure into law. This legislation is feared out in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, feared and dreaded. It is 

feared that this legislation will legitimize the closure of 

hospitals in rural Saskatchewan. People out in rural 

Saskatchewan have every right to doubt that the NDP 

government is doing . . . what it is doing in health care regions 

in this province. They have witnessed first hand what the 

NDP's health reform proposals look like. The NDP's wellness 

model essentially means get well, stay well, or farewell. 

 

That has been obvious, Mr. Deputy Speaker, since day one of 

this Bill. It has been evident since the minister's so-called 

wellness model was leaked to the opposition and the media last 

year. The NDP's wellness model amounts to nothing more than 

an attack on our health care system, Mr. Speaker, and this Bill 

will enhance that attack. 

 

I'd like to talk a little bit about the hospitals in my constituency, 

Mr. Speaker. We have four hospitals -- Gainsborough, Oxbow, 

Redvers, and Arcola. And in fact at the Oxbow Hospital, Mr. 

Speaker, there will be a grand opening on the 2nd. And it's my 

fear, Mr. Speaker, that the grand opening of the Oxbow 

Hospital will be the last hospital to open in Saskatchewan. It 

will definitely be the last hospital to open in rural 

Saskatchewan if this Bill goes ahead, as the Minister of Health 

wants and as this government wants. 

 

The hospitals in my area . . . in Redvers we have 21 beds of 

which the government is funding 14.6. I'm not sure what you'd 

do with the other .4 of that bed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but that's 

what they're paying for -- 14.6 at the present time. 

 

In Oxbow we have 10 acute care beds and 12 long-term care 

beds. In Arcola, we have 18 adult acute care beds, two level 4 

beds, and 4 pediatric beds. Mr. Speaker, in Gainsborough we 

have 10 acute care beds and 12 long-term beds. And again, in 

this hospital, the funding is 17.3 beds. 

 

Now under this new proposal the people in the area 

would like to know how many beds are they going to have left. 

When you drop this from these numbers down to 1.25 to 1.5 

beds per thousand people, how many beds are going to be left, 

Mr. Speaker -- 15 beds, 20 beds? What's the numbers going be? 

 

People need these beds, Mr. Speaker. We live in the very 

south-east corner of the province. It's 165 miles from my home 

to come into Regina. It's another 35 miles south-east of me to 

get to the edge of my constituency. These people would have to 

drive 200 miles, Mr. Speaker, to come to a hospital in Regina. 

 

So where is their hospitals going to be? If they go to Estevan, 

which has a very good hospital, they're looking at a maximum, 

perhaps from the very eastern edge of my constituency, of 100 

miles. If they go to Weyburn, they're probably looking at a total 

of 130 miles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how many times do accidents happen? And while 

we try to do what we can to prevent them, they do indeed 

happen. There are farm accidents. There are motor vehicle 

accidents. We're in the centre of the south-east oilfields. There 

are a number of accidents in that industry. 

 

Where do you take these people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 

there is an accident and when there is an injury? You just can't 

say, well we'll take them to the hospital if the hospital is in 

Regina or Estevan or Weyburn. Perhaps all you should be 

doing is sending a hearse out rather than an ambulance, 

because in some cases, Mr. Speaker, that's all you'll be doing. 

 

We need to have the hospitals in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. The people in my area have sat down together to work 

on the proposal of the district health care regional boards. They 

don't like it, Mr. Speaker, but they have sat down to try and do 

some work with it because they have been told, either you sit 

down and do the work or the Minister of Health will assign 

you, will impose the boundary structures on you and who you 

will associate with. 

 

Now this government talks a lot about openness and honesty. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I suggest to you that it is not open and 

honest to impose the boundaries on the hospitals. 

 

The hospital boards are duly elected, Mr. Speaker, the 

members are elected as town councillors, as RM (rural 

municipality) councillors, and then appointed to sit on the 

health boards. They are elected by the people in their area. 

They have a right to make the decisions, not the Minister of 

Health and not the Minister of Health's appointed 

representatives to any district health board. Because who is the 

Minister of Health going to appoint? 

 

We've heard comments that none of the elected people in the 

areas will be entitled to sit on the boards because, Mr. Speaker, 

if they appoint an elected person to that board, they have a 

responsibility to the people who elected them. The Minister of 

Health does not want to have the people sitting on her 

appointed 



March 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 651 

health boards as being responsible to the people of their area. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, it is the Minister of Health's position 

that she will dictate to the health boards what they will do and 

they will not be taking their direction from the people living in 

the area. 

 

Also when the district health boards, as appointed by the 

minister, make their decisions, the minister can deny that she 

made those decisions. And the people who are sitting on these 

district health boards, in most cases will not be seeking to be 

elected to such a position because they know once they have 

made their initial decisions, they will be very unpopular and 

they will be unelectable. 

 

What form are these district health boards going to take, Mr. 

Speaker? Where are they going to be . . . how are they going to 

be put together? What groupings will there be? 

 

In my area we have both east-west traffic and north-south 

through the constituency. It's been proposed that on an 

east-west line that the hospitals at Midale, Estevan, Lampman, 

Oxbow, and Gainsborough, should be perhaps one area. And 

that health district may even go further west and take in some 

of the hospitals at either Bengough, Pangman, perhaps Radville 

-- I'm not sure if there's a hospital there. That would make a 

fairly large area, Mr. Speaker. And with that area you would 

have Estevan sitting in the centre. 

 

The other hospitals, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, would be 

very good candidates for closure, if you're looking at a hospital 

bed density of 1.25 beds per thousand people. Now that is 

going to create a great deal of hardship for people that need 

acute care beds on an emergency situation. It's going to create a 

great deal of hardship on people that have children in the 

hospitals. If they have to travel 60 to 100 miles to visit their 

child every day, that's going to impose a very severe financial 

penalty on these people. 

 

And so what has the minister done by creating these larger 

health districts? She has transferred the costs of health care 

from the government to the individual citizens of this province, 

Mr. Speaker, because they are the ones that are going to be 

paying the transportation costs; they are the ones who are going 

to be spending their money to provide themselves or their 

children with health care, and the government is abdicating its 

responsibilities. 

 

Again on an east-west line through my constituency, Mr. 

Speaker, it's been suggested that perhaps Redvers, Arcola, 

Stoughton, Weyburn, Fillmore, and perhaps hospitals further 

west from Weyburn would be amalgamated into a larger 

district health board. 

 

And again the same problems, as I outlined earlier, would be 

the result of this type of a situation, where you would have one 

large hospital in Weyburn with the potential of closing all of 

the other hospitals with that 1.25 density, and you could be 

driving 130 miles from the eastern side of the province to 

Weyburn. 

And right now that Redvers hospital is servicing not just the 

people in the Redvers area, but it also services people who live 

in Manitoba. And they pay health care monies into this 

province, Mr. Speaker. They are a net bonus to this province 

because their support costs come from the Manitoba 

government, not from the Saskatchewan taxpayer. And by 

creating the hospitals 130 miles from the border, in the case of 

this description, you would lose all of that support. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, from that area, from Gainsborough 

and from Redvers area and along the Manitoba border, there 

are a large number of people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who go for 

their next level up of health care, go to Brandon, Manitoba. 

They do not impose the costs on the regional hospitals in 

Regina. If those people are forced to come into the Regina 

hospitals, it creates added costs for the families. But it will also 

create added costs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the system in 

Regina because there will be a greater need for more beds 

within the city hospitals. 

 

Another alternative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that has been 

suggested, is to go on a north-south line throughout my 

constituency in the very south-east corner of the province. And 

that would include the hospitals of Gainsborough, Oxbow, 

Redvers, Arcola, Stoughton, Wawota, and perhaps Moosomin 

and Whitewood. Within this area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there 

are no large, regional hospitals. And yet that would meet the 

population requirements as set out by the Minister of Health 

and perhaps, I was going to say, even the Minister of Finance 

in her imposition on the health care systems. Because in a lot of 

these cases, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is the Minister of Finance 

who is driving this health care system today. It's not a matter of 

care, it's not a matter of wellness, it's not a matter of 

compassion for the people of Saskatchewan, it's simply a 

matter of the Minister of Finance and her money. 

 

If you go on a north-south line through my constituency, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, again we are faced with the situation that 

some hospitals will remain open and some hospitals will close. 

The largest hospital in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, the 

Arcola hospital, is one of those hospitals that is in need of 

renovations. And the people of the area have put their money 

together to make the necessary renovations. They have over a 

half a million dollars set aside for their share of any renovation 

costs, as do the people of Redvers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 

have their money. 

 

(1215) 

 

But under the minister's wellness model, what will happen to 

any possible construction in their communities? Perhaps they 

will be closed down rather than having their hospitals brought 

up to modern standards as the people in the area wish, and as 

they're prepared to pay for. They have raised their money. 

 

If you close those hospitals, particularly the Arcola hospital, 

where it's situated as being the largest hospital in the area, what 

do you do with those 



652 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1993 

people? Is the government going to build a new hospital some 

place else to facilitate the patients? I would suspect not, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I would suspect that the government is going 

to say no to any construction and that you're going to have to 

go to one of the major hospitals that are already in place. 

 

And if that happens, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what happens to the 

money that these people have in place already? We saw what 

happened earlier in the 1970s when there was hospital 

amalgamations, when there was school board amalgamations. 

The provincial government said, that is our money, even 

though that money was raised by contributions, by donations, 

by the local taxpayers in that area, money that was collected 

from the property tax base, voluntarily by the people in the 

area. That money, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was stolen from those 

people and given to the coffers of the provincial government. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that the people of Redvers 

and the people of Arcola are not prepared to allow that to 

happen in this case. If the government tries to get their hands 

on this money, they will turn around and give it back to the 

people who donated it or they will spend it on the current 

facilities that they have in their communities. Whether the 

government approves it or not, they are prepared to go ahead 

and do something with their money and not allow the 

government opposite to have their hands on it. 

 

And what has happened within the hospitals in this city, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? What's happened at the General Hospital 

under the government's wellness plan? One of the things that's 

been brought to my attention was that the government had a 

number of I believe they're called interns working in the 

emergency section of the hospital. But because of budget 

cut-backs the government let the 10 interns go, that they did 

not . . . they graduated out of there and they did not refill the 

positions. 

 

And so the students of this province going through the medical 

system had 10 less job opportunities in this province. And there 

are 60 students who are moving through the medical schooling 

through the universities who are coming out now and should be 

going into the internship programs within the hospitals. Of 

those 60 students, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 50 of them have found 

jobs in Saskatchewan or in Canada. The other 10, Mr. Speaker, 

have not found those positions. And so what will happen to 

them? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those students will go to the 

United States. There they can continue their education; they 

can continue their internships. 

 

And when they graduate and receive their degree as a medical 

doctor, will they return to Saskatchewan? I would suggest not, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would suggest that once they leave this 

province, either to go to some other place in Canada or to go to 

the United States, they will not be returning. We have invested 

in their futures; we have invested in their educations, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And because of the actions of the Minister of 

Health, we will not be getting the benefits of that investment. 

Others will get the benefit but we 

will not. 

 

And this is happening at a time when our rural hospitals are 

crying out for doctors. They're crying out for our students, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to stay in this province and provide medical 

services in rural Saskatchewan. The lack of doctors in rural 

Saskatchewan has been a great problem for quite a number of 

years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for a variety of reasons. But the 

actions of the Minister of Health does not aid in that. 

 

When the government proposed this new legislation, they went 

around the province and said, this will not affect property 

taxes; the cost of medicine in this province will not be imposed 

on the property taxpayer of this province. 

 

Well somehow or another that doesn't seem to be the case. 

Presently under The Union Hospital Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the taxpayers of this province provide about $23 million in 

support of hospitals. They do this through the levies requested 

by the union hospitals, of the rural municipalities and the urban 

municipalities. The union hospital district asks for a levy from 

those municipalities and the municipalities have agreed to pay. 

 

But under this Union Hospital Act, once the Minister of Health 

brings in her new wellness model, there will be regional health 

districts, not union hospitals. And so The Union Hospital Act 

will no longer apply. 

 

So what is the government proposing? Well they've said they're 

not going to put any extra taxes on the property tax base. 

They're not going to be taxing property taxes under this 

wellness model. Well indeed under the Bill there is no 

provision for taxation. But there is The Hospital Revenue (tax) 

Act. And, Mr. Speaker, that will be the vehicle with which the 

government taxes property owners of this province to pay for 

their cut-backs in health care. 

 

That levy under The Hospital Revenue Act is currently at 2 

mills. The reason The Hospital Revenue Act was set up was to 

bring in those areas of the province, those municipalities, those 

villages, that may not have been part of a union hospital 

district. Under the union hospital district they were assessed 

levies by the union hospital district. If they weren't in the union 

hospital district, they were not providing any funds towards the 

hospitals in their areas, in their communities. 

 

So the government felt that that was unfair and that they should 

pay a portion; therefore The Hospital Revenue (tax) Act. And it 

was designed to supplement The Union Hospital Act, not to be 

a taxation method on property taxes across this province. But 

that is how this government will use it. 

 

They can set by order in council the tax rate, whatever they 

may wish to set it at. And we have seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that in taxes this government knows only one direction and that 

is up -- from 7 to 8 per cent on the provincial sales tax; this past 

budget from 8 to 9 per cent on the provincial sales tax. Only 

one 



March 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 653 

direction, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is up. And that will be 

the direction that their Hospital Revenue Act, tax Act takes will 

be to ever increase the mill rate to provide funds for the 

regional hospitals. 

 

The government has also said that those hospitals in the 

communities that are already in place to which they have cut 

funding, if the community wishes to they can levy themselves a 

tax and supply funds to support the hospital. 

 

Well in some communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that will 

probably happen. Some communities will value their hospital 

enough to be willing to pay extra for it. And some of those 

communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will be able to afford to do 

so. But other communities will not be able to afford the extra 

taxation levels that would be imposed upon them by such a 

decision. 

 

So in the end, what do we end up with, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

We end up with a two-tiered hospital system within this 

province, two-tiered -- one for those that can afford to pay, and 

one for everybody else. And this is from the government that 

claims to champion the rights of the poor and the 

underprivileged. 

 

This government does not care about the poor and the 

underprivileged. They only care about their budget. If they did 

care about the poor and the underprivileged and the ill and the 

lame in this province they would not be bringing forward this 

health care Bill. They would be supporting health care in this 

province, not destroying it. 

 

An example of how the health care system as designed by the 

Minister of Health will work in this province can be seen in 

what is happening up at Prince Albert. There were two 

hospitals within that community -- Victoria Union and the Holy 

Family Hospital. 

 

Well once the district health board was put in place, they did a 

review of the system and they considered a number of options. 

And one of those was to turn the Victoria Union Hospital into a 

single acute care facility and make the Holy Family Hospital a 

long-term care centre. Another was to make the Holy Family 

the acute care facility and make the Victoria Union a long-term 

care. Or else to split up the services between each hospital and 

to focus medicine and surgery and intensive care, psychiatry, 

and emergency services at Victoria Union, with obstetrics, 

pediatrics, and long-term care at Holy Family. 

 

And so what was the result of this study? Mr. Speaker, the 

result was that they took option one. They made Victoria Union 

into the single acute-care facility and Holy Family into the 

long-term care facility. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that may work very well in Prince Albert, 

because Prince Albert had two hospitals. They now have one, 

but they did have two. But what do you do in towns like 

Beechy that only has one hospital? What do you do in towns 

like Redvers and Arcola which only have one hospital? 

 

If you close one of them, there is no hospital. Whereas 

the people in Prince Albert are still only minutes away from 

their hospital, in a good portion of rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the people of this province will be hours away 

from a hospital -- not minutes. 

 

We've also seen how the government, through their district 

health boards, cut funding to the Wascana Rehab Centre; 

eliminated the pediatric ward there. It was only because of the 

intervention of the parents and the official opposition that a 

number of those beds were returned to that facility. 

 

Well those beds were returned to that facility, but the money 

was still cut from the system by the Minister of Health. And so 

that just means that there's going to be cuts to somebody else 

within the system, not that those beds were returned and being 

paid for. 

 

The next constituency west of mine, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

Weyburn. And in Weyburn the Souris Valley Regional Care 

Centre has had a major cut in its funding. The government told 

this centre that they were going to be getting a 12 per cent cut 

in funding. But when they got all the numbers and worked 

them all through and looked after their employees, Mr. 

Speaker, what it amounted to was 20 per cent less money for 

the operations of that hospital. Not 12, but 20 per cent less. 

 

What this means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that they will be 

eliminating staff. At least 50 to 55 people will be released from 

that centre, will be fired, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And when these people are fired, they will receive a severance 

package. And that is part of the discrepancy in the numbers. It's 

applying that severance package to those health care workers 

which will be fired, which if they wish to continue to work in 

the health care services are going to have to leave this 

province. And again that erodes our tax base. 

 

And rumour has it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that within five years 

the Souris Valley Regional Care Centre will no longer exist. 

Will no longer exist. What happens to the community of 

Weyburn if all 400 people who are employed at this centre lose 

their jobs? Well you'll be able to buy a cheap house there. But 

if you're trying to sell your house, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's 

certainly not going to be a very enticing market. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Health knows that this 

Bill is vehemently opposed, not only by the residents of 

Saskatchewan but also by the health care providers affected -- 

such as the people at the Souris Valley Centre. They're opposed 

to what is happening here. Two health care unions -- CUPE 

(Canadian Union of Public Employees) and I believe the other 

one was SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees' 

Union) -- two unions in the Weyburn area went public with 

their distrust of the NDP health plan. 

 

These were former sympathizers of the NDP Party who are 

now publicly opposing the government and 



654 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1993 

their plan. These people no longer trust the NDP, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because the government has betrayed them. It has 

betrayed those that they asked to walk the picket lines. 

 

Just go outside the door, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and ask the 

people who are out there today, that are walking the picket 

lines for the SGEU, what they think of this government and its 

actions. Mr. Deputy Speaker, ask those who attended question 

period here a few days ago and whose response to the Premier's 

questions were, where is your concern for workers today, Mr. 

Premier? That's what they said. They had concerns and they 

felt that the Premier of this province was not concerned about 

them and their welfare. He was concerned about the Minister of 

Finance's budget but not about the people of this province. 

 

(1230) 

 

In the last session the official opposition was provided with a 

copy of the NDP government's new health care proposals. It 

was our first glance at the NDP government plan, a plan to 

offload not only the responsibilities of health care onto boards, 

but a plan that would also offload the costs of health care 

system onto the taxpayers, onto the backs of the property 

taxpayers of this province. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we've 

seen, these boards will have their work cut out for them. We 

have new health boards in Prince Albert and Saskatoon and 

Regina and we've seen evidence of their work. Already they're 

starting to close hospitals and close wings. 

 

Every time there is a controversial matter to handle, the 

minister passes it off. Time and time again we hear the minister 

claim that she is not responsible for the board's actions. The 

minister is not responsible for her department, it seems. Is it 

safe to assume that once all the health care districts are formed, 

that the Minister of Health, who no longer has any 

responsibilities for health in this province, will step down, that 

we will no longer need a Minister of Health within this 

province? She won't be responsible for anything, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker; she may as well step down. 

 

And her cabinet colleagues, they are also disavowing any 

responsibilities for their department, such as the Minister of 

Education. Perhaps they should all step down and save this 

province about $9 million. That'll help keep a few of the 

hospitals open. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new boards in Prince Albert and Saskatoon 

and Regina were all appointed by the Minister of Health. She 

refused to listen to the opposition when we suggested that these 

boards be elected. She wouldn't even listen to some of her own 

back-benchers. 

 

It's funny that months after the opposition demanded the health 

boards be elected, that the member for Regina Victoria agreed. 

It's funny how it took . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order. The member should be careful 

not to involve the Chair in any way in the debate. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Can I have a point of clarification, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, about clippings? 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members from the opposition 

. . . from the government side of the House have disagreed with 

what the Minister of Health is doing. It has been reported in the 

newspapers that the Regina Health Board . . . and I'll just read 

you the quote: 

 

 The Regina Health Board has done a poor job of 

communicating to the public about the changes it has made 

to the city's health-care system so far. 

 

And this was made by one of the members opposite, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. This was made by one of the government 

members. He went on to say: 

 

 "It's frustrating for me, not only as a member of the 

legislature, but also as a resident of Regina, to see the way 

health-care decisions are being made by the Regina Health 

Board," . . . 

 

And I would agree with him on that. It is frustrating to see the 

way that they're doing that. Just take a look at what happened at 

the Wascana Rehab Centre. A wing of pediatric care was 

closed with no consultation with the parents. The parents 

themselves had to come in to have a meeting to discuss the 

situation. They approached the official opposition and we 

brought forward their case in this Assembly. And only then, 

when the parents were up in the galleries, and the official 

opposition was asking questions, did the Minister of Health 

relent, did the Regina Health Board relent, and continue to 

provide that service in this city which was not available 

anywhere else in southern Saskatchewan. Only then were they 

willing to relent. 

 

The member of the government went on to say that: 

 

 The board, a six-member panel appointed last year by the 

provincial government, governs Regina's hospitals . . . 

 

The minister appointed them. They're not representatives 

elected by the people of Regina. They're not representatives 

elected from some other jurisdiction within Saskatchewan. 

They're appointed by the government -- hand-picked 

appointments by the Minister of Health to make the decisions 

she wants to get done within the health care system, to make 

the decisions she wants made within the district health boards. 

 

It doesn't matter what the people in Regina want. It only 

matters what the Minister of Health wants. And she gets what 

she wants by hand-picking her appointments to the regional 

health boards. 

 

This health board, Regina Health Board, the hand-picked 

members by the Minister of Health were involved in another 

controversy in this city in 



March 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 655 

December, when that board made the decision to remove the 

Victorian Order of Nurses from home care. The people of 

Regina were happy with the Victorian Order of Nurses and the 

job they were doing within this city. But it wasn't good enough 

for the Minister of Health and her regional health board. 

 

And one has to sit back and wonder, why is this the case. If the 

Victorian Order of Nurses was providing good service, if they 

were providing efficient service . . . And the fact is they 

provided their own administration costs; they raised their own 

monies -- I believe it was 175,000 or $195,000 a year -- to 

provide their own administrative costs, at no cost to the 

government. They were providing these services that the 

people wanted and needed and liked. Why eliminate them? 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one can speculate. One can 

speculate after seeing what has happened in Prince Albert with 

the closure of one of the hospitals there, that perhaps one of the 

hospitals in Regina is also slated for closure. 

 

Well when the Victorian Order of Nurses was eliminated from 

the home care providers in this city, the home care board hired 

their own nurses. So what did they do? They turned around and 

they hired the nurses who were working with the Victorian 

Order of Nurses. So in most cases the nurses themselves 

continued to have employment, but now they're employees of 

the Regina Health Board and home care. They're now within 

the union structures within the hospitals. 

 

If one of the hospitals in Regina were to close, all of a sudden 

you would have a large number of nurses from that facility who 

would become unemployed. But you have approximately 60 

positions within home care of new people within the union 

structure. That would allow the nurses from the closed facility 

within Regina to bump those nurses from their positions. 

 

Is the move to remove the Victorian Order of Nurses from 

home care in this city simply a move to allow the unions to 

bump from a closed hospital in this city into those jobs and 

therefore depriving those nurses of the jobs that they have had, 

in some cases, for a good many years? But because they had to 

transfer from the Victorian Order of Nurses to home care 

board, they are now junior to the nurses which would be 

available from a closed facility within the city. 

 

The member from Regina who's quoted in this Leader-Post of 

January 20, 1993, went on to talk about the appointments and 

the election of the people to the health care boards. And he felt 

that they should be elected, and I would agree with that. 

 

The people on any district health care board should be elected 

by the people they represent. They should be elected by the 

people they represent from the beginning of the regional health 

board's amalgamation. It shouldn't be done down the road a 

year or two after all the hacking and slashing has been done. It 

should be done at the beginning and they 

should be given the power. If this Bill is to go through, they 

should be given the power to make those decisions within their 

district. 

 

And those decisions that they may make should be able to 

include funding. They have a current budget within those 

districts, within those hospitals, and that funding should be 

continued. They shouldn't simply be put into a position of 

saying, well the Minister of Health has cut half of your budget 

so you make the decisions as to what you're going to do here. 

That's not democracy. That's just simply imposing your will on 

them. The people need to be elected. 

 

One concern that I have heard is that with the regional hospitals 

within the cities that also have a large number of people 

coming in from rural Saskatchewan for their medical care, that 

if you don't . . . if you just simply have elections then there is 

no representation on the hospitals in the city for rural people. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that can be accommodated 

also. Members could be elected from the district health boards 

in rural Saskatchewan to sit on a regional hospital board. 

There's no reason why they have to be appointed. They could 

be elected from the people that are already . . . have been 

elected once within their areas. They could choose from 

amongst their own members someone to sit on a regional 

health care board. 

 

And that is democracy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What the Minister 

of Health proposes has nothing to do with democracy. It simply 

has to do with her imposing her will on this province. 

 

I'd like to quote another gentleman that's also quoted in this 

piece, Mr. Earl Longworth, who said: 

 

 by concentrating only on cuts and revenue increases, the 

government was courting disaster. 

 

 "I don't think either one of those alternatives are gong to do 

anything," Longworth said. "We've got to get people 

working again right now. We're losing 4,000 (residents) 

from Saskatchewan every year, and every year you're 

asking for more money from fewer people. 

 

 Longworth said the government appears to be operating 

without a plan on both economic development and health 

care. 

 

And he's right. This government does not have an economic 

plan, and their plan for health care is simply the destruction of 

the system as we have known it in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP caucus must have fought long 

and hard over the election and appointment of board members 

because Bill 3 now includes that a portion of the board be 

elected. Unfortunately, it does not go far enough, Mr. Speaker. 

The government opposite has talked of democratic 



656 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1993 

reform. Well perhaps to them democratic reform means that 

you eliminate elections and you simply appoint people. That 

seems to be the policy of the federal Liberal Party. In fact a 

suggestion that came out of Saskatoon in the paper the other 

day was that a party simply pick its leader and that leader will 

pick his government, that you'd only need one election. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that is not democratic reform. Democratic 

reform is letting the people affected have a say and a vote, a 

secret ballot where they express their opinions and their 

desires. Appointments are not democratic. 

 

The minister does not tell us what the district boundaries will 

be. The Minister of Health maintains that it is up to the 

communities to work cooperatively, to work together in 

determining the districts. She claims it is up to communities to 

join whatever district they want. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in my own constituency here earlier this 

week, there was a meeting of a number of the health service 

people. And they met with a Mr. Rus Duncombe from the 

minister's department. This meeting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, did 

not go off all that well because the people in the area had just 

heard that their hospitals would be limited to a 1.25 to 1.5 beds 

per thousand people. And that meant the elimination of a good 

number of facilities and a good number of beds in their area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's that kind of a decision that creates the conflict 

-- not the cooperation that the minister talks about, but conflict 

between communities. Because which community is going to 

be the one to close? Which community is going to volunteer to 

have their facilities closed? Or which community is going to be 

ordered by the appointed health boards to have their 

community hospital closed? Mr. Speaker, none of these 

communities are prepared to accept having their hospital 

closed. They don't want to be forced into a district. These 

communities want to have time to look at the situation, to study 

it, and to make up their own mind on how these health districts 

should be structured if they're forced into one. 

 

There's been a number of meetings around my area by the local 

concerned citizens in the formation of a health care district. 

And the government has sent people out. They've sent 

department people out from Weyburn to these meetings. Not 

once in a good number of meetings has the Minister of Health 

been out to one of these meetings. Not once has one of the 

NDP back-benchers been out to one of these meetings. 

 

No, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government is hiding. They don't 

want to have their neck on the line out there. They send some 

poor bureaucrat out to try and defend what's going on. 

 

(1245) 

 

But when they send a bureaucrat out, do they give him the 

information? Not a chance. They don't tell him 

anything. Or if they do give him some information, there's no 

truth to it. They come out and all they can say is: sorry, we 

don't know; sorry, that hasn't been decided; sorry, the minister 

hasn't told us yet. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister is asking the people of 

Saskatchewan to make up their mind and she's not giving the 

information with which to do that. This Minister of Health is 

simply hiding behind her oak doors and avoiding the public 

while imposing her decisions on them. 

 

The minister claims that she has consulted extensively on the 

NDP wellness model and the NDP health district proposals. 

Well I don't know who she's consulted with, Mr. Speaker, 

because I don't know of anybody in my community that's been 

consulted with. The people from the department come out and 

have no answers. They have no information. So how do you 

call that consultation? I'm sure that they have got their earful a 

number of times. 

 

And fact is, one of my local reeves, when asking about funding 

and the department person kept saying they didn't know; they 

didn't know what kind of tax structures were going to be 

imposed; they didn't know where the funding was going to 

come from, pulled down his glasses and looked over the top of 

them and asked the department person: what do you think, 

money grows on trees? 

 

And that's what they're concerned about. Where is the money 

going to come from and who is going to pay it? Because the 

property tax people in the municipalities, in the villages and 

towns of this province cannot afford to support the health care 

system that is being cut by this minister. 

 

We now have Bill 3 and if the communities do not form 

districts shortly after this legislation is passed, the Department 

of Health will designate districts. The minister has said she is 

going to give them ample time to get together, to cooperate, 

and to form health care districts. And I guess the Minister of 

Health has defined to the province of Saskatchewan what 

ample means because from the time of that statement, ample 

time means August 17, 1993. 

 

Now it doesn't matter whether or not the people in the 

communities have had the opportunities to get together and to 

make a decision amongst themselves because the minister has 

defined ample as ending on August 17. Mr. Speaker, that is not 

right. The people of this province need the time to sit down and 

work this through, with information -- not with this information 

but with the truth and with the real information. 

 

Madam Minister, if you and your officials have already 

established these districts, these outlines, if you know what the 

districts will look like, please share them with the people of 

Saskatchewan. Let us know what you are thinking we should 

have to have imposed on us. The people of Saskatchewan need 

to know what the government's ideas are. And perhaps the 

statement by Mr. Longworth is indeed correct, that this 

government does not have a plan for health care. 



March 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 657 

The minister should tell the communities which direction she 

thinks they should go, and then consult with them. Let them 

know what she has in mind and see what they think about it, 

not the other way around. Give them half the . . . give them 

none of the information, ask them to come up with some ideas 

and some suggestions, and then tell them what you're going to 

do. That's wrong, Mr. Deputy Speaker. She should show them 

the proposed districts and then go out and consult. 

 

Madam Minister, you know where you want these districts to 

go, so come clean and tell us now. You must know or it 

wouldn't be within the department's ability to make these 

assignments. The department isn't making these decisions; it's 

coming from the Minister of Health when she assigns where 

these boundary cut-offs will be. 

 

Assure the communities that the NDP government will work 

with them, not against them. Assure rural Saskatchewan, 

Madam Minister, but this time keep your word. 

 

Regional meetings . . . at these regional meetings that have 

come out, it's just been the department flunkies, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that have come out there and they have not provided 

any answers. And it should be up to the minister and her 

back-benchers and her cabinet colleagues to come out and 

explain her plan to rural Saskatchewan, not simply impose a 

plan that no one knows about. 

 

The NDP have always claimed to be the only political party 

that could save health care in Saskatchewan. They have always 

claimed that they would restore health programing and that 

they would increase funding. Well we all remember the NDP 

demands for more money, more money for health care. I 

remember back to I believe it was the 1987 or '88 by-election 

in Gravelbourg, where the members opposite spread the 

rumours that if you elect a Tory, they'll close your hospital. 

There will be no hospitals left in this constituency. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that was not the case. And the people of 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg did elect a Tory. 

 

But this time what's going to happen? This time their hospitals 

are indeed in trouble. Some of their hospitals will indeed close 

if the Minister of Health gets to go ahead with her plans. When 

in opposition the members opposite demanded more money for 

education, more money for SGEU employees, more money for 

hospital beds, no more waiting-lists. No more waiting-lists. 

 

One of my neighbours, about three weeks ago, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, suffered a collapsed lung. He needed an operation to 

repair it. He stayed in the general hospital for approximately 

two weeks before he could get a bed to get his operation done 

-- two weeks with a collapsed lung. And this is an improved 

health care system. 

 

The member from Regina Hillsdale even said people were 

dying on waiting-lists for surgery and that her 

party would fix this when they formed government. Well 

they've certainly fixed it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because now the 

people will simply go there and die and not have to worry 

about surgery. 

 

Well there's been no more money for health, no more money 

for education, no more money for SGEU employees, no more 

hospital beds. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are still long 

waiting-lists -- long, long, waiting-lists. No one has died, but 

then that accusation wasn't accurate when the Minister of 

Health made it either. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP mediscare tactics were employed each 

and every time the previous administration tried to improve or 

modify the health care system. They always said every time 

something was done in health care that the previous 

government was destroying the health care system. 

 

I'd like to refresh the member from Regina Hillsdale's memory 

on this, and I'll quote: 

 

 The opposition is going to fight these (health care) cut-backs 

and these changes to medicare. It's going to fight the 

erosion of the principles of medicare . . . I feel rather 

certain we'll be having a change of government next time 

around and then the public isn't going to have to worry 

about these problems. 

 

The Minister of Health, from Hansard, August 21, 1989. 

 

Well now she is the Minister of Health, and what has she done 

to resolve these worries that the principles of medicare are 

being eroded? She continues to cut. That is what the minister 

. . . the member from Hillsdale thought and meant. She was 

simply saying it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to get elected, not 

because she had any real concern for the health care system of 

this province. This is just another example of the hypocrisy, the 

NDP's hypocrisy in regard to health care. 

 

I would like to throw some of the NDP Health minister's 

comments back at her because they certainly apply here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And I'll quote again, from the Leader-Post of 

April 19, 1991: "Why should the sick and elderly carry the 

burden of your incompetence?" 

 

Indeed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why should the sick and the 

elderly carry the burden of the Minister of Health's 

incompetence? I ask that member the very same thing. Why, 

indeed, should they have to? After all, it is that government that 

eliminated the seniors' heritage fund, took it right away from 

them, eliminated the seniors' heritage fund, took that little bit of 

money away from them, at the same time you started charging 

user fees on chiropractic and optometric services. They started 

charging user fees at the same time that they reduced the health 

care funding. 

 

They also announced last year the elimination of fundings to 

level 1 and 2 care homes. Home care was 



658 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 1993 

to pick up the slack. But for those people that did not have 

homes, what were they to do? If the facility is closed and you 

don't have a home, home care isn't going to do you a lot of 

good. 

 

And their increase in the funding to home care was not 

anywheres near enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to cover the 

additional costs that the government was downloading onto the 

home care system by eliminating level 1 and 2 care. 

 

They reduced the funding to health care. Considering the 

following quote from the Leader-Post of March 26, 1991. 

 

 NDP health critic . . . (the member from Hillsdale) 

immediately accused the government of eroding the health 

care system by starving it of money. 

 

Well if the previous government was starving the health care 

system by giving 2 and 3 per cent increases, what does it mean 

when you give it a 3 per cent cut? Are you simply killing it, or 

are you slowly starving it to death? Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

would suggest that you are more than slowly starving it to 

death, you are outright killing the system. 

 

Or this quote from the Minister of Health, from the 

Leader-Post November 20, 1991. 

 

 The Conservatives cut back on public health nurses, 

provided stingy increases for home care and slashed 

programs. 

 

Stingy increases. I wonder what kind of words the Minister of 

Health would use for a government that cut 3 per cent. Stingy 

hardly seems appropriate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Stingy is a 

word that was used with increase, but certainly not with 

decreases. 

 

It sounds like the opposition has felt that health care was 

deserving more money. While in opposition, that's what the 

NDP said. Health care deserved more money across the board. 

That we needed more and better services. But all of a sudden, 

on October 21, 1991, that care and concern ended. There no 

longer was a need for more money in health care. There was no 

longer a need for compassion. There was no longer a need for 

home care, for level 1 and 2 care in this province. 

 

All that changed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on October 21, 1991. 

While the members were in opposition, they were demanding 

more money. But that ended. That ended on October 21, 1991. 

The previous administration did provide that more money. 

They did build the nursing homes. They built the hospitals. 

 

And the member for Turtleford was complaining in his speech 

that the government did indeed do those things. That they had 

built level 1 and 2 care facilities, level 3 and 4 care. They had 

built hospitals. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when people are sick, they want to 

have a facility to go to. When a mother is 

giving birth, she doesn't want to have to do that on the 

sidewalk. She doesn't want to have to do it in the back of a 

vehicle rushing to a hospital a hundred miles down the road. 

She wants to do that in her own community. She wants to do 

that with the people she knows, with her own doctor, not 

somebody in a big city some place that she doesn't know. 

 

And that is the kind of health care system that the members 

opposite are proposing. A health care system that takes people 

out of their home communities, that takes people out of their 

own area, that forces people into large, impersonal facilities, 

institutions, without a friendly face -- that is what the Minister 

of Health envisions as a wellness model in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it isn't fair on the member from Riversdale. She 

wasn't the only NDP member that demanded more money. 

They were all guilty, each and every one of them. The member 

from The Battlefords is guilty. The member from Saskatoon 

Broadway is guilty. The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, 

now the Associate Minister of Health, is guilty. The member 

from Moose Jaw Palliser, the member from Regina 

Elphinstone, the member from Regina Rosemont, and the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale -- they are all guilty. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- It being 1 p.m., this House stands 

adjourned until Monday at 2 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 

 


