




















































Hansard: June 04, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2221 

 June 4, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Clerk: -- I have to inform the House that Mr. Speaker will not 

be present to open today's sitting. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  This 

morning, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm pleased to present petitions 

on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens, and I'll read the prayer on 

the petition: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangement. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this morning I have a great number of 

petitions to present.  They're from Saskatchewan communities 

such as Stalwart, Liberty, Young, Watrous, Stoughton, Carlyle, 

Forget, Heward, Stoughton, Fillmore, Creelman, Moosomin, 

Rocanville, Fairlight, all over the south-east and east side of the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I so present. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I too have 

petitions today to lay upon the Table.  I will read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have hundreds of petitioners here who 

have signed.  Many, many pages of them are from Regina.  

There's some from Biggar, Hoosier, Smiley, Craven, Chaplin, 

Yorkton, Maymont, Radisson, and indeed, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, from all over the province here.  And it is my pleasure 

to present these to the Assembly at this time. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too wish to table 

some petitions today.  And I will just read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever 

pray. 

 

And these people are from the Saskatoon area, Dalmeny, across 

several communities and parts of Regina, various kinds of 

places in the two major cities of Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It's a 

pleasure for me this morning also to present petitions on behalf 

of people of the province of Saskatchewan.  And as the 

Speaker's request, I'll just read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements; 

 

 That the NDP government of the province of Saskatchewan 

intends to table legislation that unilaterally changes the 

provisions of the agreement relating to the corporate 

governance of NewGrade Energy Inc. and the financing of 

cash flow deficiencies that NewGrade may experience; 

 

 And that the NDP government's intention to unilaterally 

change legally binding agreements regarding NewGrade 

Energy Inc. represents a threat to democracy in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are from, mostly from Canora.  This 

page is all Canora; this page is Canora.  And this page is some 

Canora and Yorkton and the surrounding areas of Yorkton and 

Canora, it looks to me . . . and there's Buchanan and Canora on 

this page.  And it's a pleasure to table these petitions.  Thank 

you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have petitions this 

morning to present on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan 

from the Cupar area of Saskatchewan.  There's also from 

Canora and Norquay and some other towns up in that area, it 

looks like.  So I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And I will table them now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I also 

have petitions to present today.  The prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that 



2222 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1993 

your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation 

introduced to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate 

governance and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, come from 

Gainsborough, the furthest south and east town in 

Saskatchewan, and from the city of Saskatoon.  I would present 

these now. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as well it's 

my pleasure to present a number of petitions to the floor of the 

Assembly and reading the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petitions I am presenting to the floor are 

signed by individuals from Moosomin, Rocanville, Fleming 

area, a number from Maryfield and Fairlight and Wapella, Mr. 

Speaker, Rocanville area and a number as well from right 

across, all across the city of Regina.  I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province humbly praying that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

And: 

 

 Of citizens of the province humbly praying that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to show its overwhelming support 

in efforts to save the Termuende Research Farm of Lanigan. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

It's my privilege and pleasure today to introduce to you and 

through you to the other members of the Assembly 60 grade 6 

to 8 students from Endeavour in the east gallery.  That's a 

school in my riding. 

 

With them there are teachers Dennis Thiessen and Don 

Chorneyko.  Chaperons are Orest Belesky, Kathy Mills, Gerald 

Klein, Janet Roelens, Margaret Steppan, and the bus driver is 

Neil Fenske. 

And I'll be meeting these people later on for drinks and would 

appreciate the Assembly would welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

very pleased to introduce to you and through you to my 

colleagues in the legislature, on behalf of my colleague, the 

member from Swift Current, 42 grade 4 and 5 students from 

Dickson School. 

 

They are accompanied by their teachers and chaperons, Mr. 

Mah, Mr. Phillips, Mrs. Redekopp, Mrs. Schultz, and Mrs. 

Peters. 

 

I hope that they have enjoyed their stay in Regina so far and I 

look forward to meeting with them after question period for a 

photo and discussion.  And I would ask all members here to 

join me in welcoming them here this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

SGI Contracts on Glass Repair 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  My 

question is to the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance). 

 

Mr. Minister, back in March you cooked up a deal with the 

Glass Dealers Association of Saskatchewan that effectively 

amounted to price fixing for auto glass repair.  And when I 

questioned you about it at that time, Mr. Minister, you refused 

to answer. 

 

You refused to tell us why such a deal was negotiated with this 

hand-picked group.  You refused to tell us how many glass 

dealers they represented.  You refused to elaborate on the terms 

of the arrangement.  Mr. Minister, today it is apparent why you 

refused to answer these questions.  Mr. Minister, can you 

confirm that the criminal matters branch of Consumer and 

Corporate Affairs Canada has determined the arrangement you 

made with the glass dealers association to be illegal 

price-fixing and can you confirm that SGI adjusters who 

enforce this agreement may be subject to criminal prosecution? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 

minister responsible, I'll take notice and bring back an answer 

to the member at the first opportunity. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, will you also take 

notice of the fact that a letter has been sent out to all SGI 

offices in the province and that it says, and I quote: 

 

 It appears that those glass repair shops that have not signed 

the agreement on Glass Replacement and Repair Pricing 

Policy with SGI are being singled out in your branch . . . 



June 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2223 

And I further quote: 

 

 I have checked with the Criminal Matters Branch of 

Consumer and Corporate Affairs Bureau of Competition 

Policy and it is my understanding that you, the adjuster, can 

be charged under the Competition Act and those charges are 

criminal in nature. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, while you're taking notice, is it not your 

agreement is itself illegal because you're forcing the SGI 

adjusters, your own employees, to break the law by enforcing 

this agreement?  While you're taking notice, Mr. Minister, will 

you address this very serious issue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'll take notice 

of the exaggerated question and bring back a reasonable 

response. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, you may think it's 

exaggerated, but when these adjusters face criminal actions, I'm 

sure that they will think your actions are very unreasonable.  

Because when you first signed this illegal price-fixing 

agreement with your hand-picked industry group, you forced 

every dealer in the province to sign this illegal agreement for 

fear of you driving them out of business.  And now you're 

forcing your own employees to break the law and subjecting 

themselves to criminal prosecutions if they enforce your illegal 

agreement.  The letter that we have received, Mr. Minister, 

says: 

 

 If you are directing customers only to businesses which are 

on the list of shops supplied by your upper management, I 

would strongly suggest you now stop and avoid possible 

prosecution. 

 

Mr. Minister, this says that if adjusters continue to follow the 

direction of upper management, they will face criminal 

prosecutions.  You are forcing your own employees to go out 

and break the law.  Mr. Minister, what steps are you prepared 

to take to stop this? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- As I have indicated with the 

member opposite, when I bring back a response we will deal 

with the whole issue, so I'll take notice of this question as well. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, as we have seen with 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) legislation, you're 

very good at breaking contracts.  As we have seen with the 

NewGrade arrangements, you are very good at breaking 

contracts.  Will you undertake today to tear up this illegal 

contract and quit forcing your employees to break the law, Mr. 

Minister? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

I'll take notice of that question as well. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I would also 

ask you, what should these adjusters do?  If they follow your 

directions and enforce this illegal agreement, they are breaking 

the law.  Are you telling your adjusters, Mr. Minister, that they 

should continue to enforce this agreement and expose 

themselves to criminal investigations while you're taking 

notice? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Absolutely, I will take notice of this 

question as well. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, you're forcing the auto 

glass dealers to sign an illegal arrangement.  You've told them 

how much they should charge.  You've told them if they refuse 

to sign the agreement, SGI would no longer do business with 

them, which for most would result in the end of their 

businesses. 

 

Mr. Minister, the reason you are doing this is to artificially 

inflate windshield replacement prices to force most 

Saskatchewan drivers to take out more insurance.  You also are 

no longer allowing glass shops to waive the deductible amount 

in the hope that there will be less claims. 

 

Mr. Minister, plain and simple, you have entered into an illegal 

agreement designed to rip off the people of Saskatchewan.  

You are forcing your own employees to break the law by going 

out and enforcing this agreement. 

 

Mr. Minister, how do you justify those actions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's a little 

unusual to go through this long litany of questions when I have 

already taken notice of the question in principle.  I mean we 

can continue to spend the whole question period doing this, but 

I will take notice of this question as well and bring back a 

response at an early opportunity. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, what you're simply doing 

is allowing this agreement to carry on without making the 

proper adjustments that need to be made and the elimination of 

this agreement.  Because you've conspired with a small group 

of glass shops to illegally fix the prices in this province and to 

gouge Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

You've made an illegal agreement to eliminate price 

competition and competition on the basis of discounting 

deductibles.  Most glass dealers did not want to sign this illegal 

price-fixing agreement but you coerced them into it for fear of 

losing their businesses.  You're now forcing your own adjusters 

to break the law each and every time they enforce this illegal 

arrangement. 



2224 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1993 

Can you force both the glass dealers and your own adjusters to 

break the law, to price fix and to gouge the Saskatchewan 

drivers? That's what you're doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- I would ask that the minister and the 

government take full responsibility for this illegal arrangement, 

one that Consumer and Corporate Affairs has deemed to be 

illegal.  We would ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the minister 

resign because of this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as the rhetoric and 

exaggeration continues to increase, by the end of question 

period this is going to be quite a debate that's going on here.  

But I'll take notice of this as well. 

 

Co-op Upgrader Legislation 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  My 

question this morning is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, time after 

time you've tried to defend your heavy-handed upgrader 

legislation by citing the words of Mr. Justice Estey.  We're 

wondering this morning, Mr. Premier, if you're prepared to 

indeed follow the words of Mr. Justice Estey where he says in 

the media today that you should negotiate, not legislate. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Premier, are you prepared to back off on your 

legislation this morning and follow the words of the most 

eminent Supreme Court Justice, Mr. Justice Estey, in his advice 

to you.  Are you willing to do that, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the position of the 

government has been throughout this sorry saga to get a 

negotiated settlement, one which is fair to FCL (Federated 

Co-operatives Ltd.), one which is fair to the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan, one which allows the upgrader to function and 

to work on a commercial basis.  We have said so time and time 

again.  The member knows opposite -- I've said so in the House 

and it's in the press, and the record will show.  I've indicated to 

the president of FCL.  I hereby repeat again my intention and 

willingness to meet with him or his officers at any time to 

pursue a settlement. 

 

Unfortunately this has not been the response by FCL, and as a 

consequence there's not much more that I can do except to 

proceed with legislation to protect the taxpayers' interests. 

 

But I would say before I take my place, since the hon. member 

opposite is quoting Estey so favourably on this issue, would he 

be kind enough to go one step further and tell the House 

whether he'll quote Estey and say that his party agrees with the 

main principles of recommending the settlement based on 

Estey. Because we are prepared to do so.  Are you prepared to 

buy the principles of Estey?  Please tell us that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. 

Premier, that's almost beyond contempt.  I mean you ask me to 

go all the way with Estey?  And you this morning aren't 

prepared yourself to go all the way with Estey.  Estey is saying 

to you, negotiate.  This isn't the kind of thing you settle in a 

courtroom.  He says, negotiate; I was close to a deal. 

 

Mr. Premier, is the reason that Justice Estey was pulled off 

short of a deal was because it didn't fit with your political 

agenda?  Is that the reason Justice Estey was pulled off before 

he could come to a conclusion?  Is that why you yourself today 

will not go all the way with Justice Estey?  Is that the reason, 

Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, the lack of 

credibility of the official opposition is confirmed again by that 

question.  The member opposite knows full well that at the 

request of Mr. Justice Estey the government extended the time 

limit and his mandate in an attempt to mediate a settlement on 

one or two occasions.  If Justice Estey had asked us to extend it 

again, we probably would have done the same.  You cannot . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well yes, the answer's probably 

because he never did ask for an extension.  We extended it 

every time that he asked that it be extended.  So the assumption 

about pulling him off, in the words of the member opposite, is 

absolutely erroneous and totally incredible.  The result is that 

after six months he was not able to effect a settlement. 

 

Now I say to the opposition leader very simply this. This deal 

which is so bad that it needs revision, has a way out of it for 

everybody -- Justice Estey's recommendations.  That's what he 

recommends.  We accept those recommendations.  Do you and 

does the Liberal Party accept the principles of those 

recommendations as the basis for a settlement?  Because if you 

do and if FCL does, let's sit down right now and do it.  We'll 

get a deal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  My 

question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, Justice Estey says, we 

came extremely close to settling the issue.  The difficulty was a 

time limit. 

 

Mr. Premier, why was there a time limit when Justice Estey 

said, I am extremely close.  Why did you not want Justice 

Estey to prevent . . . why did you want to prevent him from 

finishing that agreement?  Why was it? 

 

Was it because your friend, Mr. Ching, couldn't exact his 

political revenge on FCL?  Was it because the Minister of 

Finance had some grudge from 10 years ago, with FCL?  Why, 

if Justice Estey is willing to go public today and say, I was 

extremely close but the time limit imposed upon me prevented 

an agreement from happening, why would you not have given 

that time limit?  Why would you desecrate this Legislative 

Assembly with legislation to take away the rights of 



June 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2225 

240,000 co-op members?  Why? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, if there has been 

desecration of this legislature, it has been because you, sir, and 

the former premier when you sat on this side of the House, 

entered into this unconscionable, unconscionable transaction in 

secret -- in secret -- 10 days before the provincial election in 

1986, and failed to table all of the documents.  That is where 

the desecration of this legislature took place, sir. 

 

Secondly, how dare you get up and drag Mr. Justice Estey into 

this argument about the question of having more time?  I have 

told the Leader of the Opposition, and I repeat again:  any time 

that Mr. Justice Estey wanted a time extension, we gave it to 

him.  He did not request the time extension in this instance, to 

the best of my knowledge.  The report was filed because he had 

run out of steam. 

 

I had attended meetings with FCL and the federal government, 

and FCL was not prepared to budge.  I was there.  Justice Estey 

knew it, and he knew he had to write the report because it had 

come to a logical conclusion. 

 

Now look here, admit that what you did was you saddled the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan with one of the biggest financial 

albatrosses that we have had, a mess that we've got to clean up.  

And if you're genuinely interested in the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan, tell us that you support the principles of Estey.  

Stop this cheap politicking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  My 

question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, I think if 240,000 

co-op members and taxpayers around this province have a 

choice between Mr. Justice Estey and you and your friends 

over at CIC, Mr. Ching and Mr. Dombowsky and Mr. Banda 

and all the rest that you've put in there, I think if they have a 

choice as to who is telling the straight goods on this issue, Mr. 

Premier, I think they'll side with Mr. Justice Estey. 

 

Mr. Justice Estey -- not I, sir -- says, I was very close; if I had 

had more time . . . Why wouldn't you have given the Justice 

more time if he was that close?  He must have communicated 

that to somebody.  Or don't your ministers, with their political 

grudges, tell you, Mr. Premier, that Mr. Justice Estey was 

close?  What's the answer, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The answer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

the answer which is obvious to everybody based on the report 

and the answers that I've given.  That is the answer. 

 

The Hon. Leader of the Opposition says that the people will 

take Estey over anybody else.  That's exactly why we appointed 

Estey.  That's why the FCL accepted Estey.  That's why Estey 

filed the mediation report recommending the solution.  He says 

that 

everybody is going to accept Mr. Justice Estey. 

 

All right, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, you support Estey.  

Will you accept the Estey report?  Tell us that you accept him 

and that you accept the principles of the negotiated settlement 

because we do.  Don't duck and weave and dodge and run away 

from this.  Don't shilly-shally.  You got the province in this 

mess.  For once have the guts and courage to tell the truth and 

tell the people, are you for Estey or against him.  Tell us that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  My 

question is to the Premier.  The problem, Mr. Premier, is the 

crass politics that you and your ministers indulge in all the time 

on this issue. 

 

The Minister of Justice stood in the legislature the other day on 

second reading and talked about a letter, a letter from FCL to 

Crown Management Board.  The Minister of Justice has the 

gall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to make like this letter had only been 

sent once, and in it that FCL was threatening to mothball the 

refinery and the upgrader.  Thirty-two times, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that letter has been sent to Crown Investments 

Corporation, and 32 times Crown Investments have sent back 

the same form letter. 

 

It was agreed to four years ago, yet this government has the 

audacity to stand in this legislature and use that letter as a scare 

tactic for their political reasons.  That is why, Mr. Premier, 

people don't believe you on this issue.  Your minister would 

succumb to that; no one believes you, Mr. Premier. 

 

Why don't you ask Justice Estey, who was so close, to come 

back and see if he can finish the job.  Because, Mr. Premier, the 

people don't believe you've got anybody capable of doing it.  

Why don't you do that today, Mr. Premier?  Bring Justice Estey 

back. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to 

consider the use of people who can assist in a negotiated 

settlement.  I repeat again, over and over again, and I want you 

to recognize . . . you may not accept it for political reasons, but 

I ask you just once to give us a little bit of credit here, as the 

Premier of the province of Saskatchewan.  Whether you accept 

my ideology or my policy is another issue, but for the time 

being I'm the Premier. 

 

I have said to the president of FCL, I'm ready to meet.  I've 

never seen the situation in the history of the province of 

Saskatchewan -- I'm sure it never happened when the former 

member, when he was the premier -- that when a Premier calls 

and says, let's meet, the person of whom he asks simply says, 

don't call me, I'll call you; and then never get a call. 

 

I repeat again, notwithstanding that slight . . . I don't take it on 

any personal basis.  I don't.  I've known Vern Leland for years.  

Vern Leland is still my friend; that's how I view him.  I've 

known him for years.  I do not accept that as a slight.  I say the 

offer stands.  I have not 



2226 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1993 

been able to get them to respond. 

 

Now the hon. member talks about the letter.  He says it's out 

there for 32 times or 32 months. 

 

Now just stop to think what you said.  Once a month for 32 

months FCL threatens the province and the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan of mothballing the letter . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Mutually agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- No.  Mutually agreed to -- we didn't 

sign the letter.  They gave the notice for 32 months.  You 

people should have taken the action to begin with.  Under that 

contract the only thing they had to do was give the deficiency 

notice.  They added in that letter the threat of mothballing it 

and throwing this FCL upgrader situation into economic 

circumstances.  And you know what you did?  You did 

nothing.  In fact when they told you to get rid of the 

negotiators, you did.  Shame on you for not telling the truth on 

that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Before we proceed any further, I want 

to ask the cooperation of the members to not interfere when 

members are answering questions.  When we ask a question, 

we should allow the ministers the courtesy of being able to 

make a response without hindrance. 

 

Complaints to the Ombudsman 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I find it 

incredible that the Premier would stand in his place today and 

on one hand reiterate one question and criticize my colleague 

for using Estey.  And then turn around at the end and all of a 

sudden turn around and flip-flop.  And you begin to wonder 

how can the people of Saskatchewan ever put any trust in this 

Premier any more.  I trust that as I question the Minister of 

Justice, the Minister of Justice will be a little more 

forthcoming. 

 

Mr. Minister, the provincial Ombudsman annual report was 

tabled in the House on Wednesday.  And it's interesting to note, 

in fact it's not surprising, that the number of complaints against 

the government has once again increased.  There are more than 

1,620 people who find themselves helpless against the 

government, people with nowhere to turn except to the 

provincial Ombudsman. 

 

Mr. Minister, when is your government going to start 

developing some government policy to decrease the number of 

people who are forced to go to the Ombudsman? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are very 

proud of the fact that it was an NDP government which brought 

in the Office of the Ombudsman to this province in the first 

place. 

Furthermore, we have gone out of our way, both in this 

administration and in the previous NDP (New Democratic 

Party) administration under Premier Allan Blakeney, to 

cooperate with the Ombudsman and to respect the office and to 

do everything we could to respond to suggestions and to 

complaints from the Ombudsman.  That continues to be our 

position, so we're not in any kind of conflict situation at all.  

We respect the office, we're proud of having instituted it, and 

we will continue to cooperate with it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's certainly appropriate that 

the government formed the Ombudsman's office because 

people have no place to turn.  In fact, in increasing numbers 

they're going to the Ombudsman because of the problems 

they're facing.  It's no wonder they're going to the Ombudsman 

because they feel under attack by your government. 

 

The Ombudsman, in his report, is giving a stinging indictment 

against your government.  It is proof that your government has 

failed.  Mr. Minister, your government has broken contracts 

and it's about to break another one.  It's removing people's right 

to be free from arbitrary search and seizure.  It's been 

cancelling tender calls and changing the rules in the middle of 

the game.  Cutting the needy off drug assistance; closing down 

seniors' homes so that people have nowhere to go. 

 

Mr. Minister, your government has nickeled and dimed people 

to the extent that they don't know where to turn.  Mr. Minister, 

when will you lay down your arms and serve the people you've 

been sworn to serve, not to attack? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, one wonders what 

question the member wants me to answer there.  But let me try. 

 

In connection with the Ombudsman's latest report, I haven't 

carefully checked the numbers, but it was my impression on 

looking quickly at the report that most of those cases were 

complaints that were filed with the Ombudsman's office during 

the time of the former administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Now I'm prepared to check that out but 

that was my impression on first looking into the report. 

 

Secondly, the member talks about nickeling and diming people, 

and I just simply remind the member that when this 

government took office on November 1, 1991, we found 

ourself faced with the worst financial mess ever faced by any 

government in this country at any time.  And we have had to do 

everything we could to try and get control of the 



June 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2227 

province . . . of the problem created by the members opposite.  

And that's the long and the short of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The response by the 

minister indicates we must have hit a nerve because he's gone 

back to the deficit and the reasons they had to do this.  He 

forgot totally about the fact that 300 more people have been 

brought before the Ombudsman in the last . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Because of the 

interjections from both sides, I can't hear the member ask his 

question.  So I'd like you to respect the member when he asks 

his question as we will respect the minister. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

the other day one of your colleagues indicated that a new era 

had dawned, there would be a non-confrontational government 

in approach to people, and yet we turn around, people find they 

have nowhere to turn.  And if indeed we've reached a new era, 

why have there been an increase of complaints to the 

Ombudsman in the last year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, most people go to 

the Ombudsman because they've had a case which has been 

around for many, many years and they haven't been able to get 

satisfaction from it.  Now I don't have information as to the 

dates on which the complaints were filed that make up the 

workload of the present Ombudsman.  I'd be glad to do that but 

I haven't yet done it. 

 

But that's a healthy thing.  There is some place for people to go 

if they're frustrated with the process at any level.  I reject, I 

reject entirely -- if I can have the attention of the member -- I 

reject entirely the suggestion that it is the policies of this 

government, budgetary or otherwise, that have led to any 

increase in the workload of the Ombudsman. 

 

That's a healthy outlet.  It was healthy where it was tried in the 

Netherlands, or in the European countries.  It's a healthy 

process here.  We instituted it.  We believe in it and we're 

determined to make it work well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- With leave, to introduce a guest, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- I would like to introduce to you and through 

you to members of the Assembly, a past 

colleague of mine on Regina City Council that is in your 

gallery, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Joe McKeown, and ask all 

members to welcome Joe to the Assembly this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, with leave, 

just to join with the member to welcome Joe to the constituency 

-- a constituent of mine -- and I believe the longest-serving 

member of the Regina council.  So welcome to the Assembly 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Well I didn't hear any dissent so I 

assume that leave was granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 42 

 

Federal Actions Against Prairie Farmers 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise 

pursuant to rule 42.  I would like to move the following 

resolution: 

 

 Be it resolved that this Assembly unanimously condemn the 

federal government for their arbitrary actions which are in 

opposition to the wishes of prairie farmers by: 

 

 attacking prairie farmers and the Canadian Wheat Board by 

removing barley from the sole jurisdiction of the board; 

 

 burdening farm families with increased debt by eliminating 

interest-free cash advances; 

 

 introducing legislation which will increase farmers' grain 

handling costs. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  The minister has 

only been on his feet for a few seconds and already members 

are interjecting.  Why don't we listen to the minister, wait for 

what he has to say, and usually there are opportunities to debate 

what it is that is being proposed.  Let's wait and see what the 

minister will say. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, again I will 

read the resolution: 

 

 Be it resolved that this Assembly unanimously condemn the 

federal government for their arbitrary actions which are in 

opposition to the wishes of prairie farmers by: 

 

 attacking prairie farmers and the Canadian Wheat Board by 

removing barley from the sole jurisdiction of the board; 

 

 burdening farm families with increased debt by eliminating 

interest-free cash advances; 



2228 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1993 

 introducing legislation which will increase farmers' grain 

handling costs by changing the method of payment; 

 

 all of which will contribute to reducing the number of prairie 

farm families. 

 

 And further, that this Assembly send a communique to all 

federal Conservative leadership candidates requesting that 

they make public commitment that these harmful decisions 

will be reversed. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Humboldt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  Rule 42 states: 

 

 A motion may, in case of urgent and pressing necessity 

previously explained by the mover, be made by unanimous 

consent of the Assembly without notice having been given 

under Rule 41. 

 

Is there unanimous consent to proceed to the motion?  There is 

no unanimous consent. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- What is the member's point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Before we know whether or not we can give 

leave, we would have to first of all get confirmation from the 

Chair that the motion itself is indeed legal and in conjunction 

with the rules of this Assembly.  I have not heard your ruling 

on that. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Order!  Order.  Order.  I 

hesitate to say to the former premier that, persist and make my 

day, but . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Because the member for Estevan has 

interjected on many occasions this morning, and the House 

cannot function well.  The House cannot function well as long 

as members interject.  So I want to encourage the member to 

respect the rules of the House and to not continually interject. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- What is the member's point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't think that I have ever 

heard the Speaker of this Assembly use threats to a member 

and in a demeaning statement that you just made.  I would ask 

you, sir, to reconsider that statement and withdraw that. 

 

(1045) 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  Order.  It's 

entirely within the realm of the Chair to caution members as I 

have done and to do it in my own way. 

 

Order.  Upon review of the motion, the motion seems to be in 

order except for one word.  We'd ask, in the first line that "the 

Assembly unanimously condemn" and that sets a condition on 

the motion that is not acceptable.  So therefore the motion is 

not in order. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- What is the member's point of order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, my point of order is that there is 

a point of order that I raised, and I did not hear your ruling on 

that, and therefore I'm asking you to make a ruling or indicate 

what you propose to do with it. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Is the member . . . is this with respect 

to the motion pursuant to rule 42 that I . . . 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- No, Mr. Speaker.  It's your Clint Eastwood 

statement that I want clarification on. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  I find the member's 

point of order not well taken. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 

day I would like to move an emergency resolution pursuant to 

Bill 42, which will be the resolution with the offending word 

removed. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to move the following 

resolution pursuant to rule 42: 

 

 Be it resolved that this Assembly condemn the federal 

government for their arbitrary actions which are in opposition 

to the wishes of prairie farmers by: 

 

 attacking prairie farmers and the Canadian Wheat Board by 

removing barley from the sole jurisdiction of the board; 

 

 burdening farm families with increased debt by eliminating 

interest-free cash advances; 

 

 introducing legislation which will increase farmers' grain 

handling costs by changing the method of payment; 

 

 all of which will contribute to reducing the number of prairie 

farm families. 

 

 And further, that this Assembly send a communique to all 

federal Conservative leadership candidates requesting that 

they make a public commitment that these harmful decisions 

will be reversed. 

 

I so move this, seconded by the member from 



June 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2229 

Humboldt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the minister have 

the unanimous consent of the Assembly to proceed? 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 55 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 55 -- An Act 

to amend The Workers' Compensation Act, 1979 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's indeed a 

pleasure to be able to get up and to discuss Bill 55 with the 

Assembly and with in particular the minister in charge, who I 

am sure will be very much interested in hearing a recap of our 

arguments in debate as to why this Bill needs to be torn up and 

redone. 

 

We are hopeful that today we won't have any of the problems 

that we had last night with rattlesnakes getting loose on the 

Clerk's table and that we will in fact be able to be serious about 

the Bill and put forward the kinds of argument that the 

government can accept and that they perhaps will see the light 

of day and consider all of the points that are being made from 

this position on behalf of all of the community at large. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fact of the matter is that, as I pointed 

out yesterday, this Bill is extremely important to an awful lot of 

people.  This is a business issue and as such does not gnaw at 

the heart and the soul of people the same way that a Bill like 

Bill 38 does, but just as Bill 38 was very important to the 

morality of people in our society, this Bill has the same weight 

and the same effect to the business community and to the 

employees of our province. 

 

The reality is, Mr. Speaker, that there are several points in this 

Bill that have to be reviewed and discussed and pointed out.  It 

is not only the business community though that is upset.  And 

because I am the critic for the official opposition for Labour, I 

want to first of all take the position of the employees and the 

workers of this province with regards to this Bill. 

 

If it were only the business community, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

who were upset with this Bill and the things that are going to 

happen in it, it might be said that the government would have 

some legitimacy, being a labour-oriented government who has 

of course had many people state that their objective was to 

bring good legislation for the union leaders of the province in 

repayment for their support in the past election. 

But that point can't be well taken in a Bill that also goes against 

the very employers and working people of the province.  This 

whole Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is going to backfire.  Because, 

quite simply, let me put forward a couple of the concerns that 

working people themselves have expressed to me. 

 

In the Bill there is a provision that previous injuries will be 

allotted to a new employer's responsibility.  What that means, 

very simply -- and I want to give a graphic description of this, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, so that folks will understand exactly how 

this might work -- suppose a worker like the member from 

Humboldt might have taken a job lifting cement bags.  And 

suppose he hurt his back doing that, and he went through a 

rehabilitation program and the board ruled that he no longer 

was physically capable of lifting cement bags.  He therefore 

could not go back to that job.  So he would be retrained 

perhaps, being a young, bright fellow; he would be retrained 

perhaps to become a computer operator.  And with his 

intelligence and skill that I know he has, he would then be able 

to run a computer. 

 

He would then be assisted by the provisions of the old Act -- 

and the new one -- to find a job in that area in a job search.  

When he found that job, supposing one day the new employer 

said to him, we should have that computer over by the other 

wall.  And the member from Humboldt, being an ambitious 

kind of a fellow, wouldn't phone maintenance to move it; he 

would simply say, oh shucks, I'll just move that over there 

myself.  So he reaches down, picks up the computer, and oh, 

there goes his back again.  The old injury has flared up and 

caused him now to be in such agony that he can't work. 

 

The reality of the new Bill is that the new employer is 

responsible for the injury to that old injury and the 

compounding of that injury.  What that does, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker -- and it's okay from this point of view so far because 

immediately you think, well, the worker should be covered and 

all that -- but here's what happens, and here's where the 

backfire is and the backlash comes from. 

 

The employer, seeing that he is now responsible for that old 

injury, says in his mind, I've got to find a way not to be 

responsible for those old injuries.  So what he will do is fall 

back on an old categorization -- the term "accident prone."  

And what he will do is that every person who comes in looking 

for work that is identified as ever having had a claim with 

Workers' Compensation, will automatically be categorized by 

those employers, all employers now, as being accident prone.  

That is an acceptable term under the law in Saskatchewan for a 

right not to hire an individual.  They will therefore be declared 

to be accident prone and not given a job.  They will in fact 

become blacklisted from being able to work in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So every worker who ever has an injury will automatically, in 

an unwritten way, become blacklisted from being able to work 

in our society 



2230 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1993 

because they will be tagged with being accident prone, only 

because the employers won't want to take the responsibility of 

injuries that workers have received while working with other 

employers on other jobs. 

 

And you see how the thing can evolve and snowball, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, so that in fact a large group of our people 

working in the workforce could end up being discriminated 

against in a very unwritten and unaccepted or announced way.  

So I think we have to caution the minister that this Bill is bad 

on that perspective. 

 

There's also the problem that I raised last night that I will 

quickly throw into the mix so that I can have this whole 

argument together in one time.  And the reality is that an awful 

lot of businesses in this province run on a very tight margin.  

There isn't a big profit for many, many businesses in this 

province.  We have many small businesses that run just on a 

break-even margin with a wage to themselves and to their 

family members and a wage of course to the employees that 

they have. 

 

If the rates of anything go up in this depression, it 

automatically means a financial drain on the business 

community that may cause them either to go broke or to make 

that ultimate decision to pack their bags and quietly steal away.  

They declare bankruptcy or they move to Alberta -- one or the 

other.  Or maybe they just close down and disappear and go 

some place else and find a new life.  The reality being though 

that when those businesses are gone, the jobs are gone with 

them. 

 

So on two fronts the employees are now going to suffer if this 

legislation goes too far and becomes so unreasonable that the 

business community can't live with it. 

 

So there is a backfire from the employees' point of view that 

this government needs to consider.  We also need to consider 

from the business people's point of view today, Mr. Speaker, 

their concerns which I want to lay out directly in this argument 

and in this debate. 

 

Under the new Act there will be downloading.  Medicare costs 

that originally in our old system were paid for through the 

medicare system can and will be downloaded onto the premium 

structure of the business community.  That doesn't just mean 

the business community as in the big multinational 

corporations, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  That means every employer 

in the province -- third-party employers, school units, local 

rural municipalities, urban municipalities, all of those structures 

throughout our society that carry and use workers' 

compensation as a protection for their workers.  All of that 

segment of society will see their premiums going up.  And that 

is a downloading of the medicare costs that should not be 

tolerated by business because it's not a business responsibility 

to take care of the medicare of this province on their own 

backs.  They pay their share through their tax structure but not 

through the workers' compensation premiums.  That's unfair. 

The vocational rehabilitation program, while it has been in 

place and has worked well, is being expanded in this legislation 

to a very unacceptable level.  Because here again if 

rehabilitation leads to an educational process, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, where in fact the educational costs of putting people 

into an upgraded intellectual level or understanding level, that 

should not be the responsibility of the premiums of the workers' 

compensation people who carry that protection. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that here again the 

government is attempting to download the costs of education 

onto the business community, and that's unfair.  It's wrong.  

Because the business community, while it has a responsibility 

to help with the costs of education, should not have that full 

cost on their backs alone.  Society should share the cost of 

education for all people.  And the sharing is the problem 

because it's not here. 

 

Job searches, too, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have in fact been a part 

of the old legislation for a long time, and it's been done fairly 

because there is a limit to how far it goes.  Here again this area 

is being expanded, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the reality is that 

that is unfair because here we are now going into taking away 

the cost of job searching from Canada Employment and 

Immigration, Canada manpower centres, all funded by federal 

government agency.  And we are now saying that by expanding 

this role to the Workers' Compensation, we are expanding the 

role of the responsibility of premiums to the business 

community, and that's not fair.  They have a responsibility to 

share in those costs, as taxpayers in our nation and as good 

corporate citizens . . . 

 

(1100) 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- To ask for leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 

opportunity to introduce to you and to the members of the 

Assembly through you, 25 grade 6 students that are in the 

Speaker's gallery from the Hartley Clarke Elementary School in 

Spiritwood. 

 

They're here in Regina touring some of the sights and spending 

an hour and a half or so here in the Legislative Building.  Their 

teachers are Mr. Robertson and Mr. Nesland, and two 

chaperons, Mrs. King and Mrs. Koetse.  I would like everyone 

in the Assembly to welcome the students to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 



June 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2231 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 55 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would of 

course join with the member in welcoming all that attend our 

Assembly and we hope you have a good day in Regina and that 

you will find some educational purpose to what we do here. 

 

We are discussing today Bill 55, which is the Bill that will 

revamp The Workers' Compensation Act.  And our position as 

an official opposition, as I pointed out and will for the members 

who are visiting, our position is that this Bill goes too far. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- I will caution the member not to 

include the guests in the gallery in the debate and will ask the 

hon. member from Maple Creek to just proceed with his 

deliberation on the Bill. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'm sure 

that the minister will want to reconsider his position on this Bill 

as he hears all of the arguments that we are going to present in 

the debate today.  There are several different points that have to 

be made because this Bill is not a very big Bill in physical 

structure.  I have it in my hand here; it's very small.  I think it's 

only 13 pages and the last one is even a blank page. 

 

And we have found it necessary to come up with 15 

amendments to this little, bitty piece of work that does so 

much.  There's so much wrong, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with this 

Bill that it almost needs to be written in with amendments to 

even try to get it close to being acceptable to both the working 

people and to the business community. 

 

Everyone that's going to be covered by this Bill has now found 

fault with it because it was done too hastily.  It was done 

without the proper consultation, I believe, because if there had 

been good consultation, it couldn't have turned out so bad. 

 

I'm saying quite frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 

government should take this Bill, tear it up, throw it into the 

garbage and start over.  That's my point. 

 

And here is the reason: the high cost of business in this 

province in a depression cannot be tolerated because it will 

cause people to go broke.  The government itself admits that 

there will be a 10 per cent increase, ten and a half per cent 

increase.  The business community says it will be 300 per cent. 

 

We know very well that each side in an argument or a debate 

will use the extreme.  And our understanding of the way our 

society operates I think tells us that most likely it would fall in 

the centre somewhere. 

 

So suppose it's 150 per cent.  Can any business in the province 

of Saskatchewan survive in a depressed economy with 100 or 

150 per cent increase?  That's 

the question business has to ask itself; and the government now 

has to ask, is that the way it's going to be?  Is that acceptable?  

Will it work? 

 

I don't think it will.  We have in fact from the Leader-Post 

some evidence that the government itself doubts what it's doing 

in this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think that needs to be 

pointed out so that the rest of the back-benchers will know that 

there is some serious doubt within the government and they 

won't be shocked if the minister does in fact say, look, we may 

have gone too quickly with this; perhaps we should go back to 

the drawing board and redraft this thing. 

 

And I'll refer to the statement that he made and quote from the 

paper just for the record: 

 

 "I'm not so sure we could do a proper job of three (labor) bills 

(this session)," (this is the minister's name, and I won't repeat 

it) said, referring to controversial amendments to the 

Occupational Health and Safety and Workers' Compensation 

acts the government has already introduced this spring. 

 

 "I'm not so sure we did a proper job of the two bills." 

 

Now that refers to The Workers' Compensation Act that I'm 

presently discussing.  The minister himself has publicly stated 

in the Leader-Post, recorded by Mr. Mandryk, that in fact he 

doubts whether he did the job right. 

 

Having made that admission, we make our point, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that in fact so many of the principals concerned are 

against this Bill that now we should back up, tear it up, redraw 

it, and start from the beginning. 

 

To make my point further, I'll quote from the Leader-Post of 

Regina where it says "Injured workers could be worse off", a 

subheadline.  "Proposed act changes concern some."  It deals 

from the point of view of workers and it deals from the point of 

view of the people who did the work in preparing this. 

 

Now it is: 

 

 The committee appointed by the government to review the 

Workers' Compensation Act has some concerns . . . 

 

That's the first line.  I'll quote here later on.  And it says: 

 

 In a letter dated April 26, Muir raised concerns one section of 

the act might overrule other sections that have been "carefully 

drafted to protect the interests of both employers and 

employees." 

 

You see Judge Muir, who was on the committee that the 

government set up to make recommendations, is now saying 

that the Bill itself has been improperly drafted and will negate 

the very things that he has 



2232 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1993 

suggested that should be done.  So the Bill itself is 

fundamentally flawed, in my opinion, according to the 

statement made by Judge Muir.  If that be the case, we again 

make our point that the Bill should be thrown away and redone. 

 

As further evidence in my argument, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

go to the business community's claims that longer claims will 

result as a result of the poor drafting of this Bill.  The deeming 

part of the legislation has always been an upsetting factor to the 

labour people that I am supposed to work for and represent in 

my capacity here.  They have been upset with it.  However 

even they will concede that there is a necessity in this type of 

legislation to have some way to not have retroactivity that 

would cause a multitude of perhaps lawsuits from past 

experiences all of a sudden being dug up and passing on the 

costs of court costs and all those kinds of things that go with 

that. 

 

This retroactivity is also one of the things I believe that Judge 

Muir has referred to as potentially very, very hazardous and 

potentially very costly.  So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on that point 

we also say that this Bill is unacceptable. 

 

We are saying though, from my point of view, that we do need 

to protect workers in this area, the area that deeming covered.  

There is 1 per cent of the people who make claims to Workers' 

Compensation who have serious problems getting attention, of 

getting proper settlements or finalization to their needs.  That 1 

per cent, while it is small, is very important.  Because it's okay 

to say there's 99 people in this room that are happy and I'm the 

100th person; if I'm unhappy because my foot is broken, that's 

pretty important to me.  The other 99 don't feel any pain and 

they don't care whether I get any compensation, probably 

because it's not hurting them.  But to me, that foot hurts and I 

want something done about it. 

 

That's the way the workers feel.  The 1 per cent that make 

claims against Workers' Compensation want easier access to 

the arbitration process or to a tribunal process -- call it 

whatever you want -- a mediation process, whatever term, but 

there has to be some way that people can appeal their problems 

much more quickly than what we are doing at the present time.  

That's essential, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we point that out. 

 

There are some things in workers' compensation that do need 

attention.  We're not saying that the whole thing is perfect as it 

used to be, because times change.  The world evolves.  We're 

going into a more technological society.  Obviously old laws 

will have to be updated to make them relevant to today's 

conditions. 

 

But the sweeping changes that we're seeing, along with the 

poor drafting of the Bill itself, lead us to argue that we have to 

start over with this one.  The educational costs I have already 

pointed out to you under the vocational rehabilitation, but those 

educational costs need to be emphasized because most people 

haven't recognized that in fact, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that's what it becomes. 

 

It becomes a re-education of people because quite simply what 

happens when a worker is hurt to the point that he can no 

longer work physically, he could have done that job with a 

grade 8 education or a grade 10 education.  But with our 

changing technology, there are fewer and fewer of those kinds 

of jobs that can be done with your hands without having a 

better education. 

 

So what we end up having to do is take that person and upgrade 

his basic skills, his basic education, from that grade 8 to a grade 

12 or a grade 10 to a grade 12 and maybe even some university, 

in order to qualify them for those new jobs, like the 

computerized job that I mentioned earlier in my argument when 

I referred to the member from Humboldt perhaps being the 

victim.  And I'm sure he will understand that. 

 

Most of us know that we can work with our hands with a grade 

10 education.  And we can make a good living for ourselves 

because there's a need for those kind of workers in our society 

-- desperate need for them -- and they do a tremendous job for 

us. 

 

But when they're no longer able to use their muscles, and their 

bodies are hurt, then they have to move on to more technical 

areas where physical strength is not the prerequisite to holding 

the job.  And so when you have to use your mental skills to 

make your living, you then have to re-educate yourself. 

 

The point we're making, sir, is that the educational costs should 

not be the responsibility of the employer where the worker got 

hurt.  That is an upgrading educational need that has to be 

considered by the whole of society through our educational 

system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have here, and I think I pointed this out 

yesterday, a lot of material on this Bill.  Bill 38 we discussed 

yesterday, and I pointed out to this Assembly that I had never 

received so much material on a Bill as I had on Bill 38, and 

that's a fact.  Bill 55 is the second biggest pile of material that I 

have received and in fact must be very close to the same 

amount.  There is that much concern about this Bill in the 

business community. 

 

All of the other Bills have been important, but these two seem 

to have captured the concern of our society -- this one, along 

with the occupational health which is Bill 56, the one to follow 

Bill 55.  They lumped the two together because they seem to 

have a joint effect on everybody that is concerned.  There 

seems to be a paralleling for just about everyone -- workers and 

employers both equally. 

 

And so I have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the financial impact of the 

Workers' Compensation Board of implementing the regulations 

contained in the report of The Workers' Compensation Act 

review committee.  That is quite a document, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  I'm not sure -- the pages are not really numbered -- 

but I am quite sure that there has got to be 40 or 50 pages of 

material in that document alone. 



June 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2233 

We have had all kinds of contributions of newspaper clippings 

from both the business community and from workers who have 

been injured in the past who are begging us to try to find ways 

to help them to resolve their problems. 

 

We have here Workers' Compensation Board: Costs to rise; 

business groups opposed -- in the news clipping.  We have 

from the Saskatchewan business coalition news release: 

Workers' Compensation proposal questions.  Here these good 

folks were willing to sit down, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and write 

up questions that needed to be asked of the government about 

this Bill, proposed Workers' Compensation Act amendments.  

And these are the suggestions they make that go through some 

15 or 20 pages here of material that they have set, all for an Act 

as thin as the one that I showed you previously. 

 

We have from The Workers' Compensation Act amendments 

from the Saskatchewan Home Builders' Association.  And they 

have here:  Amendment cost impact residential housing.  All 

kinds of material and recommendations on things that need to 

be done in order to protect their interests in all of this process. 

 

I have from local 601 a letter congratulating us on our 

participation with the needs of workers.  And I was very happy 

to receive that.  In fact that was one of the things that has made 

this session worthwhile to me, to find out that there were some 

people in the employee groups who were happy with the work 

that we were doing as an opposition to further their causes in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1115) 

 

We have, as I pointed out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, several 

amendments.  And I'm not sure, but I think I'll just read through 

a few of them to give you an idea in a brief little quotation of 

some of the things that will have to be looked at in the 

legislation.  This is not the legislation; these are the proposed, 

suggested reasons why particular parts might have to be 

changed; now recognizing of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

our amendments will have to be introduced during Committee 

of the Whole and that's where we intend to do it. 

 

But these are the reasons why.  And perhaps, perhaps, the 

government could steal our ideas, reword them a little bit, save 

some face, use the amendments, make the thing better.  We 

don't care; I'm not interested in the politics of this thing.  If they 

want to take credit for making the necessary changes, go ahead.  

But let's not ruin the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Let's give them the ideas.  We'll plant the ideas and they can 

steal them and use them and make this thing at least work, even 

though I do suggest that it would be better just to tear it up and 

start over. 

 

I want to point out that under section 3(b), we think that this 

defines the employers' association.  It was under a similar 

provision that the Minister of Labour 

designated the unrepresentative Mechanical Contractors as the 

employer association for almost the entire construction 

industry.  This definition is established . . . or rather, especially 

disturbing as it allows recognition of an employer organization 

made up of people who are not employers at all, whether or not 

they are employers. 

 

We say that that kind of a section has to be deleted because it 

causes far, far too much controversy and in fact allows a total 

distortion of the word "representation." 

 

That's just an idea, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think I've gone 

on with this Bill long enough now to make the points that need 

to be done and to make our arguments and I know that some of 

my colleagues want to speak on this Bill as well.  And so I'm 

going to say though, very simply, that when we deal with The 

Occupational Health and Safety Act, Bill No. 56 -- and I think 

that will be done later today according to the order paper -- the 

same arguments that are done in this Act mostly apply to that 

one.  And we have to pretty well tie the two together because 

they are a package; even though they are written up as separate 

legislation, they have an equal impact on the people in both the 

business community and in the labour community. 

 

So just in summarizing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people in our 

labour force, the employees of Saskatchewan, have serious 

concerns about the needs of their employers and the needs of 

themselves. 

 

The business community from every organized point of view 

and perspective and every group in the province that I'm aware 

of have expressed serious concerns about these Acts.  The 

government themselves, through the minister in the paper, has 

said he is not sure that these Bills were properly done.  The 

judge who was on the head of the committee that the 

government appointed to do the work to come up with the ideas 

that needed to go into changing the legislation has now said 

that there is confusion, that the drafting of the Bill is not 

exactly right. 

 

And so everyone concerned is concerned.  No one is saying 

that this Bill is good: not us, not the government, not business, 

not labour, and not even the people that worked on the 

committee to come up with the recommendations. 

 

So I say in conclusion, Mr. Minister, throw the Bill in the 

garbage for now.  Let's sit down this summer and redraw it.  

Let's get all of the folks that are represented in the impact of 

this legislation, let's get them all together, let's redo this thing.  

Let's get it right this time.  Let's do it so that Saskatchewan can 

prosper and survive.  Let's do it for the good of Saskatchewan.  

Let's start over. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The division bells rang from 11:20 a.m. until 11:40 a.m. 



2234 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1993 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Romanow Lautermilch 

Thompson Murray 

Wiens Hamilton 

Simard Trew 

Shillington Flavel 

Anguish Roy 

Atkinson Scott 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Mitchell Harper 

MacKinnon Keeping 

Upshall Kluz 

Hagel Renaud 

Bradley Langford 

-- 26 

 

Nays 

Swenson D'Autremont 

Muirhead Goohsen 

Toth Haverstock 

-- 6 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 56 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 56 -- An Act 

respecting Occupational Health and Safety be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  As I spoke 

to the Assembly earlier today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

indicated that an awful lot of the concerns with Bill 56 are 

relevant to the same arguments that were made on 55, I will 

refer those people who are particularly interested in our 

objection to Bill 56 to the Hansard that will be published with 

regard to my arguments made earlier today on Bill 55.  Many 

of them will apply and should be considered along with the 

arguments that I will put forward now as to why we oppose the 

amendments to The Occupational Health and Safety Act. 

 

We have had correspondence from many different 

organizations.  We have material from the construction industry 

advisory committee.  That's an advisory committee, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, set up by the government itself.  We have the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association with 700 union and 

non-union members and 15 association members.  They also 

represent some non-residential contractors. 

 

We have information from the Saskatchewan Construction 

Labour Relations Council.  We also have material and 

presentations from the unionized Mechanical Contractors 

Association of Saskatchewan.  And we even have some 

information on file from the boilermakers' construction 

association of Saskatchewan and from the Saskatchewan Home 

Builders' Association Inc.. 

 

Many, many other smaller groups have also made 

presentation to us pretty well with the same theme from all 

groups concerned. 

 

I have not, I'm happy to report, received one piece of 

information from any group saying that we should have a 

negative approach to bringing about safe conditions in the 

workplace.  I see a very responsible response from all of the 

parties concerned.  Safety is of paramount consideration to 

everyone and in all of the presentations that I've read and all the 

letters that's I've received.  And I'm happy to report that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Unfortunately, the government has chosen to take this 

opportunity to amend the Bill in such a way that it makes it 

extremely undemocratic.  And I want to make that point, as 

well as the point that here again we are associated with the cost 

of business increasing.  And here again we have to go back to 

that argument that, in a depression where costs rise, those costs 

must be very carefully weighed and very carefully measured 

against the results that you're going to have in a positive way.  

And you have to weigh the positive results against the negative 

things that will happen if the costs become so high that 

business can no longer function. 

 

I want to discuss the vicarious liability that is in the Bill.  Here 

is a very dangerous precedent set in legislation.  And I'm sure 

that most people can understand that if directors on a board 

who are responsible for making decisions of corporate activity 

are held responsible for things that they don't do as well as 

things that they do do, that is a serious deviation from the past 

approach to how we legally have controlled the responsibilities 

of people who sit on the boards of directorships throughout our 

society. 

 

And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, surprisingly enough is what is 

happening here in this legislation.  We have a situation where 

directors on corporate boards will in fact be held legally 

responsible for decisions that they have not made if it is 

established by a court system that a decision to put up some 

kind of protection for workers was not in fact made.  When on 

the other hand, it always can be argued and has always been 

argued that a board of directors would not necessarily know 

what safety features are required on the floor of a particular 

workplace where that duty is designated to the foreman and 

those people in the rank and file of the organization. 

 

This of course particularly affects only those corporate 

structures that do in fact have directors, and as I've pointed out 

earlier in the debate on Bill 55, in Saskatchewan we mostly 

have smaller businesses.  Therefore this won't affect a large 

number of corporate structures in our province, as it would in a 

province like Ontario. 

 

And here again I make the point that I believe that this 

legislation was largely based by the government on a model 

from the province of Ontario.  And I say that here again that is 

not only wrong, because the province of Ontario cannot be 

compared to the needs of the province of Saskatchewan 

because we are 



June 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2235 

structurally different in every way almost, but the reality is also 

that this Bill is wrong simply because the things that are done 

in the Bill are wrong for our society and cannot be accepted in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

They will deter from the ability of our province to grow.  They 

will deter from the ability of our province to produce more 

jobs.  And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a personal thing with 

me.  I believe we have to create a job base in this province.  

And this piece of legislation will not assist that in any way. 

 

(1200) 

 

The other serious problem that I have in a legal sense in this 

Bill is the right to search and seizure without warrants.  And I 

think that that is a thing that should not be in any legislation in 

our democratic society.  Moreover, it is frightening because it's 

not the first time we've seen this approach in legislation by this 

administration. 

 

And so it shows a significant trend to a grab for power by this 

government in such a way that people can be harassed, they can 

be driven out of business through felonious assault on their 

property and on their persons without recourse to the court 

system by the people who are hurt or damaged or abused. 

 

You can have your door kicked down on your business place 

by a civil servant without a warrant, an act that not even the 

RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) could get away with 

-- the police force that is admired around the world does not 

have the power that this government is putting into the hands of 

civil servants who don't necessarily, by this legislation, require 

any legal training, any psychological training, any kind of 

training at all that would make them responsible citizens that 

could and would do this kind of act with the kind of legal and 

understanding approach that needs to be put into that kind of 

power structure. 

 

I find this most objectionable; one of the most objectionable 

types of approach to legislation in a free society that could ever 

be perpetrated on the people of this province, or on the people 

of any free country, because this in essence makes us a police 

state and nothing less -- an absolute police state. 

 

The government has the power, without recourse to the courts, 

without recourse to the people who have made accusations.  

Even if those accusations are proven later to be false, if 

absolutely nothing is found wrong, there isn't even provision to 

fix the door that they kicked down.  The people who have been 

abused have absolutely no comeback, and this makes this a 

police state -- nothing more and nothing less. 

 

Joseph Stalin would be smiling because this falls right into the 

category of the kinds of things that he did in his administration.  

This is a repugnant Bill and must not be allowed to continue in 

a democratic society. 

 

I can't believe that people haven't protested more 

than they have because of this Bill.  I am absolutely convinced 

that this kind of legislation in certain countries in our world 

today would cause an open war, an open revolution, because 

this is allowing our government to become an armed police 

state without any recourse and without any ability for people to 

be justifiably compensated if they are wrongfully done.  And 

that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, should not be allowed. 

 

I'm going to quote from the letter that I have from the 

Saskatchewan Home Builders' Association because some of the 

things that they say are relevant to this issue: "Occupational 

Health and Safety Act". 

 

 Safety is the responsibility of employers, employees and the 

regulator -- Government. 

 

 Safety is a team effort and the Act must encourage safety 

awareness and procedures that create safe workplaces. 

 

 An adversary or dictatorial approach should be the last resort 

of action. 

 

 This new Act empowers regulators with more powers than 

police officers -- Section 72. 

 

 Harassment now becomes part of Occupational Health & 

Safety for the first time in North America with regulators that 

do not have the skills to judge fairly the many allocations that 

will result -- Section 2(1)(1). 

 

 The appeal process to an adjudicator -- Part VIII leaves the 

appointment to the Government from a list of names 

developed by unions and employer associations. 

 

 Many Occupational Health & Safety sections leave powers to 

develop through regulations which cause apprehension when 

those regulations are not available with the new Act. 

 

 The Government continues to recognize unions which mainly 

represent Government employers and does not recognize the 

majority of workers who are not part of unions. 

 

In other words, a lot of our workers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 

actually left out. 

 

All of these areas in the new occupational health and safety do 

not encourage safety but give powers to create adversarial 

conditions in the workplace.  And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

the point that every one of these associations that I mentioned 

earlier has made clearly and forcefully. 

 

This is not a Bill about safety.  This is not about the members 

of the opposition and the people in the business community 

trying to kick the crutches out from under injured workers or 

taking away the wheelchairs from those people who have 

accidents in the workplace.  This is an Act that is being 

amended for the purpose of power to certain government 

officials.  This is a power take-over. 



2236 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1993 

Recommendations that they give: 

 

 The Act should give powers that are normal in our society not 

powers that exceed the powers of police officers. 

 

 Appeals should reflect adjudication that involves an 

Arbitrator for each party and they appoint an agreed to 

Adjudicator/Arbitrator.  The Government should not control 

this appointment. 

 

 Harassment must not take place in the workforce but to place 

this in the Occupational Health & Safety Act, leading North 

America with this type of legislation is dangerous if you do 

not have legally trained occupational health officers.  This 

should be removed from the Act. 

 

 The Act and the Regulations must encourage employers and 

employees to work together to make the workplace safe. 

 

 We encourage our law makers to make this Act less 

adversarial and more objective towards encouraging safety. 

 

That seems a reasonable approach to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

It is without a doubt said as good as anybody could put it. 

 

And so I read that letter as evidence not only of the thoughts of 

the Saskatchewan Home Builders', but it reflects those things 

that have been said by all of the groups that have approached us 

and the list that I gave you earlier. 

 

I have material in memorandums from Jim Chase, the president 

of the Saskatchewan Construction Association, showing 

serious, serious concern with the effects on his business 

community and the people that he represents.  He provided us 

with a long letter of explanation and opinions, far longer than 

the one that I have just quoted into Hansard, but basically 

saying the very same points. 

 

I have other information.  The Saskatchewan business coalition 

news releases; The Occupational Health and Safety Act too 

ominous, is the front line.  And that, I think, after the words I 

have already said, sums it up very well on behalf of Dale 

Botting and all of the people that he represents. 

 

I have on this letter people like Bob Cunningham, Brett Filson, 

Maryann McFayden, and Ken McKinley, all of these people 

endorsing the opinions that are expressed in this brief. 

 

The Saskatchewan business coalition briefing notes go on at 

very long length to explain what looks to be a very simple 

change to the Act, but has such far-reaching consequences that 

we in fact in this province can say nothing except that this 

makes our province a police state.  There is no other way to 

explain. 

There is no accountability in this Act.  Someone with 

vengeance on their mind can make an accusation against his 

employer and that person making that accusation, no matter 

how false or incorrect it is, cannot later be taken to task.  It 

throws the whole system into disrepute because there is no 

accountability to anyone and this is wrong.  It is dead wrong.  

We just cannot allow our society to become controlled by a 

handful of power-hungry bureaucrats who may be serving the 

needs of vengeful people. 

 

If I were fired, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I might find myself angry.  

And in that anger I may do things later I would regret.  

Knowing that under the present system I am held accountable 

for my actions even in anger, I am cautious about what I do.  

Removing that responsibility allows my anger to be 

uncontrolled and unsuppressed and I may go ahead and do vile 

and foolish things. 

 

And under this Act, I could make accusations against my 

employer and never be held accountable for the thousands or 

millions of dollars that I might cause to somebody. 

 

Given an example. Suppose an employee of IPSCO decided 

that he had been put into an unsafe situation in his workplace 

and made a complaint that he thought the whole place should 

be shut down because it was totally unsafe. That in fact could 

follow through; it could happen.  If it were found that he was 

totally being malicious, that there was no case in fact for his 

argument or his statement, that he was only seeking vengeance 

for having been laid off, there can under this Act be no recourse 

against that individual. 

 

And that plant, a multimillion dollar operation, could be shut 

down for days or weeks.  Thousands and millions of dollars 

could be the result of the losses to that corporate structure.  The 

whole year's operation for that business could be put into 

jeopardy.  And in fact if a repetition of this kind of action by 

angry people -- perhaps a union who was trying to make a point 

or some group like that -- if they were to make an issue out of 

repeatedly going after this Act and using it wrongly, they could 

in fact bankrupt a company as big as IPSCO. 

 

Absolutely no question in my mind that these big companies 

could be broke quite easily, and small businesses could be 

broke even quicker.  There is no protection in here against the 

abuses in our system that always will and always do occur. 

 

At no time -- at no time have I seen, Mr. Deputy Minister, 

anybody make any points about not wanting good, safe 

conditions.  The minister the other day in question period 

referred to the 40 people that 



June 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2237 

got killed in the workplace and tried to justify these Bills by 

saying that that's too many.  And I agree.  But that's got 

nothing, absolutely nothing to do what's going on in this Bill. 

 

No one wants their employees to be hurt, much less killed.  

Let's face the reality.  Many of the people that we employ in 

this province are our good friends.  Many of the people that we 

employ in this province are in fact our families.  And no 

employer wants a bad work record, because obviously if too 

many people get hurt or die, there simply won't be any people 

that will work for them any more. 

 

But accidents will happen.  It's unfortunate, but it's a fact of life 

that they do happen.  My industry, the agricultural industry, has 

the highest accident rate of any industry probably in this 

province.  And we do everything that we can.  Manufacturers 

put on all kinds of devices on machines to make them safe, but 

accidents still happen.  And we have to accept the fact that we 

will do everything that we can to improve the situation, but we 

will always come short of the mark of a 100 per cent 

elimination of all accidents and of all injury. 

 

(1215) 

 

We must redraw this Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so that it in fact 

does what an occupational safety Act should do, which is to 

provide safety for the workplace and for the workers and not be 

a power grab for the government.  And right now that's all we 

have here is a power grab by the government on behalf of its 

officials. 

 

We have a review of the draft Occupational Health and Safety 

Act.  It was delivered to us and we appreciate having that.  It 

was very enlightening to read this and to study it through.  We 

have, as I said before, a whole litany of information -- letters 

and documents. 

 

We have workers who fear, and have expressed this to me that 

their safety will in fact be jeopardized and lost in the shuffle of 

this legislation.  They are worried.  Again, the workers are 

concerned. 

 

The employers are concerned.  The official opposition is 

concerned.  The minister himself has referred to this Act, as I 

repeated to you earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And I'll repeat it 

once more to reinforce our argument that everyone in this 

province is concerned that this Bill is not serving the purposes 

and the needs that it needs to address. 

 

 "I am not sure that we could do a proper job of three (labor) 

bills (this session)," (the minister said -- his name was there), 

referring to the controversial amendments to the 

Occupational Health and Safety and Workers' Compensation 

acts the government has already introduced this spring. 

 

 "I'm not sure we did a proper job of the two bills." 

 

Direct quote from the minister in charge.  So now we have not 

only the business people, the labour people, and the opposition, 

but the government minister himself saying that these Bills are 

fundamentally no good.  They're wrong.  They haven't been 

done right.  Let's take them back to the drawing table.  Let's 

redo 

them.  Let's do them right.  Let's consult with the people that 

are concerned, and let's get this thing put into perspective of 

what needs to be done, which is to provide safety, not to 

provide power to the government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could stand here and say this a thousand 

times, and I could not feel more strongly about it than by 

saying it once.  So I've said it a few times, and I'm going to let 

my colleagues put it into their words because I know that it 

needs to be driven from more than one force because obviously 

this government has gone deaf. 

 

And I want to encourage them, though, if you can't hear what 

we're saying, read the Hansard; read the letters; read the 

documents; read the proof; read everything that has been 

supplied to me and to you and do the right thing with at least 

one Bill in this Assembly. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  My 

colleague, the member from Maple Creek, has brought forward 

a good number of points, and very valid points dealing with 

this legislation, points that the government needs to take some 

serious look at and give some very serious considerations to, 

particularly the parts of the legislation that deal with entry, with 

search and seizure without a warrant. 

 

It seems to be the proclivity of this government to utilize that 

particular mechanism to impose their will, through a good 

number of Bills in this legislation, on the people of this 

province.  We have seen them use this type of legislation in 

their environmental Bills.  We have seen them use this type of 

legislation in some of the natural resources Bills, and now 

they're using it in this one, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And there's 

really no need for it. 

 

If the government and its inspectors feel that something illegal 

is taking place within a site, they have access to the courts.  

They can apply to a justice of the peace or the Court of Queen's 

Bench to get a search warrant to enter into those premises and 

to gain access to the information or to the procedures that they 

wish. 

 

But no, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's not good enough for this 

government.  What they want is to have the power to threaten, 

and if threats fail, then to go in with bulldozers or whatever 

means they feel suits their purpose -- which may not 

necessarily be necessary but which suits their purpose -- to 

enter into private property and to take whatever it is they want.  

This, Mr. Speaker, is unacceptable. 

 

We do still have due process within Canada even though within 

this province, under this government, due process is given very 

little consideration.  We do not see due process in contracts for 

farmers.  We do not see due process in contracts for co-op 

members.  We do not see due process in contracts for 

government employees. 



2238 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1993 

And under this legislation and other pieces of legislation 

brought forward by this government, there is no due process for 

the working people, the employers, and the citizens of this 

province.  That is what we consider to be one of the great 

weaknesses in this legislation and in this government's attitude. 

 

This legislation also deals with the rights to refuse what can be 

considered dangerous duties.  And indeed, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, if a job is truly dangerous, then it should not be 

performed without the proper safety methods being taken. 

 

But one of the concerns that a good number of employers 

across this province have, the way this legislation is written, it 

gives the employee the right to say no, I refuse to do this 

because it's dangerous.  The employer cannot assign another 

employee to perform that duty so the job stops. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this can be used -- and if it can be 

used at some point in time it likely will be used -- as a means to 

harass or to cause work stoppages at a work site where there is 

some grievance between labour and management.  Because 

within this legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no time 

frame set out.  The worker can claim that he will not do the 

work because of a hazard.  It goes through a couple of steps 

including an occupational health and safety committee at the 

work site. 

 

If the worker disagrees with the recommendations from that 

committee or if the committee agrees with the employee, it will 

then go to an inspector or an official of occupational health and 

safety for the province. 

 

But nowhere in there is there a time frame set out, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that that investigation has to be covered by.  It doesn't 

say, within two days; it doesn't say within a week.  It's left 

open. 

 

So with the collusion of the government, it would be possible 

to stop a work site simply because the inspector has never 

shown up to investigate the site to see whether or not the work 

stoppage is in fact legal. 

 

And no place within the Bill that I've seen, Mr. Speaker, does it 

provide any compensation for that employer if the employee's 

claim is false.  And no place within the Bill that I have seen 

does it say that the employer is still not responsible to pay for 

that employee's wages or all the employees' wages that might 

not have been working because of this complaint. 

 

The onus under this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is left entirely on the 

employer.  The employer pays the full cost.  The employee, 

under this legislation, bears no responsibilities.  And that is 

wrong, Mr. Speaker.  If the employee has a legitimate 

complaint, then the situation should be rectified, the employee 

should receive his pay, and that should be the end of it. 

 

But if the claim is false, then the employer should have some 

recourses that if the employee has been off the 

work site for a period of time, then that employee should not 

receive his compensations for that work, because he did not 

perform that work and there was no reason for that work 

stoppage.  That's one of the issues that the government should 

take a very serious look at. 

 

In the Environment Committee, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we dealt 

with quite similar issues when complaints come forward about 

the environment.  And the recommendation from that 

committee, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was that if the person bringing 

forward the complaint had a legitimate complaint, then the 

company or whomever that complaint was filed against was to 

rectify the situation.  But if the complaint was false, if it was 

vexatious, then the onus was on that person bringing forward 

the complaint to make restitution. 

 

And similar logic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, should be utilized in 

this particular case.  If the employee is right, the situation 

should be rectified; he should receive his pay.  If the claim is 

false, he should be forced to find some compensation which 

could simply be he does not receive his pay for the time that he 

was off the job.  But if it's a mass action which can be 

attributed to a labour dispute, a work stoppage for whatever 

reason, which would be outside of the bargaining process, then 

those that participated in it should bear the brunt of the costs.  

They should have to make good any claims against them. 

 

And those are two of the issues, Mr. Speaker, that need to be 

addressed in this Bill that the minister should take a very 

serious look in Committee of the Whole and look at some 

amendments to this Act to deal with those particular situations. 

 

I know that some of my other colleagues also wish to have 

some discussion with this Bill and I will give them that 

opportunity now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I just have a few brief comments I wish to make in 

regard to Bill 56.  But I think it's important that people around 

the province clearly understand that what the government is 

proposing here goes far beyond safety in the workplace as far 

as workers in the province of Saskatchewan go. 

 

The opposition is asking some very pertinent questions on 

aspects of this Bill because we're talking about the very job 

force of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We're talking 

about the employment levels that we have now, which aren't 

good enough to take people off unemployment rolls and take 

them off the welfare rolls.  And we're talking about decreasing 

the number of jobs that are available to Saskatchewan workers 

even more.  And that decrease will happen I believe, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, if this Bill is left in its present form. 

 

With the business community and the people that it employs, 

people in this province are saying is that given all of the current 

cost increases, the cost of doing business in this province 

cannot sustain another hit 



June 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2239 

that doesn't have some well thought out rationale and reasoning 

attached to it. 

 

My colleague who sat on the Environment Committee which 

tabled its report in this legislature and talked about the issues of 

search and seizure, about having government bureaucrats and 

government bureaucracy empowered greater than what our 

current police forces have, says to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that we're dealing with legislation that is inappropriate. 

 

The Environment Committee went and spent months saying at 

the end of the day, that that is inappropriate, that bureaucrats 

and bureaucracies should not have that kind of power.  It 

simply is oppressive to institute something that doesn't need to 

be in place. 

 

And yet what the minister is telling us in this Bill is that those 

powers need to be there with no corresponding checks and 

balances, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because we have ministerial 

prerogative and assignment all the way through the Bill. 

 

Now in good conscience most ministers of the Crown come to 

work every morning to do a good and credible job, irregardless 

of political stripe.  But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the life of me, 

I don't know why we would need that kind of empowerment 

when we're talking about the very job force that drives this 

province, the ability to shut down the workplace beyond simple 

safety considerations, the ability to . . . And I had it described 

to me that one of the individuals who now is high up in 

government, in the bureaucracy, saying that that particular 

company needs to be assessed higher because they're just an 

accident waiting to happen; they've never had an accident but 

they're waiting to have one and I believe that they should be 

assessed higher. 

 

(1230) 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's not the kind of bureaucrat we 

want to turn loose on the folks that pay the taxes in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And unfortunately, people that 

have agendas other than what the vast majority of the 

population have would have the opportunity to use this 

legislation, I think, incorrectly. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, occupational health and safety officers in 

the province of Saskatchewan, I think, have a pretty good 

record.  And the fact that we have a declining fatality rate and 

curve in the province of Saskatchewan tells me that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

It's not good enough yet because we aren't down to zero.  But it 

is about half of what it was a decade ago.  And that tells me, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there has been movement, that there 

has been people taking their job seriously. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when someone dies from a bee sting 

or someone dies in a plane crash or someone dies from a heart 

attack on the job site, there isn't an occupational health and 

safety officer in the province 

of Saskatchewan that can do a thing about it.  You can't take 

away a person's allergies.  You can't take away an act of God.  

And unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe there will 

always be fatalities in the workplace in the province of 

Saskatchewan for those very reasons. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, education through the ages has always 

been the best tool.  You cannot legislate morality, and you 

cannot legislate, in my view, adherence like this Bill proposes 

without causing major problems.  Education of the people who 

both employ and are employed in the workforce of 

Saskatchewan will do more to promote safety than anything 

else. 

 

It still comes down to individuals taking initiative to look after 

themselves to wear the right kind of boots to look after 

themselves, to wear the right kind of gloves, to do the things 

that are necessary before you step out into that job site, as it is 

the responsibility of employers to lower the crane when the 

wind is blowing. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that this Bill has not been well 

thought out, that it has been rushed, and that it has not listened 

in a consultive way to the people that it will most impact.  And 

unfortunately I believe this government's agenda, its political 

agenda to get some things solved -- rightly or wrongly -- during 

its first two years of government, has dictated that this Bill is 

on the floor of the Assembly to be debated now. 

 

And that is all the wrong reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to have 

it here and being debated.  That is all the wrong reason to have 

a bureaucracy created and growing in the area of occupational 

health and safety that simply puts too much pressure on people 

to employ other people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we must get those people off the welfare 

rolls in this province.  We must get the unemployment lines 

down.  And if this economy of ours is ever going to provide the 

services that we all enjoy, and pay the debt of the province of 

Saskatchewan, then you've got to have people employed and 

they have to be out there creating wealth.  And what I'm 

hearing around the piece, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that people 

who create wealth have a great deal of concern.  And at the 

same time, the people who work with them in the creation of 

that wealth are not being well served when they don't have a 

job any more. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we believe that the government should 

bring forth amendments to this Bill, amendments that tell us 

that they've done some consultation, amendments that tell us 

that they aren't going to use the heavy hand, that occupational 

health and safety are not going to supersede the police forces of 

our province as far as their jurisdictional power. 

 

And I think if the government would do some of those things in 

third reading of this Bill, then we might yet salvage a piece of 

legislation.  If the government is absolutely intent on passing it, 

then I think it is up to 



2240 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1993 

the members of this Legislative Assembly to bring forth 

amendments that can make this Bill at least halfways palatable 

to the vast majority of the people in this province. 

 

And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will reserve any further 

comment till third reading of the Bill. 

 

The division bells rang from 12:36 p.m. until 12:41 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Murray 

Simard Hamilton 

Lingenfelter Johnson 

Shillington Trew 

Anguish Flavel 

Solomon Scott 

Kowalsky Kujawa 

Carson Crofford 

Mitchell Harper 

MacKinnon Keeping 

Upshall Kluz 

Hagel Renaud 

Bradley Langford 

Lyons  

-- 27 

 

Nays 

Swenson D'Autremont 

Muirhead Goohsen 

Toth  

-- 5 

 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1245) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 38 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask the Minister of Justice to introduce his 

officials to the members of the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I have beside 

me, Ms. Madeleine Robertson, who is with the legislative 

services branch of the Department of Justice, a Crown solicitor; 

and behind Madeleine is Tom Irvine, who is a Crown solicitor 

in the constitutional law branch of the department. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  I believe, Mr. 

Deputy Chairman, before we move off clause 1, there are a 

number of questions we will continue, or must take the time to 

raise.  And I'm glad to see the minister has some very 

competent officials with him today. 

 

When you start looking at areas that infringe into some 

of the constitutional debate and certainly a lot of the legal 

areas, I think we need all the help in the world.  However, I 

begin to wonder whether or not . . . and we're all aware of this 

and the minister might be, is probably quite aware of the fact 

that at any given day he would find it difficult to agree with any 

specific legal opinion if it should happen to be not to his 

interpretation. 

 

And I think that's one of the major questions that has been 

raised regarding the debate on Bill 38.  And the fact of whether 

or not the changes that we're proposing to the Human Rights 

Code at the end of the day -- regardless of the amendments that 

may be brought forward, or amendments that we would 

propose, or amendments from any other member -- would 

indeed not be open to challenge. 

 

And I believe it's unfortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 

minister hasn't taken the time or wasn't willing to even accept 

the amendment that was presented to the House yesterday of 

allowing for a sixty . . . or a six-month hoist - 

_ sixty-month hoist, that would a good hoist, wouldn't it? -- but 

a six-month hoist that would give the opportunity for debate. 

 

I think what it reflects is the fact that there has been a lot of 

debate.  There was a significant amount of debate taking place 

even today.  And in view of the number of the points that have 

been raised by members, both on this side of the House and 

certainly some of the members on the other side of the House, a 

number of members who have spoken in favour of the Bill, and 

I must commend members who have taken the time as well to 

stand up and speak regarding their convictions.  I think it's 

appropriate.  This is a democratic society and a democratic 

Legislative Assembly where we should have that opportunity.  

No one should feel that they are bound by party ideology.  And 

so I want to commend all members for having taken the time to 

express their views and viewpoints whether or not I agreed or 

disagreed with them. 

 

However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would have been appropriate 

as well . . . and certainly another area that I believe the 

government could have looked at and created a greater 

opportunity for its members and all members of the Assembly 

is by allowing that free and open vote to take place in the 

Assembly. 

 

Now last evening the minister in his closing remarks mentioned 

that they will be presenting some amendments to the Human 

Rights Code.  And I'm not exactly sure how many amendments 

the minister is intending to bring forward, but in light of the 

fact that time is passing us by this morning, I think it would be 

only fair if the minister would take a moment to at least pass us 

over or inform us about the type of amendments that he is 

willing to and is planning on presenting to the Assembly so 

that, as opposition members, we may have the opportunity over 

the weekend and into next week, the time to just take and 

review the amendments and just see how they conform to the 

requests, the points that have been brought forward, the 

suggestions that have been made. 



June 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2241 

And I wonder if, as the minister is sending over the proposed 

amendments, if the minister would take a moment just to 

respond and just for the record, lay them on the record, the 

types of amendments that the government is presently looking 

at. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chair, I have just sent over 

with one of the pages a copy of the amendments that the 

government proposes to introduce during this Committee's 

consideration of the Bill.  Before doing that - 

_ I'll do that before I sit down -- but I want to just respond with 

respect to the member's argument or point, observations about 

the question of conflicting legal opinions. 

 

Mr. Chair, I think that there is no other legislative item on the 

agenda of this Assembly that has occupied so much time in its 

preparation and consideration and review, as Bill 38.  We have 

had, as all members have, quite a large volume of 

correspondence and contact with respect to this Bill.  We have 

treated every proposal as being very serious proposals.  And we 

have carefully considered and with respect to many of them 

exhaustively reviewed the proposals that have been made to 

determine what we should do with respect to them.  We have 

treated all of these proposals as being serious and constructive 

proposals and analysed them on that basis. 

 

There are a lot of people out there who were making 

suggestions, and we took all of them seriously and didn't 

simply adopt a bull-headed attitude that we were not prepared 

to consider any improvements to the law that we propose by 

Bill 38.  And that led us, of course, to a great deal of legal 

analysis and discussion about the . . . within the Department of 

Justice about the legal response or the legal analysis with 

respect to some of these proposals. 

 

I feel, if I may say so, Mr. Chair, to the member, very well 

served by the Department of Justice.  I think that it is, with only 

a couple of exceptions, the same department as served the 

previous administration throughout its years.  And most of the 

lawyers in the Department of Justice are long-term career 

lawyers working for the government and have performed great 

service over those years.  And I feel very well served. 

 

And I must say that I know the department well, having 

practised law myself for many, many years, and I have great 

confidence in their opinion.  And these have not been easy 

things for the department to handle because I have been a 

demanding minister with respect to these various points that 

have arisen.  And I've tested the department with respect to 

their opinions and they've gone the extra mile with respect to 

those opinions. 

 

So I just want to say that in general.  I want the member to 

know and to understand and accept that we have been very, 

very serious in our approach to this Bill and the various 

representations that have been made. 

 

Now there's been a long debate going on in this House and 

outside this House.  And I've met widely, 

my officials have met widely, with all kinds of people and had 

all sorts of conversations and correspondence.  And as I say, I 

don't think there's any other item on the government's agenda 

that has taken so much time in dealing with it and with the 

various representations that were made concerning it. 

 

Now with that as background and in response to the opening 

remarks of the member, we propose to make two amendments 

to the Bill.  And the first deals with the question of what we are 

not doing with the prohibition respecting . . . with the 

prohibition of discrimination respecting sexual orientation. 

 

And we are not extending the protection of the Act to any 

conduct that is prohibited by the Criminal Code, and that is an 

amendment that we plan to propose to section 3 of the printed 

Bill.  And I will quote it for the record: 

 

 . . . For the purpose of dealing with any case of alleged 

discrimination pursuant to this Act, no ground of 

discrimination shall be interpreted as extending to any 

conduct that is prohibited by the Criminal Code'". 

 

This is a question that arose over and over again as to just what 

we meant by sexual orientation.  I observed yesterday that -- I 

believe it was yesterday -- that the jurisdictions who have 

included this prohibition in their legislation have done so 

without definition.  Sexual orientation is, in the view of those 

legislators, a term that is understood without any further 

definition, and there are many concepts already in the code that 

don't have a definition, as I pointed out. 

 

Manitoba adopted the approach that we are suggesting here, 

which says what I thought was obvious but which apparently 

was not obvious, that we were not trying to protect illegal 

sexual orientations: pedophiles, sexual assaults, violent sex, 

rapes, and any other of the sexual-related conducts that might, 

by some happenchance be included under the notion of sexual 

orientation.  We want to make it clear that we're not protecting 

any illegal acts.  And I think that that, at least on the basis of 

my experience through this Bill and the representations I 

received, that that is responsive to the concerns of many people 

in the community. 

 

The second amendment that we are going to propose is to 

section 18 of the printed Bill, which deals with section 47 of 

the Act, and that is the affirmative action section.  That section 

has, since its inception, contemplated that at least in a notional 

way, that there could be affirmative action programs which are 

approved covering all of the prohibited grounds in the code.  

And so you had ideas that, like creeds and religions and 

nationality and age, could be included in affirmative action 

programs. 

 

Now the member will know that they have not.  The member 

will know that in Saskatchewan and elsewhere in Canada, 

affirmative action programs have been limited to women in 

non-traditional occupations, to aboriginal people, to disabled 

people, 



2242 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1993 

and to visible minorities -- those four groups.  It was never 

contemplated that there would be an affirmative action program 

for any religion or any creed or any nationality or any age.  

These things were just never contemplated. 

 

But I accept that section 47 as it is drafted, as it appears in 

section 18 of the printed Bill, is capable of, right on its face, of 

being interpreted to mean that an affirmative action program 

for the employment of lesbian or gay people could be approved 

by the Human Rights Commission.  And that was not the 

intention of the government, so we are proposing this 

amendment to make clear that the idea of affirmative action 

will be limited to race, colour, sex -- which is to say gender -- 

disability, or ancestry.  And that will cover the four categories 

that have been the subject of affirmative action programs until 

now, and that will be the way in which it is limited in the 

future. 

 

And there was a mini fire-storm, if I may use the term, when 

someone noticed that section 47 could be interpreted right on 

its face of making affirmative action programs legal so far as 

sexual orientation was concerned.  And as I say, that was not 

the intention of the government so we've moved to fix that. 

 

Those are the two amendments that we propose to make to the 

Act, Mr. Chair. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 


