




















































Hansard: June 21, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2675 

 June 21, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Once 

again it's a pleasure for me to present petitions on behalf of 

people of Saskatchewan, and I'd like to read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, petitioners come from such places as Estevan, 

Torquay, Lampman, and so on, Mr. Speaker.  I lay these 

petitions on the Table. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Petitioners that I 

have a petition regarding have come from Gravelbourg, 

Palmer, through the south-west part.  And the prayer says this: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I present these to the Assembly today. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again, Mr. 

Speaker, it's my pleasure to rise on behalf of Saskatchewan 

citizens and present their names to the Assembly today.  I'll 

read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have citizens from the communities of 

Peebles, Windthorst, Kipling, Glenavon, people all up and 

down . . . it appears the east side of the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I as well 

have a petition with respect to the NewGrade Energy Inc. 

corporate governance and financing arrangements.  Mr. 

Speaker, these petitions come from 

the Kindersley, Saskatoon areas, and I note one gentleman is 

the defeated NDP (New Democratic Party) nominee in the 

constituency of Kindersley. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I know the member knows that he's 

out of order by reading individual names or referring to 

individual people.  The member knows that's not proper.  You 

may continue and read the prayer. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I'll present that now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

read the prayer on my petition as well: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this petition is signed mostly by individuals from the 

community of Gravelbourg. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a petition I 

would like to present today.  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 

petitioners I will read the prayer. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitioners' names are from the Kelvington-Wadena area, 

Mr. Speaker.  And I would be pleased to lay that on the Table. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions today.  The prayer reads: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever 



2676 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Vonda and 

Saskatoon areas.  I present them now. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

 Of citizens of the province praying the Assembly defeat any 

legislation introduced to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. 

corporate governance and financing arrangements. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Property Tax Increases 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, in the first 19 months 

of your office we've seen your government cripple the 

economy through tax increase after tax increase.  You've 

increased the income tax, sales tax, gas tax, to name a few.  In 

fact you've increased taxes so much that the average 

Saskatchewan family will pay over $3,000 more in taxes this 

year than it did last year. 

 

And now we are seeing another major tax increase as a direct 

result of the policies of your government.  Mr. Premier, many 

Saskatchewan home-owners will be paying their property taxes 

over the next few days, the highest property tax in all of 

Canada, and they will have seen those property taxes increase 

by over 11 per cent in one year, thanks to the massive 

offloading of your government.  Mr. Premier, that's an average 

increase of over $300 per family. 

 

Mr. Premier, when are you going to stop piling up the tax 

burden on the Saskatchewan families?  When are you going to 

stop offloading your responsibilities onto property taxpayers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make the 

comment to the member opposite from Kindersley that the 

answer to the question of why the need for tax in Saskatchewan 

should be better put to those members that sit in the front 

benches of that opposition.  We need taxes to pay interest of 

about $800 million a year on the debt that you people brought 

about in the last 10 years.  Now if you translate that to the 

provincial sales tax, let's use that as one example.  At $70 

million per point, we could eliminate the sales tax in total -- in 

total -- if it were not for the interest on the debt and have a 

surplus of close to $100 million. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Just on the interest. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Just on the interest.  And you 

sanctimoniously stand in your place and say, why the taxes in 

the province of Saskatchewan?  Well simply 

put, it's to pay for that interest that is piling up and has been 

piling up for the last 10 years. 

 

Think about it.  Totally eliminate the sales tax in the province 

and have a $100 million surplus if it were not for the interest on 

the billions of dollars in debt that you ran up in the last 10 

years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, Mr. 

Premier, here are some of the things you used to say about 

provincial offloading onto municipalities and school boards.  In 

April of 1990 you said: the government is passing the buck 

from Regina right on to the ratepayers and the local property 

taxpayers.  They're cutting back on their responsibilities and 

loading it up onto the local property taxpayers, and that's 

wrong.  Those were your words, Mr. Premier.  That's what you 

said back in 1990, back when municipalities were still 

receiving funding increases every year. 

 

Since you've come to power, municipalities have seen their 

total revenue sharing and capital grants cuts by more than a 

half.  Mr. Premier, you are the one offloading your 

responsibilities right onto the backs of Saskatchewan 

taxpayers.  When are you going to stop that offloading, Mr. 

Premier, and heed your own words? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

members opposite, there's one line that I remember very well 

from the member from Estevan, the former premier, who said: 

the deficits are deferred taxes.  You people will remember that 

comment that he made some years ago.  He said deficits are 

deferred taxes. 

 

And what we are doing today in Saskatchewan . . . And if you 

watched W5 last night, everyone in Canada now knows that the 

deficit in this province, unless we get it under control, is going 

to break all of us.  And that's what we're doing.  We're 

attempting to get the deficit and the debt that your government 

set during the 1980s, your debt under control. 

 

These are your taxes that you deferred from the 1980s, plus 

interest of $800 million.  I say again, we could completely 

eliminate the sales tax in the province of Saskatchewan and 

have a hundred million dollar surplus if it were not for that 

cursed $15 billion debt that you people left to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, in light 

of all of that then, why did you campaign the way you did, 

promising everything to anybody that would take the time to 

listen to you and your campaign promises?  You were 

promising increased spending in education, health care, 

agriculture, every other area in Saskatchewan government.  

That's what you were planning on doing. 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2677 

Your offloading has increased property taxes by 11 per cent 

this year alone, and municipalities are saying next year will be 

even worse.  Mr. Premier, when your government is offloading 

responsibilities onto local taxpayers, when your government is 

decreasing funding, increasing costs to municipalities, do you 

even consider the impact of the actions that you are taking on 

property taxpayers in this province?  The average 

Saskatchewan family will pay $3,157 in property taxes in 1993 

-- $400 more than the next highest province, Ontario. 

 

Last year your offloading resulted in 11 per cent tax increase, 

property tax increase, Mr. Premier.  Can you tell us how much 

more of an increase it will be in 1994? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the member opposite, just to get the record straight, what we 

campaigned on in the last election.  I have here the card that 

went out to thousands of homes in Saskatchewan that says 

clearly: 

 

 First Things First -- Common Sense Financial Management 

 

 Open the books . . . 

 

 A comprehensive review of all PC privatizations . . . 

 

 (And third) A balanced budget in our first term of office, and 

a 15-year plan to eliminate the accumulated Devine Deficit. 

 

That was our plan, that is our plan, and we're on track. 

 

But what I want to say to you, to the member opposite, that he 

should get in touch with Senator Berntson to get the real reason 

why we are in the position we are in.  I want to quote from 

Hansard, February 3, 1988, the Hon. Mr. Berntson; this is from 

a Crown Corporations Committee.  And he says, and I quote.  I 

want it to be accurate, and I'll read it: 

 

 I think that (what) can happen here as well.  (Doesn't make . . 

. not good English, but then that was a problem.)  We're 

going to do what we can (do), though, to make it very 

difficult for you people (referring to the NDP in opposition) 

to take it over again when you get back into power, if that 

ever happens, because our desire is to have these things as 

broadly distributed as possible so that it's very difficult for 

you folks, if you should ever get back into power. 

 

That's the line.  That was the plan.  Now I can tell you . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  That seems to be the 

problem with this government; they're more interested in 

discussing what happened in the past than they are with what 

their plans are for the future of Saskatchewan.  The people of 

Saskatchewan are interested in what you are going to do to 

them in this province. 

 

You don't seem to think that your offloading has any bearing 

on local ratepayers.  Let's just refresh your memory a little bit.  

Next year's revenue sharing is going to be cut by 8 per cent.  

You're offloading 7.5 per cent in SAMA (Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency) funding.  You're already 

taking away millions of dollars in municipal fine revenues.  

New environmental regulations are going to cost municipalities 

millions more.  Bill 55 and 56 are going to cost municipalities 

millions more again.  Funding cuts and increased teacher 

salaries are going to cost school boards millions more.  And 

worst of all, you are offloading your responsibilities for health 

care by offloading core services at the same time you refuse to 

repeal the hospital revenue tax. 

 

Mr. Premier, when are you going to stop offloading your 

responsibilities, and when are you going to start paying some 

attention to the damage your policies are creating to 

Saskatchewan people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that, oh, if we could only forget those years 

between 1981 and 1992.  Many people would like to forget it, 

but it's impossible to forget because there's $15 billion that 

hangs in the balance as a result of that history.  And as you 

know, those people who don't understand history, the Tory 

history of this province, would be doomed to repeat it, and 

that's why it's very important for the public not to forget it even 

though you will urge them to forget that mess you left. 

 

I want to say to the member opposite that this all started back 

when your previous leader, the member from Estevan, went to 

New York and said that Saskatchewan is so well off that I can 

afford to mismanage it and still break even, as well he did.  But 

he proved himself wrong -- there isn't a province around that 

can stand that kind of mismanagement, and it led to $15 billion 

in debt.  That's why the strategy to get out of debt and to get 

this province back on target.  And that's what we're doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Court House Closures 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As we've noted time 

and time again, the government certainly likes to be very 

selective in what they refer back to.  I remember a comment 

made by a former minister of Health a number of years ago 

where it talked about . . . I think the comment was, waiting-lists 

are a sign of an efficient health system.  And at that time there 

was a lot 



2678 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

of hurt taking place in the province of Saskatchewan, and again 

we see additional hurt.  And where's the hurt coming from? -- 

coming from an NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as my colleague has just indicated, there is a 

further attack on property owners in Saskatchewan 

communities, and this continues.  My colleague outlined the 

offloading of services and taxation being heaped on towns, 

villages, and cities in rural Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, not 

only are the government increasing taxes and utility bills, the 

government is drastically reducing their services, closing 

facilities, and cutting jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you just think about it, the former 

government's policy of . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the member have a question?  I 

want the member to put his question now. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, the member does have a question.  

My question is to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, last 

year you closed judicial centres in 10 rural communities; in 

today's orders in council, I notice you plan to close the centres 

in Shaunavon and Gravelbourg on July 1. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you tell me how many people will be 

affected by those further closures? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The member is correct that the court 

houses at the two centres were scheduled for closure and have 

in fact closed.  I don't have the information with me, but I 

believe that the job losses is something like 1.5 person-years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I find it 

truly amazing how little your government knows or cares about 

our small centres.  People are hurting in rural Saskatchewan; 

people are struggling to live there.  Hospital closures, school 

closures, bus routes gone, farm safety net programs gone, 

SaskPower offices in jeopardy, and now more provincial court 

circuit points gone.  In fact it just appears to be a death by a 

thousand tiny cuts to rural communities. 

 

Can you tell us how many other judicial centres you are 

planning to close in addition to these two?  How many other 

communities will have another tiny cut, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We have no such plan, Mr. Speaker.  I 

might mention that the two centres that were closed had arrived 

at the point where they were very, very lightly used.  Neither of 

them have a resident judge and hardly any trials take place 

there at all.  Any business that is transacted from that judicial 

centre -- those two judicial centres -- for the most part was 

being conducted on the telephone with a judge sitting in Moose 

Jaw or Regina.  And it just didn't seem to be worthwhile to try 

and maintain those court houses.  And for that reason, they're 

being phased out.  But there is no other plans such as the 

member suggests. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister has indicated there is no 

further plans.  And it seems to me the other day the minister . . . 

one of the other ministers also indicated that there were no 

further plans -- I think it was Energy and Mines -- regarding 

further closures and of SaskPower services in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I just want again to ask the minister: are we going to find 

out after the House closes that indeed maybe there were further 

plans, Mr. Minister?  Can you confirm that there are no further 

plans, as you've already indicated?  Will you make a firm 

commitment that you won't make plans after the House closes 

to put further closures, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- There are no further plans, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Inflation Rate 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is to the Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, we've seen how your high taxation policies are 

driving economic growth and jobs out of this province.  Now 

usually when we get into that situation, Mr. Premier, in a 

stagnant economy, such as your government has brought to us, 

benefits such as low inflation usually help out citizens.  Under 

your economic policy we get to experience the worst of both 

worlds -- zero growth and high inflation. 

 

Mr. Premier, Regina's inflation rate of 3.4 per cent is the 

second highest in Canada, and both Regina and Saskatoon are 

well above the national average.  When are we going to realize 

in this province, when is your government going to realize, Mr. 

Premier, that high inflation and a low growth rate are a direct 

result of your taxation policies? 

 

When are we going to see your government to start taking 

some action which will increase the real incomes to 

Saskatchewan families instead of decreasing it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the member that when he refers to the inflation statistics for 

Regina and Saskatoon, really you have to look at the 

underlying reason for inflation, the large part of which, or at 

least part of which, is the debt of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I wanted to say as well though, Mr. Speaker, to the members 

opposite, that if you look at the economy in 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2679 

Regina and compare it to the rest of the cities across Canada, 

the unemployment rate in Regina is 8.3 per cent -- the third 

lowest, I believe, in Canada.  It's not a bad place to live.  In fact 

I think if you talk to the Regina Economic Development 

Authority, they are going to be very disappointed at this 

incessant whining and snivelling by the members opposite 

about how terrible a place it is to live in Saskatchewan. 

 

In fact in today's paper the headline is: "Success hints at better 

times ahead."  This is based on the Farm Progress Show where 

the international . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, if we could have some order in the House or whether 

the members are just going to shout from their seat. 

 

But the headline in the paper is: "Success hints at better times 

ahead."  And it goes on to indicate -- and I want to quote -- that 

they are predicting that the rural economic development in 

Saskatchewan is improving and is turning around.  And I want 

to quote: 

 

 "I think we are experiencing a rural economic turnaround not 

only in the farm economy, but (in) the entire rural 

community," says David Fiddler, manager of the show. 

 

And he talks about how many more people are at the show and 

the improved economic development in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

That, tied with the lowest unemployment rate in Canada, one 

would wonder why the gloom and doom by that rump party 

opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question will 

be to the Minister of Economic Development, seeing as the 

Premier doesn't find this very important. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you walked around that show as I did -- and 

I'm sure you did -- you would have realized that there was an 

awful lot of people there from outside of Saskatchewan, in the 

same article.  And I would suggest to you that farm progress 

stopped in this province when you became the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I can see why the minister doesn't think that 

3.4 per cent inflation is a big problem, because they just gave a 

bunch of ministerial assistants 30 and 40 per cent raises. 

 

But I would suggest to you, Mr. Minister, if you are one of the 

12,000 people on the welfare rolls, Mr. Speaker, since this 

government came to power, you would find 3.4 per cent 

inflation something to worry about.  And if you're a farm 

family with a net income of around $5,000 this year, you would 

find 3.4 per cent inflation something to worry about.  If you're 

a senior citizen living on a fixed income with all of your rates 

going up, Mr. Speaker, 3.4 per cent is something that you 

worry about. 

Now as my colleague from Kindersley pointed out and the 

minister seems to take light of, the very fact that Saskatchewan 

property owners, families, have a $3,000 a year increase in 

their property taxes, Mr. Speaker, means that 3.4 per cent 

inflation is something that you worry about. 

 

Mr. Minister, when are you going to realize that it's your 

taxation policies that are giving these people the inflation they 

have to worry about?  When are you going to do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's that very simplistic 

analysis that the now Leader of the Tory Party uses that got us 

into the problem we are presently in.  He says it's taxation that 

is causing the inflation.  And then he doesn't go on to say and 

the reason the taxation is high here is because of the $15 billion 

debt that we built up over the last 10 years when things were in 

fact better. 

 

Now I'll make a deal, and maybe what we can do is offer you a 

deal.  I will not mention your record during the rest of this 

question period if you get up and apologize for the fact that you 

ran up $15 billion in debt that is causing the problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, what we would like you to do is 

keep the deal that you promised in the fall of 1991 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- You made a deal.  Your Premier said, no PST 

(provincial sales tax).  Remember it -- $200 million -- it's gone.  

More for health, more for education, more for agriculture.  Do 

you remember, Mr. Minister, the deal you made with the 

farmers?  You got on a plane and you went to Ottawa and you 

said, I'm going to bring home a bunch of money.  Mr. Minister, 

instead of a deal, instead of a deal what we got was a broken 

promise. 

 

And now, Mr. Minister, we've got inflation rates such as 7.7 

per cent, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon, when the national average 

is 0.4, on clothing.  We've got 4.2 per cent inflation in 

transportation in Regina, when the national average is 2.6.  

Food, 4.3 and the rest of the country, it's below zero.  Mr. 

Minister, when are you going to keep the deal that you made 

with Saskatchewan people in October of '91? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

still is refusing to accept the fact that the reason the tough 

decisions are being made in this province -- I say even though 

people across Canada understand and people in Saskatchewan 

know -- the tough decisions are being made as a result of your 



2680 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

debt. 

 

But within two questions the minister . . . or the member has 

flipped from saying there's too much taxation to now saying 

what we need is more taxation.  Now this inconsistent leaps in 

the cogs of the mind of the member opposite is the part of the 

reason why we are at this difficult point in Saskatchewan we 

find ourselves at.  It's true there is a $15 billion debt.  The 

question is, what do you do with it?  Do you continue to hide 

your head in the sand the way you did for 10 years?  Or as the 

member from Souris-Cannington did when he was in 

government saying, we are going to use the scorched earth 

policy in this province so that no matter who gets elected, the 

province will be ungovernable.  That's what Senator Berntson 

said and we are now dealing with that issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the 

problem is the choices you make, the choices that you make.  

It's the 30 and 40 per cent increases to your assistants.  It's all 

of the Premier's friends that we've seen appointed to 

government.  You know, they all come with about a hundred 

thousand dollar tag attached to them, Mr. Minister.  It's those 

choices, when you said you wouldn't do it. 

 

Mr. Minister, when your government decided that it was going 

to attack rural Saskatchewan to make sure that rural 

Saskatchewan paid their political debts to you, you took away 

the ability of this province to generate income and pay its bills, 

Mr. Minister.  When are you going to get off the political 

agenda because you couldn't fulfil your promises in '91 and 

move on to making economic development happen in this 

province without taxing us to death?  When are you going to do 

that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- What always surprises me, Mr. 

Speaker, is the audacity of that member to get up and talk about 

economic development and what they would do if only the 

people of the province hadn't unceremoniously kicked them out 

in 1991.  The people of the province said they didn't like your 

style of economic development.  Billions of dollars for projects 

like the Rafferty.  You remember the Rafferty?  The Joytec and 

Supercart?  You remember the GigaText?  You remember the 

Pocklington deal of $20 million in grants to that deal? 

 

I say to the member opposite that if they believe the public is 

going to trust them in terms of economic development, they are 

sadly lacking until the day comes when they first admit the 

mistakes they made between 1982 and 1992.  You just have to 

admit that you were wrong. 

 

All one has to do is go down to the Rafferty dam if you want to 

use the best example of Tory economic development, and look 

at that boat ramp up on the side of the hill that people come and 

marvel at as they drive along the 

bottom, in the dust bowl along the bottom and gaze up at the 

boat launch.  They know what Tory economic development is 

about and they don't like it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, a question to the same minister.  

What's obvious here, Mr. Minister, is the fact that your 

government is a dismal failure because the numbers are in.  

The numbers are in and Saskatchewan families are suffering an 

inflation rate for one reason only, and that's because of your 

government's policies. 

 

Mr. Minister, you can't stand in here and give the Harris 

speech.  I mean your Premier goes off to New York and the 

things that you just rattled off in condemnation he stands up, 

and I repeat again, Cargill, Hitachi, IBM, Northern Telecom, 

Weyerhaeuser, he goes through the whole litany when he's in 

New York and he says these are wonderful things we have in 

our province.  You can't stand in this legislature and give the 

Harris speech, Mr. Minister, just to get your feet from the fire. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, the fact is, and you haven't answered yet: 

why is the inflation rate so much higher for Saskatchewan 

citizens compared to all of the rest of Canada if you're doing 

such a great job?  Why is that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I want to say to the members 

opposite, when they talk about economic development and you 

talk about Saskatchewan, you're missing the point that we now 

have an unemployment rate in Saskatchewan, this 7.3 per cent 

-- 2 percentage points below any other province in Canada.  

Doesn't matter . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No that's not 

true, it wasn't always that way. 

 

I want to say to the members opposite that if they would look 

and talk to people out at the Farm Progress Show they would 

know there's a great deal of optimism.  Those of you who were 

at the oil show in Weyburn -- and a couple of you were there -- 

great optimism in gas and oil in the province of Saskatchewan.  

Now there are problems.  There are problems. 

 

The biggest single problem is $15 billion in debt arrived at as a 

result of GigaText, Rafferty, Joytec, Supercart, High R Door, 

Peter Pocklington, and the list goes on and on.  I say to the 

members opposite that if you expect the public to trust you, 

you really should get a handle on the fact that they still have 

not forgiven you for the mistakes you made in the 10 years you 

were in government.  Admit you were wrong and you may 

work your way back up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Reopening of Fort San Training and Convention 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2681 

Centre 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise to inform the 

Assembly of a further example of this government's 

Partnership for Renewal.  The Echo Valley Centre or Fort San 

holds a special place in the hearts and the minds of many 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, so it gives me great 

pleasure to announce the reopening of Fort San training and 

convention centre. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- An anchor tenant, Mr. Speaker, is 

critical to the success of the new Fort San. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Department of National Defence has 

recognized the tremendous potential of this facility to serve its 

training needs.  I'm therefore pleased to announce the 

cooperative effort between the province of Saskatchewan and 

the Department of National Defence to relocate the western 

Canadian sea cadet training program from Gimli, Manitoba, to 

Fort San. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, on July 1, 1993, one 

week from Thursday, approximately 250 cadets and their 

officers will begin their two-month session at Fort San.  It will 

be the first of a long-term commitment  

_- a minimum of five years -- between the DND (Department 

of National Defence) and the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

The fact that the Defence department picked Fort San as an 

ideal base for the sea cadet program is evidence of how 

working together we can achieve success.  They would not 

have chosen Fort San if they did not have the support of the 

community, the native people of Star Blanket, and the many 

heritage groups who fought so hard to preserve this historic 

site. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another government might have lost out on this 

tremendous opportunity to create jobs for Saskatchewan people 

and to stimulate our rural economy, and at the same time retain 

government interest.  We have captured this opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, and as a result, today 43 people are working at Fort 

San in preparation of the sea cadet arrival. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- And, Mr. Speaker, more jobs will 

be created and maintained as a result of the more than $2 

million of projected spin-off to the local economy.  This is 

good news for the valley, and good news for the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my colleague, the member for 

Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, who chaired the advisory groups that 

brought together the official groups from Fort Qu'Appelle, the 

Star Blanket Reserve, the various heritage groups, and the 

union representatives.  That advisory group told us any solution 

had to involve the community and not be a 

further drain on the public purse; it had to be financially viable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased that in addition to finding a new use 

for the historic property, Fort San will be financially viable 

when fully operational and there will be no net cost to the 

taxpayer.  Mr. Speaker, this is part of Saskatchewan's new 

spirit of renewal and representative of the government 

commitment to the partnership with Saskatchewan people. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, we took a losing proposition, 

fundamentally re-examined it, and with the cooperation of 

many local groups, we found a solution that is economically 

viable, retains Crown ownership, and produces economic, 

training, and community benefits.  Mr. Speaker, this is a vivid 

demonstration of Saskatchewan's Partnership for Renewal, the 

Saskatchewan spirit at work.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to also pass on my congratulations to the people of 

Fort Qu'Appelle and area that have obviously worked very hard 

to put together an accommodation that keeps the historic Fort 

San functioning in Saskatchewan.  One only has to live in this 

province and know someone that's spent time in that particular 

institution while recovering from tuberculosis . . . knows that it 

is a historic part of our heritage here and that all people would 

like to see it continue on in some form or other. 

 

I would also like to congratulate the federal Minister of 

Defence, the Prime Minister to be, for working with the 

province of Saskatchewan and Fort Qu'Appelle in bringing this 

about.  And that, I think, is a positive aspect for that particular 

new Prime Minister, to present Saskatchewan with something 

such as this in the beginning days of her prime ministership; 

now in contrast, Mr. Speaker, to the leader of the federal NDP 

who would have shut the Defence department down a long 

time ago and we wouldn't have had this opportunity. 

 

So it's nice to see the provincial New Democrats working hand 

in hand with the Minister of Defence and now Prime Minister 

to bring about what is something unique for Saskatchewan, to 

have a sea cadet training area here when we are a land-locked 

province.  And I think hat off to Ms. Campbell for her 

diligence in working with these New Democrats and pulling 

this about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I'd like leave to make comment, if I may. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would 



2682 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

just like to commend all of the people involved in this.  Gimli, 

Manitoba's, loss is Saskatchewan's gain.  And I do think that it 

really is a great pleasure for people who have participated in 

the retreats at Fort San; not only, as the Leader of the Official 

Opposition has stated, that there are historical stories from Fort 

San, but there have been many, many stories created at Fort 

San because it's been a writers' retreat and very well-known 

and important Saskatchewanians such as Lorna Crozier and 

Patrick Lane, Gertrude Story, Anne Szumigalski, have all 

written many, many stories from Fort San.  It is indeed good 

news, not just for the people of the valley; it's good news for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Before orders of the day -- I believe 

this has been arranged with the leaders of the other party -- I 

would seek leave of the Assembly at the conclusion of a few 

remarks to move a motion respecting the Assembly paying 

tribute to the memory of the late Honourable Frederick William 

Johnson, 16th Lieutenant Governor of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, we were all saddened and I might say certainly in 

my case shocked by the untimely passing of Frederick William 

Johnson, 16th Lieutenant Governor of the province of 

Saskatchewan who died on June 20, 1993. 

 

Frederick William Johnson came to Canada with his parents as 

a child at an early age.  He was born in England in 1917.  Prior 

to the Second World War, he was a school teacher in the 

Balgonie district and in Grenfell, Saskatchewan.  He joined the 

Canadian Armed Forces in 1941 and served overseas in 

Normandy, Belgium, Germany, and Holland with the artillery 

battery from Moosomin.  In 1946 he was discharged with the 

rank of major. 

 

After the Second World War, Mr. Johnson came back home, 

and he took his law degree at the University of Saskatchewan 

and practised thereafter law right here in the city of Regina.  

Although he was a busy practitioner, he found time to be active 

in what turned out to be a lifetime of community work.  He 

found time, for example, to be elected trustee of the Regina 

Public School Board for two consecutive terms, beginning in 

1956.  And in memory of his recognition there, later a high 

school would be named in his honour. 

 

In 1960, Mr. Johnson was elected as a bencher of the Law 

Society of Saskatchewan, which is of course the governing 

body of the legal profession.  And then in 1963, he was named 

a member of the council of the Canadian Bar Association on a 

national level. 

 

In December of 1963, he was appointed Queen's Counsel.  

After serving another term as provincial 

bencher in 1964, he was appointed chairman of the royal 

commission on government administration in Saskatchewan to 

examine government reorganization in the province, having 

been appointed by the former premier, the late W. Ross 

Thatcher. 

 

In 1965, Mr. Johnson was appointed to the Court of Queen's 

Bench.  In fact, I believe that my first contact with Mr. Justice 

Johnson, as he then was, was during this period when I had the 

obligation of defending a client on a charge of murder.  It was 

my first defence of this magnitude and the Justice was Fred 

Johnson, who presided, as I now recollect back, with the kind 

of civility and courtesy and firmness which characterized his 

years on the bench.  Later -- 12 years later -- he was elevated to 

the position of Chief Justice of the Court of Queen's Bench in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

As I say, while serving on the judiciary, he was noted for his 

compassion, his civility, courteousness, and respect for the 

truth, which of course is the ultimate purpose of any court 

proceeding -- to get at the truth. 

 

At that time, as life would have it, when he was Chief Justice, I 

was the Attorney General for the province of Saskatchewan.  

And so our paths again intertwined in regular and frequent 

meetings concerning the administration of the court and the 

obligations of the court and the requests that he would make on 

the Attorney General and the Attorney General's office, in his 

capacity as Chief Justice. 

 

(1445) 

 

We had many interesting problems to deal with.  To me, the 

one that sticks out the most was the initiative of the 

government of the day that I was very honoured to introduce, 

and that was the merger of, what was at that time, the district 

court with the Court of Queen's Bench -- amalgamating them 

and making it one Court of Queen's Bench. 

 

This clearly was a somewhat controversial move, I would say, 

amongst some members of the judiciary and certainly amongst 

some members of the Bar and perhaps even some members of 

the public.  But Fred Johnson realized its worth and he 

immediately took to heart the task of convincing his colleagues 

that it should work; that it was in the best interest of the 

administration of justice, and he sold it. 

 

More than selling it, he made it work in his position as chief 

judge.  This was, in my judgement, one of the most significant 

legal reforms in the province of Saskatchewan again to be 

associated by the name and with the name of Fred Johnson. 

 

As I indicated earlier, throughout his very active life, Fred 

Johnson was extremely busy and active in community service 

work.  Together with a small group of Regina citizens for 

example, he spearheaded the Centre of the Arts planning and 

building committee as part of the city of Regina centennial 

project for 1967.  And we now have of course the very 

wonderful Centre of the Arts in the Wascana Centre Authority. 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2683 

In 1971-1972 he was chair of a committee established by the 

minister of Public Health to study the cancer care issues and 

problems pertaining to cancer care in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  The implementation of a large number of the 

recommendations from that report by Fred Johnson has greatly 

benefited those who suffered and are still suffering from cancer 

and benefited their families as well. 

 

In the mid-1950s he was deeply involved with the organization 

of an umbrella association for care homes for senior citizens.  

And that provincial organization still continues as the 

Saskatchewan Association of Special Care Homes.  And later 

he was very active in the organization of the Clare Parker 

House, a group for physically challenged young people. 

 

So as you can see, this was a person who was very, very active 

in a very productive and positive way to the activities and the 

needs of his community. 

 

For almost 40 years he and his wife Joyce were members of 

Westminster United Church.  And during this association Mr. 

Johnson held key positions in all the committees of that church 

and continued to serve as an active elder right up to his death.  

He also was a member of the advisory board of Martha House 

for a number of years.  And was an active member of the 

Salvation Army advisory board, also here in Regina. 

 

I suppose in some ways the culmination of this very 

outstanding, sterling career of devotion to public service came 

in 1983 when Mr. Justice Johnson was appointed as His 

Honour Lieutenant Governor for all the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Being the representative of the sovereign here 

in this province from 1983 to 1988, he enhanced and 

strengthened the position of the Crown, the role of our 

parliamentary system of democracy in this province at a time 

when all Canadian institutions were in question and to some 

extent still remain in question.  He demonstrated in his role 

here a keen understanding of the subtle but vital duties, 

functions, both constitutional and ceremonial, both legal and 

ceremonial, as the monarch in Canada and as the Queen's 

representative in this province. 

 

Fred Johnson also served as the first chancellor of the 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit in 1985.  He ensured the success 

of the new provincial honour by his wise counsel, his 

independence, and his firm support.  And fittingly, he received 

the Order himself in 1991, in November of 1991, and he was 

made an Officer of the Order of Canada in 1990. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, throughout this very active citizen's 

contributions stood his gracious, intelligent, and attractive 

spouse, Mrs. Joyce Johnson.  Much can be said about her.  I 

would simply like to say that in my judgement the highest 

tribute to a relationship that I can give is that they 

complemented and supported each other, no doubt in the good 

times and the bad times, but in all of their various activities. 

They put people at ease.  I know this from my personal 

experiences.  In fact last night when I found out about this sad 

loss when I was in Saskatoon, my wife Eleanor and I were 

reflecting back about the number of occasions when Mrs. Joyce 

Johnson -- not that Fred Johnson wouldn't -- but if there was a 

little bit of a glitch in the ceremonies or the proceedings, how 

she would make you feel very much a part of the proceedings.  

Gracious, intelligent, attractive, and strong.  I spoke to her this 

morning and she shows that strength and that grace which has 

made her such an important part of the Johnson family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to close by saying we have here in Fred 

Johnson a person who demonstrated above all -- above all -- his 

commitment and love for Canada and for Saskatchewan.  A 

commitment and a love for Canada and our province, our 

people, our institutions, our opportunities.  We have here a 

person who had a zest, a love of life, which matched if not 

surpassed his love for Canada and the province. 

 

He was forceful, he was determined, he was honest, he told it 

like it is and was.  He was friendly and witty.  He was in many 

ways larger than life.  He'll be very sorrily missed by those of 

us who met him and knew him.  There are thousands in the 

province of Saskatchewan who have had that experience.  He'll 

be missed by us. 

 

On behalf of the Assembly, on behalf of the government of the 

province of Saskatchewan, and I would say on behalf of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, we pass on our deep 

regrets and sorrow to Joyce Johnson, the family, to tell them 

that we're thinking of them in this moment of sorrow. 

 

And so therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded 

by the member from Thunder Creek, the Leader of the 

Opposition, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That this Legislative Assembly unites in paying tribute to the 

memory of the Honourable Frederick William Johnson, 16th 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan, who 

died June 20, 1993. 

 

 Mr. Johnson was born February 13, 1917 in Sedgley, 

Staffordshire, England but moved to Canada when he was 11 

years old.  After graduating from high school, Mr. Johnson 

attended Normal School in Regina.  He qualified as a teacher 

in 1935 and took a position at the New Ontario one-room 

school near Balgonie.  Two years later he moved to Grenfell 

where he taught until the Second World War began in 1939. 

 

 Mr. Johnson joined the militia and, until being called to 

active service, he attended the University of Saskatchewan.  

In May 1941 Mr. Johnson was accepted into the officer 

training school at Victoria, British Columbia.  He was 

commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Royal Canadian 

Artillery Regiment and served overseas until being 

demobilized in 1946. 



2684 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

 When discharged, Mr. Johnson had attained the rank of staff 

major. 

 

 In 1946 Mr. Johnson enrolled in the College of Law at the 

University of Saskatchewan.  He earned a Bachelor of Arts in 

1947 and graduated with a law degree in 1949.  During his 

articleship in Regina, he married Joyce Laing of Stockholm, 

Saskatchewan.  In 1950 he was admitted to the Bar and 

practised law in Regina for the next 15 years. 

 

 In 1963 Mr. Johnson was made Queen's Counsel and in 1965 

he was appointed a Justice of the Court of Queen's Bench for 

Saskatchewan.  He became Chief Justice of that court in July 

1977. 

 

 Mr. Johnson was involved in his community's affairs and 

served on numerous boards and committees.  Since the 

1950s, he was involved in the creation and operation of 

special care homes for senior citizens and group homes for 

handicapped youth.  Beginning in 1956, he served two terms 

as a trustee on the Regina Public School Board.  Mr. Johnson 

was an unsuccessful candidate in the 1960 provincial general 

election and in the 1962 federal election.  In 1964, he was 

appointed as chairman of a Royal Commission which studied 

government administration.  Mr. Johnson was also chair of 

the Regina Centennial Project Committee which worked 

towards the construction of the Centre of the Arts.  In 1971 

and 1972, Mr. Johnson served as chairman of a government 

committee which studied cancer care in the province.  From 

July 6, 1983, until September 7, 1988, Mr. Johnson served 

with great distinction as Lieutenant Governor of the province 

of Saskatchewan.  In November 1991 he was bestowed with 

the Saskatchewan Order of Merit.  His Honour's 

commitment, energy and style in fulfilling his duties as the 

Queen's representative have endeared him to the people in 

every corner of the province. 

 

 In recording its deep sense of loss and bereavement, this 

Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with members 

of the bereaved family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased to join the Premier today in this condolence motion to 

the family of the Honourable Frederick Johnson, former 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan.  I'm 

going to be very brief, Mr. Speaker, because I know there are 

other members that wish to say a few words. 

 

Mr. Johnson was the Lieutenant Governor of the province 

when I was first elected in 1985, and I guess my first 

impressions of lieutenant governors were made by Mr. Johnson 

and Mrs. Johnson in my first few 

days and months as a member of this Assembly.  And as the 

Premier indicated, Fred Johnson and his lovely wife, Joyce, 

were a very gracious couple.  Mr. Johnson's career was so long 

and varied with so many aspects of Saskatchewan society, and 

indeed contributions to our country, that I think he had the 

ability to make almost anyone feel at home and welcome. 

 

And the Premier is absolutely right -- Mrs. Johnson was always 

so gracious at formal occasions.  If you were a little hesitant or 

you felt a little bit uncomfortable with the role you were 

expected to play, she never hesitated to give a kind word or that 

little nudge that made things flow along very smoothly. 

 

And I think the Lieutenant Governor's contribution all across 

the province was always the same way, whether it was the 

school children or seniors or people that just love the idea of 

the role that the monarchy plays in our system, the fact that we 

do use the British parliamentary system and we do have a 

sovereign that Mr. Johnson represented so well in the province 

of Saskatchewan during his term here. 

 

I think anyone that did as Mr. Johnson did by putting his very 

life on the line for his country during a time of war gives one 

an appreciation for all of the good that we have in our society, 

Mr. Speaker.  Certainly from the time that Mr. Johnson was 

decommissioned in 1946 until he came to this untimely death a 

few days ago, we know that it was a life jam-packed with 

contribution. 

 

I think Mr. Johnson's experience, as so many veterans' 

experiences were, made them very motivated and made them 

feel that they had to use each and every day to make that 

contribution to the society which they had fought for.  And as 

one reviews Mr. Johnson's life, it was certainly one of 

contribution and dedication to his society. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I'll take my place and allow other 

members of the Assembly to express their words. 

 

(1500) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like 

to pay tribute to the Honourable Frederick Johnson, whose long 

and distinguished career in public service was so capably 

outlined by the Premier and whose life exemplified dedication 

to Saskatchewan and to Canada. 

 

On behalf of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party, my family, and 

myself, I'd like to pass condolences on to Joyce, to Bill, Royce, 

and to Sheila, their children, who are suffering pain at the loss 

of their husband and their father.  I know that their pride in him 

and the astonishing memories that he helped to create for them 

will sustain them through this very difficult time.  Fred and 

Joyce did a tremendous job of raising thoughtful and concerned 

children who are committed to serving others. 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2685 

And I'm proud that Mr. Johnson had a long and dedicated 

affiliation with the Liberal Party until his appointment to the 

bench.  Last summer I asked this great Canadian to make 

comment on the Charlottetown accord at a time when 

politicians and others were leaping to their feet to either attack 

or to align themselves with this pact.  And it was most 

impressive that his response was that he would not make 

comment until after he had read the document in its entirety 

and digested its implications. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the lives of our citizens have been enhanced by 

the works of Fred Johnson, and it is most appropriate that we 

celebrate his life and honour his memory in this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to take 

a few moments this afternoon to add my voice in memory of 

Fred Johnson.  I want to speak both as the Minister of Justice 

and then I want to say a few words on a personal basis. 

 

The Premier has highlighted Mr. Johnson's many contributions 

to this province and to the lives of all of the people of this 

province.  Included in the Premier's remarks were recollection 

of the career of Mr. Johnson as a lawyer, then as a Queen's 

Bench judge, and finally as the Chief Justice of the Court of 

Queen's Bench.  These were very distinguished elements of the 

life work of Mr. Johnson, a life devoted to serving his 

community as a teacher, as a lawyer, as a judge, as a Chief 

Justice, and then as a Lieutenant Governor.  Fred Johnson was 

always known for his unfailing sense of fairness and for his 

compassion and his deep commitment to this province and to 

the people of this province.  

 

I want to add a personal note, Mr. Speaker, based upon my 

personal experience with this man.  I started out my career as a 

lawyer in Regina, and on first coming here I made the 

acquaintance of Mr. Johnson.  And in the very competitive 

world of the practice of law, Fred Johnson stood apart.  He 

stood apart as a warm and courteous and affectionate member 

of the senior Bar who always took the time to express an 

interest in young lawyers, myself included, but including also 

the other young lawyers who were beginning to make their way 

in the profession.  And Mr. Johnson always took time to ask 

questions and offer encouragement and to let us know that the 

practice of law and the profession of law can be a very caring 

and compassionate profession, and the members of that 

profession can enjoy a strong and warm personal relationship. 

 

He was an extraordinary man.  He has contributed in so many 

ways to the development of our province, and the individual 

citizens of this province were always clearly his priority.  I 

always felt, Mr. Speaker, that these sentiments were focused 

upon me, knowing at the same time that they were focused 

upon many, many other people as well.  We never met but that 

he expressed an interest in what I had been doing and what he 

had heard and what he thought might be of interest to me. 

And that continued all the way through until our last meeting 

over lunch at a recent luncheon at Government House.  And at 

that time he had advice to give as to economies that could be 

made within the government.  He suggested, for example, that 

the overuse of courier services was something that should be 

looked at.  Granted in this day and age there is a need for quick 

communication of information, but it doesn't have to be that 

quick.  His point was that ordinary mail would serve the 

purpose of transmitting this information just as well and much, 

much cheaper than the hiring of couriers. 

 

So his interest in that area was chronicled by the Premier, 

having headed the royal commission on government 

expenditures, and it's an interest he obviously never lost in his 

lifetime. 

 

I wanted to join my colleagues this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, in 

extending my deepest sympathies to Joyce, who is well-known 

to many of us -- Fred's lifetime partner and friend -- and to their 

children, Bill, Royce, Sheila, and their family.  The people of 

Saskatchewan deeply share their sense of loss, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to add my 

sympathy at the passing of Fred Johnson.  I will join with the 

Premier and other members of the legislature to extend my 

very best to the family. 

 

I had the opportunity and was pleased to be the premier of the 

province of Saskatchewan when Fred Johnson was entrusted 

with the office of Lieutenant Governor of our province.  Their 

Honours Mr. and Mrs. Johnson were very kind to me and to my 

wife Chantal during our mutual time in public life. 

 

As the Queen's representative I can say that not only did Fred 

Johnson do an outstanding job in the ceremonial and symbolic 

role, but that he also acted as a very sincere and true adviser to 

Her Majesty's ministers. 

 

I had numerous occasions to consult with the Lieutenant 

Governor to seek counsel on matters important to government 

and public service.  He was never partisan but always to the 

point, and gave his very best advice.  For example, in 1987 the 

province was fortunate to enjoy a royal visit by the Queen.  

Such an undertaking is a major task for a province like 

Saskatchewan, and it is a highlight of the Lieutenant 

Governor's career.  Fred and Joyce Johnson were literally 

outstanding as Her Majesty's -- if I could use that term -- host 

and hostess here on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

In the midst of a highly controversial and divisive issue, Fred 

Johnson showed the courage of his convictions, and after 

leaving the full neutrality of the sovereign throne, he spoke out 

on trade.  Rarely did he do this, but he spoke, as always, with 

conscience and his sense of duty to preserve the unity of 

Canada. 

 

The same applies to his feelings towards our 



2686 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

constitution.  He was a man of principle, a man of deep belief.  

His contributions to our province will endure, as will our 

memory of a man committed to very high ideals. 

 

Let me say that Fred Johnson understood his role as the 

sovereign's representative and that he took it most seriously.  

Fred Johnson believed the basic worth of each human being 

and his life was a mission to improve this province and this 

world. 

 

I believe that there would be countless people across the 

province who have heard Fred Johnson speak on November 11, 

Remembrance Day.  And at these ceremonies he was as 

patriotic and as powerful a speaker as we've ever heard in the 

province.  He cared so much for his country and so much for 

the province and so much for the future of Canada that he 

would bring people in the audience to tears when he spoke of 

his Canada. 

 

He cared deeply for people and particularly for children, and 

certainly his own children.  Fred Johnson was a great family 

man, a very positive and compassionate and wise father, as we 

see reflected in his family and his children today. 

 

I can say that I personally valued his wisdom and his measured 

approach to public affairs.  In some ways, and I think the 

Assembly will let me say this, he was like a public service 

father to me in many regards. 

 

Chantal and I extend our deepest sympathy to Joyce, his 

family, and our very best wishes to all of the Johnsons and their 

loved ones.  May God bless them all. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise with regrets 

and sympathy over the passing of Frederick Johnson.  My 

remarks will be short, Mr. Speaker, but very sincere. 

 

I've known the late Mr. Johnson and Mrs. Johnson, Joyce, his 

good wife, for many years.  I attended many functions with 

them, mostly pertaining to his official duties, but also at other 

duties of a more private nature. 

 

I enjoyed, Mr. Speaker, hearing him speak.  He was a fluent 

speaker.  Mr. Johnson did all his duties as a lawyer, a judge, 

and Lieutenant Governor with great dignity.  Frederick Johnson 

was a good citizen of Saskatchewan.  He left his mark and will 

always be remembered. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I wish to put on the record with my 

colleagues, my sincere sympathies to his good wife Joyce, and 

family, and may God's blessings be with them at this sad time.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

want to join all of my colleagues in the legislature in passing 

on my condolences and deepest sympathy to Mrs. Johnson and 

the Johnson children and family. 

I first met Mr. Johnson when I became a new member of this 

legislature in 1986, and I was obviously aware of the Johnson 

family prior to becoming a member as my cousin Russell is 

married to Sheila Johnson, and have come to know the family 

through that marriage. 

 

One of the things that I will always remember is his fondness 

for his grandchildren, and I don't think that that's been 

mentioned here today.  He was extremely pleased when Sheila 

and Russell had their first child.  And I happened to be driving 

by Sheila and Russell's last Wednesday night and had the 

occasion to see Mr. and Mrs. Johnson on the street with their 

grandchildren, along with other members of the family. 

 

I know that Mr. Johnson cared deeply about his family, his 

children.  He was very proud of his children.  Two of whom 

I've met were proud lawyers just as he was, and I know that 

they will miss him very, very much.  So I want to say to the 

Johnson family, from my family to them, my deepest 

sympathies. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

make a few short comments as well on the passing of Mr. 

Frederick W. Johnson.  The privilege I had of first meeting Mr. 

Johnson was at a ministerial breakfast, a prayer breakfast in 

Kipling prior to my ever getting involved in public life. 

 

And I must say, in the comments from that prayer breakfast, 

were nothing but praise for the way Mr. Johnson shared in that 

meeting.  The patriotism he showed, his love for his nation, 

love for his country, and the encouragement that he left with 

each one of us to reach out to our neighbours and to treat them 

as we would treat ourselves, as Christ would have endeavoured 

that we do.  Certainly he was a man of high value, certainly 

looked upon with high esteem. 

 

I also counted it a privilege to be involved in the Saskatchewan 

prayer breakfast committee and having worked with Mr. 

Johnson for some, I believe four years, in helping organize the 

prayer breakfasts that are conducted in this province.  And 

there again Mr. Johnson really showed leadership and really 

gave leadership to the committee and established the values 

that he upheld highly.  It was an honour and a pleasure to work 

with the former Lieutenant Governor. 

 

It was also very enlightening and uplifting to be around Mr. 

and Mrs. Johnson.  They always had a word of encouragement, 

and Mrs. Johnson always had a vibrant smile.  And I would 

like to extend to Mrs. Johnson and the family from my wife 

and I, our deepest sympathy at this time of Mr. Johnson's 

passing. 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I, 

too, would like to join my colleagues in the legislature in 

extending my deepest sympathy to the Johnson family at this 

very sad time for them. 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2687 

I want to state that the first time I met Judge Johnson was when 

I was being admitted to the Bar many years ago, and he was the 

judge who was admitting the young lawyers at that time. 

 

The Johnson family were also neighbours of mine for a number 

of years when I lived on Leopold Crescent.  And for a period of 

years I represented them as constituents.  I found Mr. and Mrs. 

Johnson to be very friendly, very kind people as neighbours, 

and very understanding people.  I also know and reiterate the 

comments of my colleague that the Johnsons were very proud 

of their children and I'm sure very proud of their grandchildren 

as well. 

 

They were always interested in what you were doing.  And 

they were willing to provide you with help and advice if you 

sought any advice from them.  I found both Mr. and Mrs. 

Johnson to be very wonderful, community-minded people.  

And I certainly pass on my sympathy to the family and wish 

them the very best. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I take leave of the 

Assembly to move, seconded by my colleague, the Leader of 

the Opposition, the member from Thunder Creek: 

 

 That the resolution just passed, together with the transcript of 

oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 

communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of this 

Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, with leave to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like 

to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly Mr. and 

Mrs. Ross and Margaret Irvine of Oxbow.  Ross is the 

pharmacist in Oxbow.  And I would like to ask you and the 

Assembly to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- With leave I'd like to make a brief statement 

about Arden Knoll in the U.S. golf tournament yesterday. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Saskatchewan Golfer Makes U.S. Open 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to offer 

my congratulations, and I trust the congratulations of the 

Assembly, to a man characterized by the Premier as a personal 

friend of the member from Estevan.  I'm proud to say that I am 

indeed a a friend of Arden Knoll.  And I recently had the 

opportunity to play golf with Arden, as suspected by some 

members of the cabinet. 

 

That aside, I think it is a worthy achievement that Arden has 

played so well in the U.S. Open, and we can now say he's 

certainly the top golfer in the province and one of the best on 

the continent. 

 

Arden finished seven over par, two strokes better than Nick 

Faldo who is ranked the best player in the world.  He also beat 

out Jack Nicklaus, and for any members -- and particularly for 

the member from Elphinstone who says he doesn't understand 

golf that well -- let me say beating Nicklaus would be roughly 

equivalent to Ray Martin beating Ralph Klein today. 

 

Let me say that the only regret I have, Mr. Speaker, is that 

Arden will not be wearing a SaskPower team jacket.  Had good 

sense prevailed, it is obvious the value of the sponsorship 

contract today; and I say with just a modest amount of humour, 

perhaps Arden is now priced out of the government's range. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sincerely, we all want to congratulate Arden 

Knoll and we want to express our appreciation for this very 

noticeable achievement.  And I'm sure all members of the 

Legislative Assembly will join me in taking our hats off to 

Arden Knoll. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to join 

with members of this Assembly in congratulating Arden Knoll 

in his golfing accomplishment on the weekend.  Many people 

may not realize this, but to qualify for the U.S. Open you do 

not have to win a lottery or get lucky in golf.  You have to go 

through a long process of very competitive golf.  And I might 

add that Arden Knoll went through a qualifying procedure at 

which he beat hundreds and hundreds of golfers and became 

the low qualifier to make it into that particular Open. 

 

He is a Saskatchewan resident and citizen that we're very proud 

of.  And as person who has, from time to time, had an occasion 

to golf in this province -- not exactly with Arden, but with 

other golfers of his calibre -- I wish to express my 

congratulations on behalf of the government and on behalf of 

our caucus to him and his wife on their great accomplishment 

in making the cut at the U.S. Open and doing such a great job 

in those final 36 holes.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

Item 1 



2688 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Premier, I 

have some questions that relate to agriculture, and I know that 

that's not your first understanding, but I want to ask you a 

couple of questions that relate to what you perceive to be the 

direction that agriculture is supposed to take in the next 18 

months or 2 years.  I want to begin by saying that I believe that 

agriculture is the backbone of this province, but it also needs to 

go one step further, Mr. Premier, and that is that the 

involvement of secondary industry and processing needs to 

become a part of the fabric and framework of this province in 

order for us to create jobs and economic wealth as a component 

of a delivery for a better Saskatchewan and a better place to 

live and a place for our young people to become a part of. 

 

And in that area I believe we have to deal with agriculture in 

two functions.  One is the technological function which I 

believe Saskatchewan is a leader in the world, in dry-land 

farming and many other places as it relates to technology and 

livestock and livestock production as well as the primary 

production, and then the transfer into secondary industry as it 

relates to processing and manufacturing the products that we do 

to some extent. 

 

We have some of them -- Harvest Foods and others come to 

mind, as I think about it -- but I'd like to have you comment on 

that to begin with, and then we'll start our discussion in related 

fashion as we go along. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I think I can in general 

terms agree with almost everything that the hon. member from 

Morse has said, and I was taking notes while he was making 

his comments.  And I think the importance of agriculture to this 

province is clear; no one would dispute that.  I think we are a 

leader, not only in primary but secondary production and 

innovation. 

 

Obviously the field faces a lot of challenge in the next not only 

18 months but perhaps a little bit longer than that -- maybe not 

-- but certainly for the next little while there are still some 

hurdles to overcome.  And we hope that through a combination 

of federal and provincial programs, the road will be made a 

little more smooth for family farms. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- In the . . . we'll start with the primary side 

first.  In the election, Mr. Premier, you promised the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan that you would put cost of 

production into the formula as it relates to any kind of a 

program that we had.  And the program that was in existence at 

that time did a qualified cost of production but it dealt with 

qualified cost of production based on the general inputs that 

were as a part of the total that came as a result of an analysis 

done by various agencies that looked at what were the inputs 

and what constituted the majority of volumes in those inputs, 

and then the decision was made in revenue insurance to run 

that at 70 per cent. 

 

And I very clearly recall you making the commitment that it 

would be at cost of production.  And I believe, 

Mr. Premier, that that was far in excess of what really the 

province has a capacity to pay; however, you did make that 

commitment to the people of the province and I believe that we 

should have an explanation of why you changed your mind. 

 

I think you probably are going to blame it on all the debt, but 

you have to think about the difference between something in 

agriculture and something in health care.  In agriculture, you 

have a component that will earn a gross domestic product in the 

province of Saskatchewan and in Canada and internationally 

and it benefits; and benefits accrue nationally for what we do in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I'd like to have you make some comments about that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, the general approach 

of a cost of production, or the input costs that the member 

refers to, in my judgement, is the direction still for support 

programs for family farms for a whole number of reasons 

which I don't need to get into at this stage in the game.  The 

commitment of the government is still in that direction. 

 

The member asks, why did we make this and why do we adopt 

this position when it's, as he describes it, in excess of provincial 

capacity to deliver?  And here's where I guess I would draw a 

distinction between his position and ours.  I think that it is in 

excess of the capacity of the province to deliver because I think 

that agricultural changes which take into account cost of 

production are primarily, I would say exclusively, the federal 

government's responsibility. 

 

(1530) 

 

As the hon. member himself has said many times, the current 

subsidies battle between the European Community and the 

American community has driven prices down over production 

and the like.  That's trade.  International trade is a federal 

responsibility.  Food and agriculture is a national responsibility 

and international.  We don't feed just the people in 

Saskatchewan; we feed the people from sea to sea to sea.  As 

the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) would say, feed 

them outside our shores. 

 

We think this is a responsibility of the federal government.  We 

think that there has been too much of an offload by Ottawa 

onto the provinces with respect to agriculture.  It is now 

something in the neighbourhood of about 40 per cent carried by 

the province.  And I think that that's unprecedented and unfair, 

especially for a province which is so dependent upon 

agriculture, as the member has pointed out. 

 

So we still subscribe to the objectives.  But what we want to do 

of course is to make sure there's a proper program into place 

which takes this formula factor into account, but at the same 

time seek Ottawa's approval and concurrence for its proper and 

full share. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well that leads me to the point I guess 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2689 

that I have to ask you -- where the federal government are in 

discussions about cost of production.  You've given notice that 

revenue insurance is going to be concluded in two years.  

You've given that notice to the federal government.  With the 

status that they have at this point in relation to their debt and 

the volumes of debt, what do you think you're going to be able 

to achieve by discussion and debate with other . . . the other 

prairie provinces? 

 

And I believe you have to take into consideration Ontario in 

this, from the diversified agriculture side, and also Quebec.  

You have to take those people into consideration.  So I'd like to 

have you comment on where do you think that the federal 

government is going to get the money to do this extra volume 

that is going to be required if the volume changes and we need 

a half a billion dollars annually to hold us through, to get the 

international scene adjusted.  And this is money that should 

accrue to agriculture.  Where do you see the dividing line?  

And if it's federal, how much are they supposed to give when 

they have probably got more debt per capita, if you called it 

that, than Saskatchewan does?  And their volume of debt is 

higher.  How would you justify that in terms of the statements 

that you made when you were running for election? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, as the hon. member 

will know, Saskatchewan is not alone in its decision to give 

notice to pull out of the revenue insurance program -- GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program), as it's commonly known.  

The sister province to the east, Manitoba, has also similarly 

given notice.  So that there are two provinces very active in 

agricultural primary production who have decided, perhaps for 

differing reasons, but none the less the notice should be given 

and the GRIP plan needs to be looked at. 

 

So much of the same concerns which the member directs our 

government to focus on will also persist with the province of 

Manitoba.  I would say -- although I have no authority for 

saying this; it's just an outside observation -- that even Alberta 

is very concerned about the directions in GRIP, as currently 

constituted. 

 

In my judgement, the answer really lies in two directions.  First 

of all, the design or the redesign of an agricultural program 

which is targeted or focused, which takes into account cost of 

production, which is -- how should I describe it? -- taxpayer 

efficient.  Taxpayer friendly is not quite the word, but taxpayer 

efficient; one which the federal government has obviously 

input in its design, and the financing of it, which is my second 

point, at a federal level is a question of options.  It's a question 

of choices. 

 

And I don't say this in any pejorative political terms.  The 

federal government clearly has more options with respect to 

financing than any provincial government does.  This does 

sound like a political comment, but it is I think highly 

illustrative of the point that I'm trying to make.  If the federal 

government chooses to proceed, in its wisdom, for helicopter 

program of -- 

what is it? -- $6 billion for what no doubt it thinks are good 

reasons, it's a choice. 

 

What we hope to do is to persuade the federal government to 

take a look at that expenditure versus an expenditure to finance 

an appropriately focused, targeted, cost-of-production-based 

kind of plan.  And my guess is that Manitoba probably is 

looking -- although I'm not saying that we have the same plans 

in mind -- but Manitoba has the same ideas also in its objective 

of giving notice. 

 

As you know, we have the Farm Support Review Committee 

now well on the way to setting up a reliable, adequate income 

proposal which has those features and characteristics in place, 

and once it completes its study and the producers have input 

and the farm organizations have input, and even concurrently, 

we would approach the new federal government after the 

election -- it'll take us that time in any event to get ourselves 

ready -- and to sit down into the give and take of the 

discussions to see what kind of a plan can be featured and how 

it can be financed.  But I think it can be financed, given a 

proper will, notwithstanding the debt situation that Ottawa 

faces too. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What is your position going to be in relation 

to what you perceive the federal share to be?  You should have 

some idea what target you have for determining a percentage of 

the volume dollars that your share should be, and I'd like to 

have you expand on that for us today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I start, Mr. Chairman, from the 

position philosophically, and I would even argue without being 

too lawyerish about it, constitutionally, that in this field this is a 

primary federal responsibility for the obvious reasons.  First of 

all as I've said before, our food feeds all Canadians.  They don't 

ask the province of Ontario to cost share a particular program 

with respect to the Auto Pact and any negative impacts it might 

have on the Auto Pact, although that's basically an 

Ontario-based program.  It's a national program. 

 

They don't ask Newfoundland to share when the cod stock is 

depleted and the consequences are felt throughout the province 

of Newfoundland and the Atlantic region.  Why?  Because it's a 

food supply, it's a national food supply.  And I would also 

argue from the legal point of view, as I've said before, if this 

matter is primarily occasioned by the subsidies battle -- 

although I think it's more complex than that, but from what I 

can read and from what I'm told I think it's a major factor -- this 

is trade, international trade.  Ottawa has the sole responsibility 

in this regard. 

 

I would say that prior to 1989, which is only a few years ago, 

Ottawa picked up 100 per cent of the costs of these kinds of 

programs.  With the subsequent evolution of programs in 1989 

and the penned agreements of those subsequent programs, 

GRIP included, the share has shifted from 100 per cent Ottawa 

to 59 per cent Ottawa, meaning that somebody has got to pick 

up the 41 per cent, and 



2690 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

that's us.  That's tough stuff because if you're bleeding, because 

the agricultural sector is bleeding and is in difficult terms, you 

can't stop the hemorrhaging by giving yourself a blood 

transfusion from the provincial treasury when the same source 

of funds come from the same taxpayer, the same farmer or, if 

you will, business people and others.  So my objective would 

be to start both from a principle point of view, a principle, a 

monetary point of view, a precedent point of view, and say that 

this is, if we can design an appropriate plan, the responsibility 

of Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What percentage are you targeting for the 

federal government?  You said it was 59 per cent and 41 per 

cent province.  What are you projecting that you want to target 

a program for, for the agriculture in the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Again, I'm sure the hon. member will 

appreciate this will depend what finally looks like is the report 

of the review committee -- the shape and the form of the 

program.  And this would then be able to give us some specific 

numbers.  So that isn't quite yet finalized, to state the obvious.  

So I'd have to see what that looks like, and we'd all have to 

have some inputs on this. 

 

But I would say, notwithstanding the fact that I don't know 

what the shape of this program is, the position of the 

Government of Saskatchewan is that this should be a 100 per 

cent federal responsibility.  I'm not here now even alluding to 

our debt problems; let's leave that aside for the moment.  I 

think they're well known.  I just refer back to the earlier points 

that I made with respect to constitutional, moral, and economic 

responsibilities, as I see it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- When we were asking the Minister of 

Agriculture questions as it related to agriculture, I asked him a 

number of questions that related to payments made in western 

grain transportation and related issues.  And I'm going to make 

the same observation to you as I made to him, and that is that 

as I see the world unfolding, we're going to have a very serious 

problem to deal with as it relates to grain in the grain sector and 

primary production and moving grain to markets in the next 18 

months because I believe whether there's a Tory government 

elected or a Liberal government elected -- and Mr. Chretien has 

denied that he's going to do this, but I believe that he still will 

-- is that payments will be altered to some extent on how 

transportation is paid in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I guess I made this observation to the Minister of 

Agriculture, and I will make it to you that we have to position 

ourselves in relation to that in a very functional way but firm.  

I'm not saying that we have to defend either the 

pay-the-producer or pay-the-railroads position.  We have to be 

very, very securely and firmly established in the mind-set that 

deals with the fact that the province of Saskatchewan should 

get its traditional value in relation to the Crow.  And that runs 

about 54 to 56 per cent of what the total should be.  And there 

are factors that play into this that are outside of the realm of the 

Crow that I believe 

Manitoba and Alberta will deal on. 

 

And that causes me and caused me a great deal of concern 

when I, together with the member from Estevan, were dealing 

with this issue on a national basis.  And that is that as it sits 

today, the people who sell their barley and their wheat through 

the Canadian Wheat Board and move it . . . move all of that 

grain through Thunder Bay, that payment for freight from 

Thunder Bay to Montreal is paid out of the pooling account of 

the Canadian Wheat Board.  And I believe that Manitoba is 

going to try and negotiate that into the context of the payment 

of the transportation costs for moving grain. 

 

And that causes me a great deal of concern, Mr. Premier, 

because that in effect moves the centre of the western Canadian 

grain transportation system from Scott, Saskatchewan, which is 

what I call Tompkins in the South to somewhere near Brandon.  

And it would reduce the volume of dollars paid to 

Saskatchewan by a very, very significant amount.  And that is a 

very serious concern and needs to be a very serious concern to 

us in the province of Saskatchewan.  And as a primary 

producer, that is my concern. 

 

We can talk a lot about who we pay, but if we mix up who 

we're paying rather than what we're getting paid with in the 

discussion, Mr. Premier, then we're going to have a very 

serious problem because eventually we will lose, I believe, if 

we keep the discussion on the debate between pay the producer 

or pay the railways. 

 

And when we get to the place where we start talking about we 

need to have our money firmly entrenched in . . . as an 

entitlement I believe.  Just as we've settled with the natives and 

the Indians in the province of Saskatchewan, the farmers in the 

province of Saskatchewan also have an entitlement that I 

believe is as real as that one was.  And I believe that we need to 

take those principles into consideration.  And when the 

discussion finally takes place about who gets paid, then we can 

have that discussion.  But when we talk about what gets paid, 

then we have to be all on the same side.  And I've had many 

discussions with Sask Wheat Pool on this issue. And we need 

to firmly establish that $400 million accrues to Saskatchewan.  

That's what we need to be very, very firm on.  And I'd like to 

have your observations about that too, Mr. Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well I think the hon. member 

obviously makes an important point because the sums of 

money which are owed to the people of Saskatchewan is 

obviously a major concern, a very major concern.  And we take 

the position in general terms, very briefly, as follows.  We'd 

like to see as many alliances as we can.  That may not be 

possible with Manitoba or Alberta -- I'm not sure yet -- but 

we're still in the preliminary stages of discussion with them in 

this regard. 

 

But our view here basically is this, that there should be no 

change in this payment, the method of payment, until the 

federal government obtains the support for the proposed 

changes, whether it's system 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2691 

efficiencies, as Manitoba describes what they're trying to do, or 

whether it's more substantial in terms of who gets paid.  Right 

across the piece we take the view that that should only take 

place after there is a stated support from the majority of the 

producers. 

 

(1545) 

 

I would argue that the study that went on last winter indicates 

that the majority of the prairie producers don't want to change.  

They want to keep things the way they are. 

 

And therefore, again without being political, I think this is one 

of the problems for us.  If the federal government persists in 

moving with its announced WGTA (Western Grain 

Transportation Act) changes and the like, whether they be so 

_called system efficiencies or whether they be method of 

payment to the . . . what agency or what group or what 

proportion thereof, they'll be doing so in the absence of the 

support of the majority of the producers. 

 

So our view at this stage in the game is to keep reminding 

Ottawa that this is what the farmers want -- no change -- and 

we're with them in this. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I have a great deal of concern, Mr. Premier, 

that we will lose if we talk about how we pay it.  That's my 

concern.  And we have to start to talk about what we get paid 

and how we can entrench that in the long-term commitment for 

agriculture.  And I would say that when GRIP and revenue 

insurance is moved off the table in two years, Saskatchewan 

producers, in the grain side, are likely to lose $400 million.  

That's what I expect to be the federal share of the premium 

payment.  That share is lost to the people of Saskatchewan, the 

taxpayers of the province. 

 

If you add another $400 million that is lost in the Western 

Grain Transportation Act, then we have $800 million more.  

And, Mr. Premier, that is a very, very serious loss.  One is on 

the expense side and one is on the income side.  But on the net, 

the net benefit will go down $800 million.  And my producers 

in my constituency and anywhere in Saskatchewan that you go 

cannot afford it. 

 

That's why we have to talk about what we get paid rather than 

how, at this point.  Let's move the how aside, because if you're 

going to talk how we're going to get paid, then the debate . . . 

we'll lose that one too as well, Mr. Premier, and that's what 

concerns me.  So it's what we get paid that has to be involved. 

 

And added on to that there are a couple of other things that 

you've got to be thinking about, and one is the net benefit to 

Ontario in the areas of dairy and the feather industry.  Those 

benefits accrue to $500 million every year, either through a 

consumer subsidy or a direct subsidy by the provincial 

government in Ontario.  And exactly the same thing accrues to 

Quebec.  So you've got $1 billion going to those two provinces 

in annual payments made to them for two of the products that 

they produce. 

In Saskatchewan, if we take the $400 million off on our 

revenue insurance and we take another $400 million off on our 

payments to move the grain, we are in a very serious position, 

Mr. Premier. And I say that we cannot afford to have that 

happen.  And I think on top of that you have to add on the 

Quebec benefit that accrues because of the Crow rate and you 

have to also add on the feed freight assistance that the 

Maritimes get, and all of those have to be put into the equation. 

 

That's why what we get paid, in my view, is far more important 

than how because all of this debate is going to take a national 

perspective when each of these groups come before the table 

and want their share as an entitlement.  And they will hang that 

all on the federal government decision to pay the Crow, 

whatever way it is. 

 

And that's the debate that causes me a very, very serious 

concern.  And I raise it to you not in a debate fashion, but as a 

serious concern about the problems that we face if we don't 

address what we get paid rather than how.  And we can talk 

about how out in the country after we get the what, and then we 

will establish for ourselves a lot of dialogue about how it's 

done.  But what we have to talk about now is what, and we 

have to talk about it as an entitlement, an entitlement to the 

province of Saskatchewan for the grain transportation that we 

are accustomed to. 

 

And that leads me to the next observation.  And I personally 

believe that an effective and efficient rail system is necessary.  

But I believe we have that already, Mr. Premier.  We just have 

a whole bunch of rules that stand in the way to having people 

like the short line railroads who are, I think, as efficient as you 

get them and can move the grain in an efficient fashion.  And 

when push comes to shove, we need to be in a position as a 

province to deal with that issue as well. 

 

And I know that there is a guarantee out there as it relates to 

the short line railroad down in the south at Coronach and places 

down there, but that is far more efficient to have the grain 

moved by rail than it is to try and build the highways to deal 

with the kinds of things that we have to.  So I just throw that 

out as observations.  You can respond if you wish.  But I 

believe we have to take a broader perspective of this than a 

provincial one. 

 

And the second point, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, is that 

as we talk about this, we cannot lose sight of the fact of . . . on 

the base, making our secondary industry grow.  And that is also 

something that we have to take into serious consideration.  And 

I would say that there is no better place to start than in 

agriculture to create secondary industry.  We can have all the 

Piper Aircraft come in here that we want, but food and food 

manufacturing are always going to be there.  And you may sell 

your plane, but you always need to eat. 

 

And that, Mr. Premier, is the reason why I think to go into 

those areas has far more benefit and can assist the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan in 



2692 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

maintaining themselves in a far better way. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, if I may say so, the 

hon. member raises some very -- in my mind -- very valid 

observations and very valid concerns.  I've taken notes of his 

concerns.  I would say that clearly the problem is complex, and 

you have demonstrated that when you consider the issue of not 

only what, but how, and the question of short line hauls and so 

forth. 

 

I agree with the general sentiment about jobs and the economic 

well-being, not necessarily vis-a-vis Piper.  We have to 

continue to try to forget about Piper to diversify our economy.  

But you're right, fundamentally you're dead right about that. 

 

I guess my response would be this, not to be argumentative or 

to diminish your point because I grant the point that I think you 

make, as I understand it, as being a very good one.  I'm not sure 

it's a question of separating the what we get paid from the how 

that we get paid.  I'm not even sure from the reports I get from 

the ministers that we're capable of doing that.  It's a question of 

both; it's a question of what and how. 

 

And I suspect that even if we were able to nail down the what 

-- and I grant the point that you make -- that at some point or 

other, if some other government or governments in some 

combination thereof insist that the how be changed in a way 

which would have a detrimental impact to the province of 

Saskatchewan, then there is another cost which we haven't even 

factored into your situation, which is rural Saskatchewan, 

country elevators, branch line elevators, and the like. 

 

So what we have to do here of course is take both into account 

at every stage of the game, and the admonition which you give 

to us is what I hope the ministers have taken to heart -- namely 

they've got to see all of the issues and see them as part of a 

large puzzle, pieces of the jigsaw puzzle which are going to be 

put together. 

 

Again we are trying to do that, but trying to do that from the 

point of view, as I said, fundamentally the overall policy point 

of view which is that no changes should be made at all, 

whether it's called efficiencies to the system or method -- 

however you describe it -- unless there is consensus by the 

producers.  And we don't think that there is.  So let's just 

continue to try to work within the system and change it as best 

as we can. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- There's another point that I'd like to make and 

that is about the debt as it relates to the rural farm debt.  From 

my understanding of it, about one and a half billion dollars is 

banks, about a billion and a half is Farm Credit, about 800 

million is credit unions, and about 800 million is Ag Credit 

Corporation.  That's just broad numbers. 

 

You are today, Mr. Premier, at a very significant point in time 

that is unique, and I believe it's unique for a number of reasons.  

Another point I want to make is that agriculture has roughly a 

.95 per cent cost of 

interest across the province.  That's an average of all the 

interest paid.  Interest is paid by the youngest producers and 

has the greatest rate and also the greatest volume. 

 

The producers who are, let's say, the older ones, probably don't 

have any debt or they have some and at a low rate of interest.  

And if I use myself as an example, when I bought land in 1960 

the rate was at 5 per cent.  I believe that there's another area 

where you need to press the federal government on and that is 

to deal with Farm Credit Corporation in a way that they could 

now establish a debt reduction function that would come in at 

less than that 9.5 per cent. 

 

If Farm Credit could, on long-term mortgages, come in at 5 per 

cent -- and even at what your bond rating is, or your bond is for 

the province of Saskatchewan which you set at 6 per cent, there 

are many people in the province of Saskatchewan who would 

feel very, very comfortable at 6 per cent. 

 

Now the point I want to make is this, Mr. Premier, that if the 

average . . . I'm certain it's almost 10 per cent, the average in 

the province of Saskatchewan on interest paid by farmers.  If 

you took that and lowered that to that 6 per cent that you're 

asking people, or that you have said to the people of the 

province that you're prepared to pay for a bond, that 4 per cent 

reduction on every billion dollars worth of debt that the farmers 

have in the province of Saskatchewan is $40 million . . . No, it's 

$400 million.  No, it's $40 million on a -- I get my zeros wrong 

-- on a billion. 

 

So if you had $3 billion worth of debt that would be taken over 

by or re-established by the volume that there is out there, and if 

it would be lowered by 4 percentage points, you would have 

$120 million net benefit to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  That, sir, is extremely important in looking at 

how you can make farming and the people of the province 

viable again in relation to that cost and an input cost. 

 

I would say this to you also, sir, that if I would have ever had 

an opportunity to have a 6 per cent interest rate I would have 

considered myself very fortunate.  Even as the minister 

responsible for ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan), that never was an option in order to give a 

reasonable break to the taxpayer. 

 

You sir, today, have an opportunity that is way ahead of any 

opportunity that the governments have had since the early '70s.  

And that, I would say, is probably, it's probably time for you to 

take and assign a minister to take that thought to the federal 

government -- either jointly in relation to how you could 

renegotiate those mortgages for those farmers.  ACS is causing 

a problem in agriculture itself and the average probably in ACS 

is probably between 10 and 13 per cent interest and that is a far 

cry from the 6 per cent that is available and that you're 

providing to your own treasury.  So you need to think about 

how that can be done, Mr. Premier, not by yourself but in 

conjunction with the new mandate that Farm Credit 

Corporation has today.  That's the first point. 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2693 

With a new mandate that Farm Credit will be seeking as it 

relates to the political side that the federal government will be 

seeking, that's also an opportunity for you to consider as you 

deal with this.  And I believe you've got a window of 

opportunity that is going to hit your government and give an 

opportunity for the people that I represent in rural 

Saskatchewan.  That opportunity is only going to come once in 

the next five to ten years where all the ducks line up and 

interest and mortgages and those things. 

 

(1600) 

 

And I'm asking on behalf of the producers of the province that 

you think about that and how to get it done and set your 

bureaucrats -- I know that Stuart Kramer works in your office 

and he understands this as well as anyone -- but you need to put 

people like that into place to make them work to put together a 

policy, an interest-rate policy, that is going to benefit rural 

Saskatchewan and you have to do it in conjunction with the 

federal, but you need to do it soon, sooner than later. 

 

And that, I think, Mr. Premier, is giving you a lot of 

opportunity and thoughts to dwell on.  And I didn't want to take 

too much more time but I wanted to have you understand that 

that's a concern to the people that I represent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, again the hon. member 

from Morse, if I may say so, makes a great deal of sense in my 

mind and he . . . on this particular issue and a few other issues, 

because it is correct.  The interest rate situation, the debt 

situation, is not good. 

 

This is a little bit off the topic, but I'll pass this information 

along to you.  Farm Credit Corporation, FCC, 1992, did a farm 

survey and they divided the farmers into three equity groups: 

high equity, of which they say there are 19,362 farmers, they 

carry only 2 per cent of the total debt; medium equity, of which 

they say there are 19,413 farmers, they carry 30 per cent of the 

debt; and low equity, of which there are 19,398, carry 67 per 

cent of the local debt . . . of the total debt.  And as you've 

pointed out, statistically that low equity is in the young farmer 

basically, with the high interest rates. 

 

And here we have a situation where the interest rates have 

dropped, and why can't we make some readjustment is the 

issue.  And I think that that is right, that there is a window of 

opportunity here. 

 

The question of how to do this in a way which would involve 

more than just FCC but however would involve others like 

banks and credit unions and ACS is where the crunch comes.  

It becomes a little more difficult.  Because if ACS needs to do 

its part, there will be a cost to it.  You've already computed 

what the benefit would be; there will be a cost.  And again I'm 

not here to talk about the debt, but that is one of the 

considerations which we have as we examine this whole 

problem, namely what additional levels of projected debt 

would accrue to ACS on the 

assumption that FCC, the banks, and the credit unions, the 

others, would similarly agree. 

 

But let me just make one last point.  We do not want to do 

anything but pursue what you have suggested.  And we're 

doing this actually through a lot of people in the Department of 

Agriculture, but it's complex.  And in a way, if I may say, the 

window of opportunity is really there.  Because if a farmer 

loses his or her farm land and it's repossessed by FCC and then 

put back out on the market again, FCC takes a hit.   And they 

put it out under current financing arrangements and current 

interest rates, so they swallow, they eat it now.  And the issue 

therefore is why shouldn't they or ACS or any of the chartereds 

eat it now in order to preserve and to protect? 

 

And to me I think that has always made sense.  It's made a lot 

of sense.  When you meet with the banking people -- I don't 

mean to single out the banking people -- they give the 

argument that . . . well it's a complex argument; I won't make 

their argument.  You know it well, better perhaps than I do.  

For us, our consideration at the provincial level is the hit on 

ACS and the dollar cost.  But the point that I want to say to the 

member is: your admonition to us to get at this and to pursue 

this is very much appreciated because this is exactly what we 

are examining in the context of how it can be engineered, under 

what circumstances, cost to us, and the like, in order to see if 

it's an option will which really fly.  But conceptually I think it's 

got a lot of merit to it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- One other point I want to make, Mr. Premier, 

and that is this.  You're going to have a cost to a large extent in 

any case.  And when you talk about the credit unions, the cost 

that it is going to be . . . and you began to come to that point 

with the bankers.  The bankers are going to take the hit.  ACS 

is going to take the hit.  But the province, through its guarantee 

of credit unions in the province of Saskatchewan, is going to 

have to deal with that too. 

 

And I know that in the south-west -- and I don't think it's any 

different anywhere else in the province -- the credit union 

system is at some risk in relation to these outstanding debts that 

can't be paid by farmers who have every intention to pay but 

haven't the wherewithal to do it.  And that causes a great deal 

of concern and frustration in many places. 

 

And if I use the example in the south-west that I'm familiar 

with, the two credit unions in the city of Swift Current didn't 

even amalgamate because the one was in serious problems and 

the other one said, I don't want to become involved with that 

because I don't want to get into that serious risk problem. 

 

And so that is the reason why I say to you, you're going to lose 

some of that in any case because you're going to have to take 

and come up with some of that money that's going to be needed 

to deal with that.  If some of that hit is taken in ACS and 

relieves some of the responsibility of the credit unions, then 

you could have that system regain itself.  And I think that's one 

of the points that needs to be made so that the people of 



2694 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

the province can understand and that you can go to the people 

of the province and say, this is where we have to start to work 

and what we have to start to deal with. 

 

I'm going to finish this off by saying this: there are a lot of 

people in this province, Mr. Premier, who have a lot of good 

ideas.  And I believe that there has to be two things that 

happen.  One of the things that you've already begun with this 

committee . . . And I have every respect for the people that are 

on the committee; however if you don't get the political people 

involved, then the political involvement is going to have to 

come after the fact and you have to take the politician and the 

people who think politically in this along with the decision 

making.  And I think you're one step short of doing that. 

 

And I would suggest to you that a good opportunity to do that 

would be to activate the defunct agriculture committee of this 

Assembly to become involved with that as a part of that.  And 

then I believe we could also make concessions because the 

industry is too big and too good and too strong to lose on the 

basis of political argument or debate.  And I don't want to do 

that.  That's why I've laid out suggestions for you.  I've laid out 

alternatives for you, not to debate, but to show you that the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan have a need.  And I 

raise that from that perspective for you today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I very much appreciate 

the approach and the comments and the questions and the 

criticisms the member has made.  The agricultural committee 

idea has got a lot of merit to it.  And while I'd obviously have 

to . . . want to consult with my caucus and the cabinet, I think 

that it's a suggestion which is well taken because I agree with 

you. 

 

I think we are behind in the sense that the politics -- and I say 

this in the best sense of the word -- should be incorporated 

early.  And we can thrash that out if we can, early.  And if we 

can't, at least we know where the trade-off points are.  But if 

they're not involved later, and then through misconceptions or 

through whatever reasons it comes in full force, it's a real 

problem. 

 

I'm going to take the agricultural committee suggestion as a 

very, very, real serious suggestion. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a line of 

questioning to the Premier, Mr. Chairman, to I suppose, get at 

his plan for economic development and growth.  And I suppose 

it won't come to any surprise to him that I'm not totally in 

agreement with what he's doing.  But perhaps I'll give him the 

benefit of the doubt and see if he's got a plan that he could walk 

the public through this afternoon. 

 

I will make some points -- not to be argumentative -- but they 

are facts.  Since you've been elected, Mr. Premier, you have 

added to the debt in the province of Saskatchewan and you've 

had three consecutive deficits.  Taxes are up in a large number 

of places.  And 

I'm going to make the argument that your tax increases have 

substantially more pain than some of the alternatives, not only 

to rural people but just generally to the business community, 

because taxes and fees have increased, as you know, to a very 

large extent across the board. 

 

Similarly, a fact is that Saskatchewan's credit rating has 

declined; some now give us a BBB.  Despite the tax increases 

for revenue and despite some cuts, the credit rating has 

dropped.  And there certainly -- I suppose we could argue 

about this -- but there certainly seems to be a lack of 

excitement about economic growth.  In other words, people in 

Saskatoon tell me, and people in Regina and other places, 

they're are looking for a plan for economic growth and 

excitement, some diversification, a combination of things that 

would have let us be more optimistic about the future.  And I 

think it's fair to say that there is real, real pain in the smaller 

communities, in the smaller cities, and in rural Saskatchewan -- 

some real shock that's going on.  And I don't . . . I think that's 

evidenced in the headlines and in the papers and in the public 

that meets and talks about the various kinds of things that are 

going on. 

 

So you see where I'm heading.  People want to know that you 

are absolutely confident that your plan has some real, sound 

underpinnings and that will move the province forward.  

Because if in fact the debt is increasing, and if in fact you are 

running deficits and your taxes are up, and you've got some 

pretty tough taxes, as you can imagine when we're looking at 9 

per cent here and nothing in Alberta, and their credit rating has 

fallen, and there's not the talk of a general plan for 

diversification and growth, and certainly a lot of pain in rural 

Saskatchewan, despite the fact that interest rates are as low as 

they've been in 30 years, which has to be a help, I would think, 

to any administration -- it's got to be a help -- we see inflation 

as low as it's been maybe in 30 years, around 1 per cent, and 

the exchange rate for our economic growth and potential is as 

good as it's been in a long, long time. 

 

In other words, we see interest rates are not in the 20s, but 

they're down into about 5, 6 per cent; inflation isn't running 10 

to 12 per cent -- in fact it's almost non-existent, about 1.  We 

see exchange rate about 75 cents on the dollar, so we have a 

tremendous advantage in marketing to particularly the United 

States for other countries that base their currency on the United 

States.  And despite those conditions, despite those conditions, 

people are worried about the growing inability of your 

administration to manage the debt and to manage the credit 

rating, to create economic activity because of the high taxes. 

 

So the question out there is a matter of confidence.  The people 

would like to know and I certainly would like to know, what 

your plan is generally to give people confidence to stay here, to 

build here, to invest here with our difficulties that we face 

under the first 18 months of your administration.  Now I will 

let you respond to these initial observations. 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2695 

Clearly, as you've just pointed out to my colleague, all 

jurisdictions across the country have debts and deficits -- 25 

billion in Alberta and billions and billions in Ontario and the 

same in Manitoba and Quebec and other jurisdictions.  In the 

province of Saskatchewan our mix is a little bit different.  

Clearly they have interest on their debt; clearly all 

administrations have paid that. 

 

So given the fact that you have this plan or have this situation, 

could you elaborate a little bit more on some of the details that 

would give you confidence and give the people confidence that 

you're on the right road? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I thank the 

former premier for that question.  And I think it's an important 

question because confidence, consumer confidence, business 

confidence is vital I think to any kind of an economic recovery 

which we all hope to have here. 

 

Let me make two points.  One perhaps not so much rebuttal but 

-- maybe they are rebuttal -- responses to some of the things 

which the former premier talks about.  It is correct that the two 

budgets, the two full budgets which we introduced and are fully 

responsible for, had deficits to them. 

 

The first budget which we introduced for '92-93 projected a 

deficit of 517 million, and we came in at 590 million or 

thereabouts, which for the size of the budget is the closest that 

it's been in 10 years, 15 years, for a number of years in any 

event.  And I think the important thing to note about that 

budget, in my judgement, is that we were able to turn around 

annual operating expenditures, which averaged 6 per cent per 

year, to a more than minus 3 per cent reduction.  No provincial 

government ever did that in that budget year.  That's a 9 per 

cent turnaround. 

 

This year we're able to do that again with another minus 4 per 

cent, roughly speaking -- maybe that's a little bit high -- in 

expenditures, and we are taking the deficit down from 590 to 

295. 

 

By all of the external judgements -- people like Standard and 

Poor's and Moody's of New York -- this is really quite an 

incredible turnaround.  This is quite an incredible turnaround, 

and the ratings have been maintained by Standard and Poor's 

and by Moody's in this context.  On May 26 Standard and 

Poor's of New York said, quote:  "The ratings reflect . . ." It 

says this: 

 

 S&P affirms its triple -'B'- plus rating on the Province of 

Saskatchewan.  The rating outlook is stable. 

 

 The ratings reflect the government's strong, demonstrated 

commitment to deficit reduction and more rigorous 

management of its off-budget loans and investments; 

 

I could go on, but none the less one interesting 

comment I found here was the following: 

 

 Good conditions at the start of the current crop year and some 

improvement in commodity prices have supported nominal 

GDP forecasts in the 3.5 % range in 1993. 

 

So says Standard and Poor's. 

 

 In addition, residential construction is up sharply, albeit from 

a low base, and personal consumption is strengthening. 

 

Personal consumption.  I'll just give you the last paragraph.  

Quote: 

 

 The stable outlook reflects the government's commitment to 

continuing with initiatives aimed at eliminating the deficit by 

fiscal 1997, despite economic volatility and the limited scope 

for increased federal transfers from the federal government.  

The government's resolve is backed by a growing record of 

politically tough decisions, S&P said. 

 

And they have been politically tough decisions.  And you, 

being a former premier, you've had to make some tough 

decisions -- a lot; I know that.  And I think you'll understand 

that when people in New York say politically tough decisions, 

as people who have no stake in the political aspect of this 

debate, that I think is an actual statement. 

 

So our credit rating is sound and our deficit trajectory is in the 

right direction.  There will be, so long as we have deficits, 

increases to the debts.  That's the factual base.  You cannot 

argue against the statistics of that.  But the key thing to 

remember is that by '96-97, if it all works out, then we'll be on 

a balanced-budget track. 

 

Now the second point that I want to make is, is the plan sound?  

We think the plan is sound.  We think that the people of the 

business community who make up the Provincial Action 

Committee on the Economy, PACE, as we call it, the acronym, 

have looked at the partnership paper that my colleague, the 

Minister of Economic Development, has released.  They meet 

regularly in subcommittees, PACE does.  They monitor, they 

ask for reports, they ask for legislation in advance, and the 

advice that we get from them is stick to the plan.  There will be 

periods of perhaps not as good activity, but periods of 

increased activity.  That we must stick to the written plan 

which is set out and to flesh it out. 

 

In the interests of time I will not belabour the member or the 

House with some of the positive signs which our economic and 

finance people have indicated with respect to population, with 

respect to employment, with respect to retail trade, with respect 

to new motor vehicle sales -- these are all up, by the way; 

exports -- live animals, fabricated materials, crude materials, 

end products -- these are all up as well.  Crude oil production is 

up, natural gas production is up, potash production is up 

marginally, zinc sales volume up, sales up of uranium, up 21.4 

per cent; housing -- I 



2696 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

referred to that -- and there's a marginal increase, not a big one 

but a marginal increase in the service sector.  Now these are all 

very, very positive signs. 

 

And to us it's not rockets and red glares.  I'm not standing here 

saying that this is the way I'd like to see it, but I do like to think 

that the combination of the fiscal plan, on the one hand, 

coupled with, as it must be on the other hand, the economic 

game plan, the partnership paper, as demonstrated by some of 

these indicators, give me confidence that we're on the right 

path, on the right direction. 

 

I'm also supported by the fact that everybody externally 

indicates that that is the position.  Standard and Poor's, 

Moody's, Burns Fry, Midland Walwyn talking about bond 

values -- all of the external people who look at what we have 

set out say that we are headed in the correct direction. 

 

Time will tell of course whether that's the case or not.  If I 

knew with accuracy what the future would hold, then I guess I 

wouldn't need to worry about my Estimates.  But I think that 

we have done the very best that we can do in analysing the 

figures and have put together a very realistic plan. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well thank you, Mr. Premier.  I kind of thought 

you might use some of those.  And I'm going to use your 

comments plus a little bit of this to go back to my main 

argument that I'm not so sure, I'm not so convinced that any of 

the good news, frankly, isn't from the international interest rate, 

exchange rate, inflation rate developments, or certainly a good 

part of it, compared to your plan which obviously -- and you 

will admit and I think you have in the House -- it's been 

difficult for you to raise these taxes on people and still end up 

with a deficit. 

 

And the reason I'm going to say that is that listen to this, or a 

couple or three of these -- this is about Saskatchewan -- and 

then we'll take it from there: Saskatchewan's credit standard 

maintained; Saskatchewan's economy has managed to achieve 

growth since 1987; attempts to diversify and reduce 

dependence on grain crops have met with success.  The report 

said increased output in manufacturing and expansion in the 

service sector has helped to diversify the economy. 

 

It's also noted that while gross debt levels have grown 

substantially in years, about 60 per cent of the borrowing is by 

Saskatchewan Crown corporations and is therefore largely 

self-supporting.  The report predicted further trimming of 

program spending to stabilize a growing provincial debt if 

interest rates remain high during the rest of the year.  Canadian 

Bond Rating Service said that the AA minus rating which is 

AA plus from 1983 to '85 and from AA to '86-87 indicates the 

ability of Saskatchewan to maintain a good level of protection 

to its bond raters remains high. 

 

Another one on the ratings: provincial debt level not considered 

alarming.  Saskatchewan is in a tough financial spot, but it's no 

worse off than many other 

provinces, says a spokesman for the Dominion Bond Rating 

Service.  Saskatchewan trading has not changed since 1987.  

They give a positive view of the economic strategy associated 

with the province of Saskatchewan.  That's 1990, Mr. Premier, 

and the last one was 1990. 

 

Let me go on to 1991 because if we're going to quote 

bond-rating institutions and people from New York . . . says 

this: Saskatchewan will be one of the few provinces to reduce 

its budget deficit this year.  The budget deficit for fiscal '91-92 

is projected at 265 million or 1.2 per cent of GDP (gross 

domestic product) down 100 million or nearly one-third from 

last year's level.  And I'll put this quote in:  And the 365 million 

the year before that was hit right on. So just a slight correction 

to your earlier statement that nobody had ever met those 

targets; that target was met in 1990. 

 

Restraint initiatives which reduced total expenditures by 4 per 

cent this year more than offset the negative impact of slower 

economic growth and reduced federal transfer payments of the 

provinces.  The consistent application of fiscal constraint, the 

hallmark of fiscal policy for the past five years, will lead to 

steep declines in the budget deficit over the next several years 

as the economic recovery takes hold.  And in that area, they're 

talking about exchange rates and interest rates and inflation. 

 

This fiscal discipline also underlines the government's 

commitment to meet its target of a balanced budget in 1993-94.  

Investment dealers were saying, Mr. Premier, 1991 they were 

looking forward to a balanced budget in 1993-94.  The budget 

had gone from 365 down to 265, and their forecasts were that 

the plan, with the help of exchange rates and interest rates, 

would allow a balanced budget in 1993-94. 

 

Here this just confirms it, just so that we all can look at the 

same sort of things.  It says: Saskatchewan gets an A for 

economic growth.  This is the spring of 1991.  Saskatchewan 

will be one of only three provinces to have real economic 

growth in 1991 according to the investment dealers association.  

The real GDP growth will average .5 per cent this year, down 

from 3 per cent last year.  For the third consecutive year, 

Saskatchewan will outperform the national economy. 

 

Diversification has taken the form of several things, and they 

talk about the combination of the diversification.  In other 

words, losses in agriculture are being made up through 

investment in projects such as the Husky upgrader, Saskferco, 

Rafferty-Alameda, the Shand power station, pipelines, oil and 

gas wells, uranium development, Millar Western's pulp mill, 

Poundmaker ethanol plant, and further modernization of 

Regina's IPSCO plant. 

 

The organization which represents Canada's brokerage 

community also praises the minister of Finance, the ability to 

cut costs while expanding revenues.  Saskatchewan will be one 

of the few provinces to reduce the budget deficit this year.  

Restraint initiative will reduce total expenditures by 4 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2697 

per cent this year, more than offset the negative impact of 

slower economic growth, and reduced federal transfer 

payments. 

 

I just go through a few of those, Mr. Premier, because if it is 

rating institutions that are going to give us the measure whether 

in fact we have an economic plan, the development of a tax 

plan in cooperation with the federal government, the taking of 

the deficits down from 500 to 365 to 265, the encouragement 

by the business community for investment, and the collective 

management of debt so that we can in fact look at lower 

interest rates -- now in the neighbourhood of 5 per cent . . . was 

all encouraged by people from Toronto, Chicago, and New 

York and others. 

 

In fact, some went on to say that the rating institutions had a 

great deal of positive influence on the fact that Saskatchewan 

was one of the jurisdictions that would look at cooperating with 

the federal government in a plan to stimulate economic activity 

and also to provide a tax system that allowed people to invest 

here and have a break.  In other words, compare the system 

here versus in Manitoba or versus Ontario.  The fact that you 

put the two systems together allowed the rating institutions to 

be very, very positive about the plan for economic growth in 

Saskatchewan, particularly if interest rates came down. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, on an economic basis, why is your plan -- 

on a straight economic basis -- for growth and economic 

activity wiser or better than a plan that was endorsed by rating 

institutions, financial institutions, and the business community 

as being positive towards investment, positive towards 

balancing budgets, positive towards the general economy here 

in the province of Saskatchewan.  Is there anything else that 

you can add, other than the rating institutions, that would give 

you and me and the public more confidence in your taxation 

system or your plan than you've just stated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, if the hon. member is 

saying that -- and I don't think he is -- but if he's saying that the 

rating agencies in the 1980s gave the government of the day 

glowing reviews about the economic and fiscal plan which 

encouraged it to pursue the policy that it did and that in the 

1990s it now is giving reviews which are less than flattering of 

the 1980s so therefore why should we rely on this kind of 

economic plan, the answer is we don't put all of our eggs in one 

basket. 

 

But as the hon. former premier knows, they are the best that 

there is in the business but they're fallible too.  They're fallible 

today and no doubt they might have been during the 1980s.  

But the other reality is, apart from fallibility, is their 

importance in terms of our capacity to raise the funds needed 

now to make the government function. 

 

(1630) 

 

A negative rating, a disapproval of the position that we find 

ourselves in, as the member from Estevan will 

know, would put at great jeopardy where this province is going 

to be able to finance its operations in the future.  Which by the 

way, has also forced us to try to redesign -- new, in part -- 

forced us to try to redesign new programs in health care and the 

like. 

 

I'm saying this is a totality situation.  When you get Midland 

Walwyn saying, as it did a few weeks ago, that Saskatchewan 

bonds last year were the lowest of the bonds that they'd 

recommend and this year, based on the strength of the budget 

and the economic plan, are the highest that they would 

recommend -- as an example -- that, I think, is a vote of 

confidence.  They are not a rating agency. 

 

When you have the evidence which I have recited, which you 

dismiss as saying is partly due to exchange rates, this is 

encouraging.  Again I repeat, I'm not standing here and saying 

it's rockets and red glares.  We need to do very, very much 

more, but it's an encouraging sign. 

 

The exchange argument, with the greatest respect, doesn't carry 

very much weight with me because in a resource-based 

economy, that's always the case with respect to exchange rates.  

If your administration had had a more favourable exchange 

rate, maybe you wouldn't have fallen into the deficit situation.  

I don't know. 

 

The reality is that the expenditures exceeded the revenues by 6 

per cent a year on average in the 1980s.  I don't want to be 

political about it, but that's the fact.  We all have to try to live 

with that.  When you were the premier and when I'm the 

Premier, we have to try to adjust and to foresee as best as we 

can. 

 

So what I'm saying is, in the total package, what we have here 

are external people who deal not only in making funds 

available and not available to us, people who have external 

independent analysis who have said that the situation that 

confronts us is being tackled, as I would summarize it -- I don't 

want to overstate it, but as I would summarize it -- as being 

tackled by the government in the correct course, in the correct 

direction coupled with the indicators which cannot simply be 

dismissed as being exchange rates, favourable exchange rates. 

 

And if so, that's part of governance.  It's part of governance if 

the exchange rates go sour.  We have to try to figure out what 

to do under those circumstances.  That was your responsibility; 

it is my responsibility. 

 

So I am optimistic about the future in this province.  I'm 

optimistic because we're able to provide in the budget, even in 

the tight squeeze that we are, $31 million in tax incentives and 

concessions to small business.  I think that is producing some 

favourable spin-offs and other activities. 

 

We are in constant discussion with them about other 

mechanisms, which do not involve big money sums, to try to 

promote their products.  And the evidence I think is coming 

through on some of the stats which I have recited. 



2698 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

So I say that we have turned the corner, and that we are headed 

in the right direction.  I use the rating agencies as but one piece 

of evidence, but not the only piece of evidence. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  A couple of points.  

What I was quoting were not from the 1980s; they were 1990 

and 1991, with the debt in the province of Saskatchewan at 

14.2 billion.  So it was about the 1990s. 

 

And what they said about the 1990s and a plan to cooperate 

with the federal government and to diversify and have balanced 

budget legislation was very positive.  So the rating institutions 

liked the diversification.  They liked, granted, some of the 

privatization.  They liked the community bonds, and they liked 

the Saskatchewan savings bond, and they liked the cooperation 

with the federal government that allow us to simplify the tax 

system. 

 

So all I'm asking you:  if the rating institutions are your gauge, 

but the rating institutions in 1991 gave us a very positive record 

and judged us very positively, then if we call that a draw -- if 

you bring out your headlines and I'll bring out mine -- then let's 

get back to the economics of what you've done versus what was 

going on at the time in terms of economic growth and 

confidence, not only in the rural, but in resources and other 

economic areas.  That's where I run into some difficulty.  I 

haven't heard anything from you today that sets you apart or 

that sets you above or gives the extra confidence why people 

should want to stay or build or develop here beyond . . . And I 

say fair enough.  We'll take our good luck with the bad. 

 

You have got extremely low interest rates which is helpful to 

everybody.  And you've got very low inflation, almost zero, 

and you've got a very favourable exchange rate marketing into 

the United States because it's running at approximately 75 per 

cent, give or take a point or two. 

 

Now is there anything . . . given that, is there anything that you 

are doing, apart from the cross . . . headlines from rating 

institutions that would suggest that your plan has some real 

economic underpinnings that would allow people to have 

confidence? 

 

Because again I go back to my opening comments.  If in fact 

your deficits are going to continue and if in fact your rating 

institution, which by now some has it down to a BBB, if in fact 

some of the investment community looks at the exchange rates 

and interest rates and says, maybe Alberta would be better, or 

maybe Ontario, or some other jurisdiction, how will you 

compete with other jurisdictions here in Canada?  What new 

ideas do you have? 

 

And why -- I guess I could be a little more specific -- why do 

you think your particular taxing regime is smarter or better or 

more competitive than some of the alternatives?  And 

particularly when we look at now in Saskatchewan 9 per cent 

sales tax, and obviously that has to compete with other 

jurisdictions. 

Or what is there in your economic strategy that allows you to 

have the confidence or gives anybody else more confidence in 

Saskatchewan apart from the headlines that we can both bring 

forward?  And apart from -- generally as anybody would tell -- 

the interest rates and exchange rates? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Again with the greatest of respect to 

the member from Estevan, and this is a clever debating tactic 

he employs with excellence, if I may say so, he prefaced the 

question by saying apart from and then recites three or four 

possible reasons to leave you in the position of saying, well of 

course if I can't consider the aparts, then the answer is nothing.  

But I don't buy the assumptions. 

 

You see, you talked about rating agencies, and I didn't hang my 

hat on rating agencies.  Here is the Star-Phoenix, March 27, 

1993; Paul Martin, business editor: 

 

 John MacNaughton is president of the investment brokerage 

Burns Fry.  Ted Carmichael is the firm's senior economist.  

Both had words of praise for the provincial government's 

budget document saying it was an example for other 

governments to emulate. 

 

Now the hon. member from Estevan, the former premier, will 

know this is not a rating agency.  This is a house which advises 

where people should invest.  In fact, it was on the occasion of 

their opening of a branch office in Saskatoon.  So this is not 

simply a question of rating agencies. 

 

But the fundamental question that the member from Estevan 

asks is: what have you done which sets you apart?  And I will 

answer it this way.  I think what we have done is we have taken 

the initial very critical, important steps in restoring confidence 

in the business community in the fiscal integrity and the fiscal 

plan of the government of the province of Saskatchewan by 

setting out a very tough but a very responsible budget. 

 

We have determined that business people will do business if 

they've got a good idea, a lot of hard work, perhaps a little bit 

of start-up capital from time to time, all of the traditional 

problems.  In this province people are innovative and they can 

get up and create more jobs by a country mile than huge 

megaprojects which you refer to in the 1990-91 quotations as 

the source of some activity. 

 

It is correct perhaps that they were the source of some activity 

in the initial period of construction.  But the reality also is, in 

the words of Standard and Poor's, they have left us with a huge 

off-budget investment and loan problem.  Some of them are 

unproductive.  So once the initial occupational construction 

fades out and the debts are being carried, we have the 

responsibilities.  And there's spin-off.  I don't mean to minimize 

all of them or, for that matter, any of them particularly.  I've got 

my concerns on some of them. 

 

The reality is that the small-business person in Harris, 

Saskatchewan, who wants to develop a new jam or a 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2699 

new mustard may or may not succeed, but he or she will 

produce more jobs with fewer taxpayers' commitment and 

perhaps more long 

_standing jobs than the kinds of distinguishing economic 

programs which characterized your administration in the 

1980s.  I mean, there's no doubt about it, the megabucks from 

megaprojects were a distinguishing feature.  And we'll see over 

time. 

 

I have greater faith, with the greatest of respect . . . and that's 

not to rule out megaprojects, some are needed; every 

government's got to get involved in them.  But I think there's a 

general philosophical approach, I believe, in the free cylinder 

economy of private business, the private sector -- let them do 

their thing -- the co-op sector and, where capable and where 

necessary, the public sector. 

 

Now the hon. member opposite says, well what about the 

taxing regime?  It's true we raised the sales tax.  He says, 

alternatives.  I don't know what alternatives he's referring to.  

But I would answer by saying that although the tax in the sales 

tax has gone up, we have put in $31 million for small-business 

reductions of taxes as a direct incentive.  The small-business 

corporate tax rate is down, will be down by a full percentage 

point, tax incentives in a variety of other areas, 1-800 lines.  

We're giving actual kickbacks to the question of the sales tax 

portion for direct agents and manufacturing. 

 

These are . . . In fact it allowed IPSCO to allow their 24-inch 

mill to proceed, the construction of that.  And we're seeing 

where we can expand that.  It all costs money.  It's $31 million.  

But I think it produces more jobs in the long run and medium 

term run, maybe even short run, than the jobs which flare out in 

the dramatic 18 months or 12 months of a construction, even 

with the spin-offs, and then fade off. 

 

Now again let me close by saying that is not to say -- I don't 

want you to misinterpret this -- that every megaproject is out or 

is bad.  We can't afford any of those kind, it so happens today.  

Even if we could, I don't think it's right.  I don't think it 

produces the jobs.  But as necessary, in order to help out the 

economic needs of the province, we'd obviously take a look at 

it on a case-by-case basis. 

 

So I think the distinguishing feature for us -- and I don't want to 

be provocative to former premier, the member for Estevan -- I 

would think the distinguishing feature for us is we're allowing 

business to do business.  We're not propping up business with 

taxpayers' dollars.  We're not making grants or exclusive loan 

guarantees in order to get them here, which in some cases 

might even be decisions economically not on sound 

commercial grounds.  We're saying to business: it's up to you; 

do what you can do best. 

 

And in some ways it's ironic that you, coming from the 

ideology that you come from, had as your distinguishing 

feature in economic development these, what I call, megabucks 

for megaprojects, and me coming from my political ideology, 

advocating 

the role for small business in cooperative and public sector as 

required approaches. 

 

And I won't take the time . . . The partnership program of 

course, as the hon. member will surely concede, sets out in 

detail the objectives and the time lines and the specific 

programs which we have in mind. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well thank you for that response.  It's 

interesting to listen to you, Mr. Premier, talk about your 

philosophy of small business and co-ops and private sector in 

1993 when a good part of the problem that - 

_ and I think it's fair to say without being too partisan -- that 

was laid in the laps of Saskatchewan people was a huge move 

on your part to take over business in the province of 

Saskatchewan, major, major megaprojects, where you decided 

the private sector belonged in the public sector.  And you went 

to New York, and you went to other places, and you borrowed 

money and you bought the private sector industry here.  You 

bought millions, hundreds of millions of dollars. 

 

(1645) 

 

Now you've kind of flipped a little bit.  I don't want to get too 

partisan here, but you've changed your tune, I suppose would 

be fairer to say, that now you believe in small business and less 

or no government, but in private sector and in cooperatives. 

 

And now it's just a little interesting, and I'm sure those that are 

watching say well, wasn't this the minister that lead the 

nationalization and the take-over of the private sector by the 

Government of Saskatchewan in the 1970s?  Then when 

interest rates hit 22 per cent, you know, the province, the 

taxpayers who had to speculate on that because you borrowed 

on it . . . you didn't pay it back.  We were all speculating on 

potash as a result of your philosophy at that time. 

 

Now your philosophy seems it's just modified a little bit.  

You're not into government, so you wouldn't do that.  And 

conveniently I suppose, it's maybe as you find across Canada 

more fashionable to speak this way about it. 

 

And I would think, to be fair, you would not be against 

upgraders as megaprojects, as I believe under the Blakeney 

administration you worked to try to build one or two of those.  

I don't think you'd be against the paper mill as a major project 

in Prince Albert -- a thousand sustained jobs there, a thousand 

sustained jobs.  And it's better than making fence posts or stud 

lumber, and I think you would agree with that.  And the same 

applies to some other things that have gone on as a result of 

economic development even during 20 per cent interest rates, 

let alone 5 per cent as we see them here today. 

 

What I want to shift to because, with respect, I haven't heard 

anything new and in fact I could give you quotes from local 

papers that are not very happy with your budget.  If you want 

to get into those kind of quotes, we can do that too and I've 

done it before in here.  And I have several of them:  budget has 

few fans. 



2700 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

Or you know: Romanow blasted with the budget.  And it goes 

on and on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it's a tough 

budget. 

 

What I'm after, is it the right way?  That's a good question and I 

think that's what we're after.  Now if we make the argument 

that the rating institutions liked what we were doing and the 

rating institutions like what you're doing and you can't really 

use that for a gauge if we have different philosophies on how to 

get that. 

 

I'm going to make the argument -- and I would like you to 

respond -- that I think and believe, I genuinely believe, we 

could have much more economic development and much more 

economic incentive for the private sector you so fondly talk 

about now if you had a tax system that encouraged them, if you 

had a tax system that encouraged them. 

 

And if you did, I think there would be a tremendous difference.  

And I don't think you'd have to impose the pain that you have 

on all of the public and the families, not only rural but urban, 

on nickeling and diming and pounding away on them as you 

have.  I think it's hurt the province, I think it's hurt our 

reputation.  And what I'm going to get at is two things.  One, 

I'm going to get at just a little bit of your political integrity and 

then I'm going to go back to the economic plan. 

 

You talked about . . . I'll start this, it was a May '91 headline 

saying, the member from Riversdale angered by political 

comparison.  Ontario's $9.7 billion budget deficit this year will 

eventually mean higher borrowing costs for Saskatchewan, 

says credit rating agency.  And it goes on to say that it's . . . if a 

province like Ontario under the NDP continue to borrow like 

this, it's going to make it really very difficult. 

 

You went on to disagree with that.  You said: if the bond rating 

agencies are frightened by the big debt the Ontario NDP 

government has rung up, how do they feel about 

Saskatchewan's PC (Progressive Conservative) government 

that has increased debt fivefold in nine years to $14.2 billion? 

Romanow asked. 

 

Now if in fact as you've talked about, and I'll give you several 

articles here, you were worried about the debt and the size of it, 

particularly the 14.2 as we found it, which the rating institution 

says that we had under control with the package we had -- 

balanced budget legislation, harmonization, the cooperation 

and, granted, some of the privatization and the bonds. But if 

you were really worried about that, then what people are 

beginning to ask is, why did you think you had the freedom, 

the economic freedom, and of course the political freedom, to 

come in, given that sizeable number -- 14.2 billion -- why did 

you think that you had the freedom to say you could offer to 

the people of Saskatchewan from 200 to a $400 million tax 

break? 

 

Why and where did you get the confidence that your plan 

would sustain you through the 1990s with the 2 

to $400 million tax break when you were quite clearly 

complaining about the size of the debt and the worry about 

deficits?  How could you do that and at the same time -- and I 

have lots of quotes here -- saying, but we will not raise any 

taxes? 

 

And the reason I'm saying that -- and this is partly, I suppose, 

part as an argument -- but partly because if that had no real 

sound economic justification then maybe people's confidence 

in the province of Saskatchewan under a jurisdiction that now 

promised balanced budgets, promised no taxes, and promised a 

2 to $400 million tax break, because that's what PST 

harmonized is worth. And if that didn't work, because taxes 

went way up, the credit rating is going down, fees are up, 

offloading is up, I mean it's been a pretty major . . . pretty 

difficult, and you will admit that. 

 

What the people want to know is that what gave you the 

confidence in your plan to such extent that you could offer a 

200 to a 400 million tax break and then turn around and say, 

and I promise no new taxes?  What was it in your plan that 

would give you the confidence to pull that off and still maintain 

the . . . well some semblance of balancing the books and 

tackling the deficit, when you have to give away 400 million 

on one hand and promise no new taxes on the other -- and I 

could add one more, and I have quotes for those -- and 

complain bitterly, if I think it's fair to say, about any small, 

modest increases in revenue that we would provide the 

universities and the hospitals and others? 

 

And your implication was -- and there's lot of them -- there 

needs to be more money for health and more money for 

education and more money for this and more money for 

farmers and more money for this.  And you were the man who 

said, boy, we've got ourselves in a strait-jacket with 14.2 billion 

quoted on the front page of the Star-Phoenix, but I'll promise 

you 2 to $400 million tax break, and I will promise you no 

taxes, and I'll promise you more money for health, education, 

farming and so on. 

 

What is it in your plan that would allow you to make those 

kinds of promises, and why should people be confident in what 

you're doing today, given the fact we're down to a BBB credit 

rating and our deficit is growing and you've added over a 

billion to the debt?  You see why people want to know what 

you had in mind and if you have a real depth to your plan and if 

we could get a hold of some of those details. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'd be pleased to 

respond.  First of all, the hon. member talks about a change in 

my philosophy with respect to economic development, citing 

the potash take-over in 1975-76.  And I know the hon. member 

will not see it this way, but there is no change in my 

philosophy because my philosophy, the core of my philosophy 

with respect to economic development, is pragmatism.  I 

believe in a pragmatic way in developing the economy.  And 

I'll spare you the argument about the PCS (Potash Corporation 

of Saskatchewan Inc.) debate '75-76; it's written in many 

academic articles, not by me, but by other 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2701 

people.  Even I've contributed.  I don't pretend to say it's 

academic necessarily, but I've contributed pieces on it. 

 

This was a pragmatic response to breaking a log-jam, a 

fundamental log-jam about levels of taxation.  It was not a 

matter of ideology.  Now maybe if this was a right-of-centre 

government in power in the mid-70s, they might have slipped 

the other way and not have done what they did.  But it wasn't a 

question of getting out there and simply saying we want to 

socialize or provincialize.  This is a question of pragmatic 

changes. 

 

And let me just make a point about why I say pragmatic 

changes.  At the last session of the House, you, I think, will 

recall that we introduced changes to your Saskoil privatization 

Bill which, in effect, changed the ground rules to make Saskoil 

stand on the same footing as some of the other privatized 

corporations which you privatized. 

 

If we were ideologically blinkered and didn't want to do that, 

we wouldn't have done it . . . is an example of a pragmatic 

response to try to give an important corporation some form of 

response.  So that at the core of my economic development 

philosophy is pragmatism.  And at the core of my belief of 

pragmatism is that the free engines power the economy. 

 

Now I want to just speak very briefly to the other issues which 

you talk about.  And again you don't want to be too political, 

and I don't want to be too political, but it is a bit confusing to 

hear the members opposite . . . and they were doing this today 

in question period too, Mr. Member from Estevan.  The first 

line of attack on us is, as you started out in your examination of 

me today, you are taxing too much.  And then the next line of 

attack, as exemplified by your last comments and questions, 

really in effect is an argument for harmonization which, in my 

mind, is an argument for saying you're not taxing enough 

because harmonization, as you know, means that here you . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's different. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well no.  The member, the acting 

opposition leader says it's different, and it's not so. 

 

The GST (goods and services tax) is here, if my hand is an 

example of it.  And under the law, harmonization requires the 

PST to come and overlap entirely within the four corners of the 

GST.  And that means that we would have to tax school books, 

children's clothing, restaurant meals, the whole area of 

activities.  And the fact of the matter is that no provincial 

government has harmonized.  So we're not alone on this as 

oddballs. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Try Quebec. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- No, Quebec's got a special 

arrangement not through harmonization, not complete 

harmonization because of their tax system -- close but not right 

on the mark. 

And why?  No, it's not on the mark.  And they've got a special 

tax arrangement.  And the hon. member from Thunder Creek I 

think will accept that to be the case.  And the reason why they 

haven't is because all provincial governments want flexibility 

to be able to tailor tax policies precisely for the kinds of things 

that the former premier is admonishing me for, namely 

increased economic development which would vary from a 

province-to-province basis. 

 

So for us not to move in on this . . . And I'll spare again the 

arguments about our economic analysis which were made at 

the time about the impact, negatively, of harmonization.  We 

thought it would lose about 5,000, 7,500 new jobs, we felt.  It 

could have been an erroneous study, but on the best that we 

could get . . . In fact Mr. Botting, as I recall, of the CFIB 

(Canadian Federation of Independent Business), publicly 

endorsed that as an accurate statement.  So it was a trade-off. 

 

Now the last part of your question is: what gives us confidence 

. . . or why did we say what we said?  And this comes back to 

me in a variety of ways.  Four point five billion ought to be 

enough to run a province.  Well I think it ought to be.  And I 

would say to the hon. former premier that in fact that's exactly 

what we're doing. 

 

This year the budget shows, on page 37 I think it is, that our 

operating is just slightly over 4 billion.  The problem is that we 

have $840 million interest on the public debt, all virtually 

inherited.  So the $500 million surplus, if we didn't have that 

interest on the public debt, is sopped up by the red ink, the 

blotter, and we're still left in a minus 297 decision. 

 

So we are doing it.  And we're going to have to do it some 

more in order to beat the deficit.  But I guess my specific 

answer to your question is the letter which, amongst others, 

that I received from your minister of Finance, the former Hon. 

Lorne . . . or the present Hon. still, but the former minister of 

Finance, Lorne Hepworth. 

 

You'll recall I wrote to you and said on September 22, what 

about an independent verification of the current revenue and 

expenditure statements and the current year's deficit forecast, 

so forth.  And I talked about special warrants and . . . Well I'll 

spare the time of the House of the whole . . . But on page 5, Mr. 

Hepworth writes as follows to me in the letter dated . . . 

actually it's not dated that I can see here, but it's a letter shortly 

after the 22nd: 

 

 As you can see, there are numerous factors at play that must 

be taken into consideration.  On balance, however, I see no 

reason to alter our target of a $265 million deficit.  The 

mid-year update will detail our projections for you and for 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

That's what the minister of Finance of the day wrote.  Now I 

suspected it, and when we took office and Mr. Gass and others 

looked at what was the state of play at the Crown Investments 

Corporation, took a look at the 



2702 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

operating state of play as the hon. former premier will know, 

265 turned out to be 920 million.  That is an error of about 600 

million, 600 million.  I have the letter here and you know, I'm 

sure you must have approved it before it went out. 

 

(1700) 

 

Going into an important election campaign this is exactly what 

you would have done, and approved it.  Details all the Crown 

Management Board statements and the like, but it turned out to 

be wildly off-base. 

 

I don't mean this in any partisan sense, that is just the fact. 

Because the budget we passed in December of 1991, right after 

we took office, was in essence your budget.  We had no time to 

introduce our own budget and we tailored it down a little bit, 

not much.  It was only after that when we introduced our first 

full budget in '92-93 that we really tailored it down and this 

next budget, '93-94.  So we are budgeting very, very tightly and 

we are getting, I believe, the support of the majority of the 

business community and the investment people and others, who 

say you're left in a very difficult situation and if you can cite 

me quotations about people saying they're not happy with the 

budget, I know that. 

 

I know that by the correspondence that I get. But you know 

what I also get is at the core of that letter . . . those letters and 

editorials is the underlying belief the people say, you, Mr. 

Premier, I may not like it, maybe there's some other way to do 

it, but you're on the right track.  You're doing what has to be 

done.  I'm convinced of that. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well thank you, Mr. Premier.  With respect, 

you haven't given the public anything new about why they 

should be . . . what you had in mind when you said there is a 

terrible debt of 14.2 billion but I'm going to give you back up 

to $400 million in tax breaks and I promise I will not raise 

taxes and I'll spend more on health and education and 

agriculture.  How did you plan to get it done?  You didn't do it. 

 

What happens is . . . what happened is you have continuing 

deficits.  You've added over a billion to the debt.  You've raised 

taxes all over the place when I have chapter and verse of all the 

promises you made -- no new taxes. 

 

What I'm asking and the public is asking, how could you 

believe you could make that promise of up to $400 million in 

tax breaks and no tax increases and then end up in situation 

where you've got growing deficits -- deficit, deficit -- and 

you've got over a billion in debt and your credit rating's going 

down?  What plan did you have to allow you to perform this 

magic?  And you said, well efficiencies would make it work. 

 

And to be fair, I think you'll acknowledge, the $365 million 

mark that we planned for 1990 was hit right on and the 265 led 

to a balanced budget in 1993-94 -- granted, with 

harmonization. 

Mr. Premier, this is what Mr. Gass says: the Tories made no 

attempt to hide the province's financial standing.  In fact, the 

books were open all along to credit agencies or anyone else 

interested.  End of quote. 

 

You knew it was a $14.2 billion debt.  Mr. Gass confirmed that 

afterwards.  And then he went on to say: the main reason for 

the increase in the deficit during that period of time, after his 

review, is due to accounting principles. End of quote.  That's 

what he said. 

 

So you knew, I knew, the Legislative Assembly knew, in the 

budget we presented 14.2 billion will balance the books in 

1993-94 with harmonization granted and some other things. 

 

But you had a better plan without paying.  That's what people 

are asking about.  How did you come up with the confidence 

that you could give away hundreds of millions of dollars when 

you complained about the strait-jacket the province was in, and 

then promise no tax increases?  How did you do that? 

 

And then you say, well but when we brought in our deficit . . . 

or our budget after we took office -- that's what you say about 

your new government -- the deficit was higher.  Well 

obviously, Mr. Premier, if you don't implement the 

harmonization, it's going to be higher.  And if you don't 

implement the retained earnings or profits from the Crown 

corporations and you put it on to the next year, there's going to 

be a gap. 

 

Well of course there is.  That's what people were saying and I 

was saying and others, if you don't harmonize where will he get 

the money?  If he doesn't have some equity offerings, where 

will he get it?  That's just a fair question isn't it?  Don't think it's 

too partisan. 

 

You said 2 to $400 million tax break, vote for you. You said, 

but no new taxes, we'll do it with management; and we'll 

increase health and education and agriculture spending. 

 

Now has any of that come to pass?  Well you did do away with 

harmonization.  But, with respect, you raised the PST to 9 per 

cent and you added it to clothes.  Kind of went back there a 

little bit.  And you recall that school books weren't applicable 

anyway because schools can buy . . . they're exempt.  Now it's 

a pretty small argument. 

 

But then, Mr. Premier, look at all the increases in taxes that you 

said you wouldn't.  On the drug plan deductible, under our 

administration is $125; it's up to $1,700 with you.  You said 

you wouldn't dare touch that.  Chiropractic user fees, there 

wasn't any; now it's 15.  Optometric user fees, wasn't any; now 

you got it up to $45.  Insulin user fee, there was a dollar; you 

raised it to 23.  Oxygen user fee, wasn't any; you raised it from 

$70 to $900 a month.  Hearing-aid auxiliary fee was $80; you 

raised to $230. 

 

Health care funding.  Wow!  We maintained it year after year.  

And I'll say, with respect, and I can read it to 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2703 

you, year after year after year we increased funding, 

maintained increase, and you complained bitterly that we must 

have been very unfair. 

 

And that's the truth.  You complained and your colleagues 

complained, oh how could the Tories do this?  Well fair 

enough.  We had modest increases.  But under your 

administration the first 18 months you have slashed the 

spending and the help to all kinds of people that need health 

care attention. 

 

For example, special home care fees, from 726 up to 937 -- a 

25 per cent increase.  Level 1 and 2 funding, we had support; 

under your administration it's gone.  Seniors' heritage grant, yes 

we had help with the low income seniors.  Under yours, it's 

gone.  And we built hospitals and with respect . . . I mean 

obviously there's some change going on there.  It looks like 

you're closing a few.  And not to mention about $500 million in 

taxes because you're not funding municipalities and it's an 

offload. 

 

I just read a few of those because if it isn't the headlines that 

make it, and if it isn't the New York rating institutions that 

make it, well we've got to go back to well how are you doing in 

terms of deficits?  Or what is the plan that will really allow us 

to believe you knew what you were doing when you'd say, I'm 

worried about the debt but I'm . . . and that's what you said -- 

we're in a strait-jacket.  You said you're worried about it.  And 

then you said, but I can offer you up to $400 million tax break 

and I won't have any tax increases, but I'll increase spending 

and all these things.  And I'll protect health care so that you 

won't have to suffer if you're sick.  The sick should not pay.  

And what we ended up with is not quite what you said. 

 

So that's why it leads people to ask me, when I'm around 

Saskatchewan or in other jurisdictions, do you think the new 

administration in Saskatchewan really has a sound economic 

plan that would allow people to invest and to build and to 

create economic opportunities here?  And I'm, to be fair, still 

waiting for the answer -- still waiting for the answer. 

 

And I can give you lots of economic arguments why 

cooperating with the federal government -- and you're talking 

about it now and your Minister of Finance is -- on tax 

cooperation is a lot more productive than all these fees and hits 

and sales tax increases without relief is causing under your 

plan.  As you know with the whole cooperation, Saskatchewan 

and farmers and businesses become completely sales-tax free.  

Imagine what that does to your small businesses and your 

cooperatives.  And I'd just like to put it another way. 

 

You said if you didn't harmonize it would save you something 

like 5,700 jobs.  Well you didn't harmonize.  Have you got 

5,700 jobs?  Have you got the growth in investment?  Was your 

research really valid?  Could you use that research to help 

substantiate your plan today?  And it's . . . I don't think it's an 

unfair question because I knew and the public knew and even 

after your review everybody knew exactly what 

the situation is in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And if you are going to make sure that people will continue to 

invest here, it's a little difficult to figure out why a leader of a 

political party could say, under this strait-jacket I will offer you 

400 million in tax breaks; I will never raise taxes; I will not 

raise taxes -- I can give you the quotes -- and I will increase 

spending in health and education, social services, and we will 

balance the budget. 

 

Now it's probably difficult to go through all the points in your 

plan, but I wonder if you could just give us some of the 

economic underpinnings that allowed you to make those three 

statements:  here's a tax break; I promise no taxes; I'll spend 

more in health and education, social services, and agriculture, 

and I'll balance the budget. 

 

Perhaps you could just add a little bit more detail to the 

economic underpinnings that allowed you to say that.  And 

obviously we didn't end up there; we're in a completely 

different situation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The hon. member from Estevan raises 

some interesting points and I hope he doesn't misinterpret what 

I'm about to say here to him, because I think he's more 

interested in refighting the 1991 election than the people of 

Saskatchewan are.  But maybe they want it refought, and at 

some point I guess they'll have a chance to refight it. 

 

But I want to make just two or three points very briefly.  I have 

said this until I'm blue or red in the face, depending on your 

point of view.  Here, Mr. Chairman, is what our campaign card 

was all about, "Let's do it . . . The Saskatchewan Way."  I'm 

going to take a moment or two just to say what it says. "First 

Things First" on the first page; it's just a two-page card, very 

simple: 

 

 First Things First -- Common Sense Financial Management 

 

 1. Open the books.  A public, independent audit of the 

province's financial affairs to cut government waste and 

mismanagement. 

 

 2. A comprehensive review of all PC privatizations and 

business deals, to determine if they are in the public interest. 

 

 3. A balanced budget in our first term of office (which I 

might say parenthetically is the goal for '96-97) and a 15-year 

plan to eliminate the accumulated Devine Deficit. 

 

That I think is going to be a little tougher to achieve.  Next 

heading, "New Directions, New Priorities"; subheading, "Jobs, 

Fair Taxes, and Wealth Creation": 

 

 1. A commitment to save 7,500 jobs (not create, save 7,500 

jobs) threatened by the expanded 7 % PST.  We will repeal 

this unfair tax. (Which we did.) 



2704 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

 2. Work with local manufacturers and businesses to increase 

the value-added processing of our resources and commodities 

for both the domestic and export markets. 

 

That's what we're trying to do on the $31 million package.  No. 

3 talks about new technology with respect to the application of 

renewable resources. 

 

Now on the next page it talks about "A Better Quality of Life": 

 

 1. Work with students, families, and educators to develop a 

world class, accessible education system. 

 

 2. Commitment to a new, community-based health care 

system based on the "wellness" model. 

 

I'm reading exactly. 

 

 3. A commitment to Saskatchewan's Aboriginal people to 

honour land entitlements and promote 

self-government. 

 

 4. Introduce an Environmental Bill of Rights to guarantee the 

public access to information and participation 

regarding environmental impacts. 

 

And finally, 

 

 5. Fair labour laws, developed in consultation with working 

people and employers to promote harmony in the 

workplace. 

 

I will not give you agriculture because we talked about that 

with the member from Morse, or open and honest, accountable 

government, except to say a code of ethical conduct was 

introduced and passed by the members; that's no. 1. 

 

That's what we campaigned upon.  That is what we campaigned 

upon, campaigned on.  Well . . . and the former premier shakes 

his head, but I mean, there are thousands of these copies all 

over the place, and that's exactly what we campaigned on. 

 

(1715) 

 

Now I've made my point about the letter and the $265 million, 

$275 million which was told to all of us at that time was going 

to be sufficient to handle it.  Heck, if I've got a $500 million 

surplus now on the huge debt that I've got, 275 we could have 

found easily, could have found very easily.  We've made that in 

cuts, in spades, very easily, in that context.  So that's the 

answer to that member's question in this regard. 

 

The member then goes on to say, well you know that Don Gass 

says it was all wide open.  Well I guess it depends on how you 

read the Gass Report.  I'm looking at the Summary and 

Highlights section, page 2, under Transactions Review, at the 

very bottom, no. 3: 

The financial implications arising from certain 

transactions have not been fully disclosed to the public, 

nor have they been recognized properly in the Province's 

financial records. 

 

Note those words.  That's a finding of Don Gass.  And in fact, 

when we examined the books, Gass points out 1.8 billion in 

losses or write-downs, plus 1.3 billion in guaranteed debt, plus 

non-payment for sale of assets, 237 million, although that's 

been cleaned up by us.  Four, under category, investments of 

concern, 177 million plus 140 million.  And they total these all 

up, totals these all up: losses, write-downs, guaranteed debt, 

questionable investments.  And he totals them at 3.727 billion. 

 

And he says these have not been fully disclosed to the public 

nor have they been recognized properly in the province's 

financial records.  That became public in February, as the press 

so widely reported. 

 

You see if the former premier says that I ought not to have 

been surprised, my further response is, so too the public and the 

press ought not to have been surprised.  But they were, by 

Gass.  Because the truth is, through a variety of accounting or 

non-accounting measures, that was the situation that took 

place.  That's why all the huge coverage.  That's why all of the 

W5 stories and everything else that goes on. 

 

And again I don't want to get into headlines because it gets too 

provocative, and I really don't -- unless the member wants to 

pursue it -- I don't want to get on to this.  But I think that's the 

reason for the headlines and all the concern. 

 

So he can say that we knew or ought to have known, and I say 

that we knew what we knew.  And we acted and we made very 

responsible promises and statements, as the platform campaign 

card shows, on the basis of the facts as were known to us.  He 

may say this is insufficient detail.  I think it's very sufficient 

detail for an opposition party, very sufficient, and I would say 

very prophetic.  It turns out very prophetic. 

 

Opening up the books turned out to be a good exercise for all 

the people of Saskatchewan.  Mr. Gass, the chamber of 

commerce -- everybody says we've got it set up on the proper 

basis now and with our appropriate legislation we're never 

going to be able to return, I don't think, to a day where the 

accounting doesn't fully reflect the situation for the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Again I close by saying, we have a Partnership for Renewal 

paper -- first time ever, Mr. Chairman -- 20-some-odd pages.  It 

sets out goals and guidelines, sets out the philosophy, sets out 

our challenges, talks about education, retooling government.  I 

would hope that the former premier in his capacity as 

consultant and adviser to people in business would show them 

this document and indicate some of the objectives and 

strategies which we have set out as being positive. 

 

I think that this is a very, very good document.  Have 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2705 

we accomplished it?  Of course not -- it's only been tabled 

several months.  But we're making good strides and the 

economic indicators show that. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well again I would just reiterate, you said quite 

clearly that you thought that the $14.2 billion in 1991 was a 

strait-jacket.  And I quote, I think it's in the Leader-Post, May 

1, '91:  Even if we wanted to, I don't think we would have the 

option because of the economic strait-jacket Devine has put us 

in.  So you considered our situation a strait-jacket. 

 

Well when you opened up the analysis, Mr. Gass says it was 

always open.  And if you wanted to find some differences, he 

said this, and I quote:  Blakeney used the same accounting 

principles and the figures were correct.  The main reason for 

the increase in deficit is due to accounting principles, and under 

the accounting principles the main element is unfunded pension 

liabilities.  End of quote. 

 

Now what the people are asking and I'm asking is, is there 

nothing else that would allow you, admitting that there was a 

strait-jacket, knowing there was a strait-jacket, knowing how 

difficult it was, to allow you to say I am going to give you a 

$400 million tax break. 

 

In other words, if you had Gass ahead of time or if you had 

Gass afterwards, would you think it's responsible to offer a 

$400 million tax break with a $14.2 billion debt, and in the 

same time, same time . . . And I got to read these to you 

because you can have your little platform stuff, but this is what 

you're saying day after day on the radio and the television, and 

obviously people believed you. 

 

I quote:  We believe in living within our means.  We think a 

$4.5 billion expenditure a year is roughly . . . is what we now 

expend is the province of Saskatchewan is enough.  Your 

name, September 3, '91.  Tax increases were not needed to pay 

for the GRIP and NISA (net income stabilization account) 

programs, says NDP leader, Roy Romanow, end of quote, P.A. 

(Prince Albert) Herald. 

 

I mean you even looked at things like the strait-jacket of 14.2 

billion when you're looking at hundreds of millions of dollars 

going into agriculture, you say I don't even need to raise taxes 

to pay for GRIP and NISA.  You go on to say no new taxes 

will be imposed.  Instead the NDP would cut wasteful spending 

and encourage new economic development, end of quote. 

 

And again with respect it just says, Romanow is promising a 

government that will live within its means and spend no more 

than the current budget Estimates of 4.5 billion annually.  End 

of quote. 

 

And I quote again; this is March: I say the people of this 

province are fed up with Devine's taxes and we're going to 

change that.  You were going to reduce taxes. 

 

Another quote: well to answer your specific question -- this is 

on the Harasen line, 1992 -- we will not 

charge premiums or deterrent fees or utilization fees, as they 

are called, for a numbers of reasons.  Basically the fundamental 

is they are not a fair way to finance the health care program.  

End of quote. 

 

This is in October of '92.  You were still promising no tax cuts 

in '92 when you've raised fees and all kinds of health care 

premiums. 

 

October 17, 1991: we're not going back to taxing people. 

Quote, unquote. Moose Jaw Times-Herald.  Now there are lots 

of quotes, and I won't read any more of them.  But what it said 

is that as you were gearing up towards '91, you on one hand 

said we're in a strait-jacket of 14.2 billion; isn't that awful?  

Then you'd say, but I won't raise taxes.  And there's quotes here 

that people have in their living room and they've got them 

papered up and they're all over the place: you won't raise taxes.  

And people thought, well that will be good; I wonder what he's 

going to do now. 

 

Then at election time you said, on top of that, I'll give you $400 

million back, no PST, and we'll balance the budget with good 

management.  And then when you do get in, you don't 

implement the PST and you don't finish some of the programs 

you had in place.  You say, whoops, we've got another $400 

million here on top of the deficit.  And then you add another 

500 million and now another almost 300 million, and you've 

added over a billion dollars to the debt, and you've got deficits 

and lower credit ratings.  And we're just looking for what was it 

that allowed you the confidence to say that you could give 

away hundreds of millions of dollars, not raise taxes, spend 

more on health and education, and balance the budget? 

 

Now obviously, Mr. Premier, some of us don't think that you 

had a real sound economic plan.  In fact some of us might even 

believe that perhaps it was a plan to be successful in your 

short-run venture but it was not going to be good for farmers 

and not going to be good for taxpayers and not going to be 

good for health care people and it wasn't going to be good for 

universities and it wasn't going to be good for education.  It 

wasn't going to be good for municipalities - 

_ there was going to be lots of offloading -- and it wasn't going 

to be good for seniors and it wasn't going to be good for 

business. 

 

And do you know what happened?  It wasn't good.  Rural 

people are hurting, farmers are hurting, seniors are hurting, 

taxpayers are paying through the nose, sales tax has gone up, 

and you promised none of that would happen. 

 

So it's a fair question.  After all those promises sort of, as the 

kids say, you know, how are you doing so far?  Well so far, 

there's quite a bit of pain and still more to come because you 

said your plan was better.  Well not only was your plan better, 

you had a plan that was quite attractive, frankly.  I grant you 

that; I give you that.  It was very attractive. 

 

Imagine -- you're going to say no PST to the public.  Well I'm 

not going to raise taxes.  I'm going to spend more on all these 

things.  Vote for me and I'll balance 



2706 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

the budget.  And that's what you said.  And then you got in and 

you say, well we're going to open the books and see if we can 

do that.  And obviously . . . you said, oh my gosh, we can't do 

that.  Surprise, surprise, surprise. 

 

And the people that opened the books says look, they were 

always open.  Accounting principles made the difference, 

except for unfunded pensions and liabilities there associated 

with pensions, and you had those and so did we. 

 

So I come back to the argument and just the question:  what in 

the world allowed you to say, with a $14.2 billion debt that you 

called a strait-jacket, what allowed you to say I'll give away 

200 to 400 million, I will not raise your taxes, and I'll spend 

more on health and education for universities and all these 

people in social services, I'll eliminate food banks and do all 

these wonderful things, and I'll balance the budget? 

 

Where did you get the wherewithal to say all of those things at 

the same time?  Because obviously we got a completely 

different situation today.  We've got severe pain in many, many 

places.  Universities complain; the students complain; food 

banks up 400 per cent; farmers are complaining; towns and 

villages, reeves, councillors, mayors, taxpayers.  It isn't like 

you said it would be.  It isn't at all like you said it would be.  In 

fact people wonder how in the world you said it at all and kept 

a straight face, because it just didn't work out. 

 

And you've got the lowest interest rates in 30 years, the best 

exchange rates in 30 years, or close to it.  And you've got a 

tremendous effort in terms of fighting inflation, and you have 

people wanting to invest. 

 

So the question is there, seriously there: what gave you the 

economic confidence to put those three or four political sayings 

together at a time when you were talking about a strait-jacket in 

the province of Saskatchewan?  And how do you think your 

plan is any better or in fact is even close to the economic 

alternatives that might be there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, if the former 

premier is seeking me to say that his plan is the way to go as 

the alternative, I tell him, just disabuse himself of that because 

the people of Saskatchewan loudly rejected your plan. 

 

To answer your question very specifically, I think nothing 

better can be said than this.  This is a May 6, 1992, editorial by 

the Star-Phoenix: Tories to blame. 

 

 The issue, provincial deficit; the solution, Tories must accept 

responsibility. 

 

Quote, referring to the Gass report: 

 

 Despite the report's overwhelming indictment of the Tories' 

fiscal management, Neudorf and Swenson have the audacity 

to claim that during the election campaign Premier Roy 

Romanow pretended not to know the Tories were lying about 

the provincial deficit.  The absurdity of 

this situation and the complete moral bankruptcy of the 

Tories is not lost on Saskatchewan taxpayers.  That's 

obviously why they're in opposition. 

 

And here we are, 18 months later, you on the same tack.  That's 

the judgement of the public.  The argument that you make is 

that doing away with the PST, the harmonized PST is not 

responsible, too much taxation.  But to harmonize with the 

GST is responsible, just the right amount of taxation.  The 

argument that we were foolish enough to believe your minister 

of Finance when . . . actually when you think about it, after 

nine years there wasn't one budget where they were even 

within a scintilla of being near accuracy. 

 

I think I admit that we made a mistake there.  We shouldn't 

have believed him when he said 275 million was going to be 

the deficit -- 275 million is what his letter said.  And on 275 

million . . . And on November 1 -- I'm talking about four 

months left in the fiscal year -- it comes in at 925.  Even after 

harmonization, not even within a country mile are you close.  

Not within a country mile. 

 

Just like the editorial says, and I can read this section to you 

again.  So you cannot accept that argument and you simply will 

not accept that argument.  Because I say with the greatest 

respect to the premier you will not accept the result of October 

1991. 

 

(1730) 

 

Pardon me . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay.  But my last 

point is this.  And this is the comment on the question of the 

accounting.  I just simply want to say Report of the Provincial 

Auditor, March 31, 1992: 

 

 The Government moved from providing what the Financial 

Management Review Commission viewed as the weakest and 

least useful financial statements in Canada to providing one 

of the most useful financial statements issued by senior 

government in Canada. 

 

That's the Provincial Auditor's support of adopting the Gass 

Commission documentation.  And to us we think that report, 

plus Ernst & Young and the documentations, indicate the 

situation that is there.  And I can only repeat again -- and I will 

not read again to the hon. member -- our campaign card, the 

great campaign card that we have . . . or had, but none the less 

it is there as to what we promised and it was a very responsible 

document. 

 

And I'm proud to say that when we do go to the electorate in 

three years time or thereabouts, we will be saying: okay, here's 

what we promised; open the books, we did it; review the deals, 

we did it; balanced budget in our first term of office -- I hope 

we can say that; I think we can -- new jobs.  I think we can go 

right down here and say we did all of this, fighting for rural 

communities and the like; open, honest government; general 

elections.  I think this will be a very good 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2707 

report card upon which the electorate can either say yes or no. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Premier, I just come back . . . and 

again, with respect, you have not given any economic 

underpinnings why your plan had given you the confidence to 

say to people, you will have no taxes and that you can give this 

big tax break and you're going to spend more and you're going 

to balance the budget.  Obviously something must have 

allowed you to say that. 

 

And you say, well are we reviewing '91?  Look, you review '91 

every day.  In this legislature you're asked a question and you 

say, well but there was a debt of 14 billion in '91; therefore I 

have to do this. 

 

Now I think that's fair.  You do that a lot.  I'm just asking you, 

under the circumstances of your review all the time, because 

you talk about '91.  You said: lookit, you left a debt of 14.2 

billion; therefore we got to do this.  You talked about that 14.2, 

but what did you say then?  You said something that people 

obviously believed you would do.  You said it's a $14.2 billion 

debt and it's awful, but I'll tell you what I'll do.  You said, I'll 

cut your taxes and no new taxes and lots of increase in 

expenditures. 

 

And people bought it.  They said, well that's pretty popular.  

Isn't that popular.  I mean, today they're shaking their head and 

said, my gosh, all these taxes have gone up.  We have this odd 

combination.  I think, I think . . . didn't they say that they were 

going to cut taxes and spend more on agriculture, cost of 

production?  And you didn't need tax increases to pay for GRIP 

and NISA?  Did they say that?  Didn't they say there was going 

to be more for health and education -- get the university 

professors and students to vote -- didn't they say that?  Yes, 

they said all that. 

 

Well what in the world happened?  Oh, they got elected.  And 

we end up with a situation where now people are saying you 

have hurt rural people; you have inordinately taxed 

municipalities; you have raised the sales tax, you've broadened 

it to include clothes -- it's up 26 per cent from where it was 

where you took office; you have cut into the protection for 

seniors; you have cut the pension plan which was very popular 

among all the seniors; and you have taxed business - 

_ taxpayers are saying the same thing -- and there was no 

justification. 

 

All you've got is, well we got elected because we promised no 

taxes and a tax break and more spending.  And guess what?  

We have . . . now we're in charge. I guess we're going to have 

to find a way to get through this.  And you think it's tough.  

Well thank goodness you've got very good exchange rates and 

very low interest rates and some other things to help you 

through or it would be . . . well frankly, it'd be extremely 

difficult. 

 

Well all I make the point is, of course there was a debt.  And 

other jurisdictions had debts, as you know.  Bob Rae finds out, 

Alberta finds out, Canada finds out it's not easy.  But what you 

did on those circumstances is 

you said, and I will promise lower taxes and no increase in 

taxes and more spending and balance the budget, and people 

believed you. 

 

Well all I want to make the point is, is you told people certain 

things and they believed you. 

 

Now I think it's fair to say with respect, it didn't come to pass.  

You have dramatically raised taxes, dramatically offloaded, 

dramatically cut into health programs, agriculture programs, 

social service programs, educational programs, and you've 

certainly raised the PST and you've broadened it.  And you're 

looking at a situation where there's a great deal of pain.  So 

people are just asking, I wonder if he really knew what he was 

doing when he said that.  And if he didn't, well we've got to 

find out if we should have confidence in you.  If you didn't 

understand that 14.2 made it difficult to promise no taxes and 

that you would give a $400 million tax break, if you didn't 

understand that, then people are going to say, well gosh, maybe 

I shouldn't have confidence in his economic plan. 

 

On the other hand, if you did understand it would be really 

difficult but you promised it anyway, then their confidence 

might be a little suspect.  So either way, people are looking at 

you and saying, if he argued that 14.2 billion was a 

strait-jacket, he must have realized that a big tax break and 

promises of this and promises of that just wouldn't wash unless 

he had a really good plan.  And if you don't have a good plan 

then maybe you didn't have one at all, and then they wonder 

why you would do that. 

 

So I think, Mr. Premier, I've made my point.  It's not 

particularly pleasant to see the economic circumstances that 

people of Saskatchewan are facing with high taxes, increased 

taxes, increased debt, and certainly much less support in health 

and education and agriculture, when in fact they voted for the 

opposite.  And if there's no plan, if there's no economic 

underpinnings to what you've done, then we'll just accept the 

fact that it was a plan, but it wasn't based on economic 

underpinnings.  It was based on something else. 

 

And I have seen nothing here today that you have given me 

that would suggest that you have an economic prospect or an 

economic strategy that would lead us into the future.  And 

you're saying, well, you know, if I keep raising these taxes and 

keep doing this, I hope to be able to balance the budget even 

though you promised that you wouldn't be able to do it. 

 

My last argument will simply be this.  I would again like you to 

explain -- and particularly for the co-ops and the business 

communities -- why your taxes and your sales tax increase of 

25 per cent, up to 9 per cent, without any relief for business, 

why that is better than some sort of cooperative effort as you 

subscribed in part today.  And I think you were proud of it, 

where you have tucked it in a little bit and said, we'll give relief 

there and give relief . . . Obviously it makes sense because if 

you've done it for IPSCO or do it for 



2708 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

Sears, it makes great economic sense for those companies.  If it 

makes sense for Sears and it makes sense for IPSCO -- and 

certainly we've got lots of letters, and you'll have them on file 

-- why your increase in taxes and taxes and taxes and taxes is 

really going to be the right way to allow the business 

community and co-ops to have confidence to invest here. 

 

So perhaps you would have the capacity or the wherewithal to 

give me and the public any other economic underpinnings that 

gave you the confidence to say that you could pull this off 

under your new tax system when in fact you promised no taxes 

and tax relief and increased expenditures.  Is there anything 

else that you could add in terms of the economic underpinnings 

while your tax system is, in my view . . . Convince me that it is 

not just a very, very crude, blunt instrument that you're using 

now all over the place.  Health, education, municipalities, 

consumers, the sales tax -- the PST is up to 9 -- everywhere 

you go, and no relief.  Where is the relief? 

 

And you talk about, well we did have, we had $30 million here.  

But where is the strategy that would encourage them to invest 

here rather than Alberta or Ontario or Quebec or B.C. (British 

Columbia)?  Is there anything else that you could add that 

would help describe that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, with the greatest of 

respect, I just don't understand where the former premier is 

coming from.  He cites these figures just as if he was back in 

the premier's chair.  Four hundred million dollars in taxes, and 

he knows full well that the most the harmonization would have 

gotten him by his own figures is 125 million, for an example. 

 

He shakes his head.  Well let's get . . . Would you get one of 

the officials to dig out that last budget of theirs and we're going 

to settle this once and for all, right now. 

 

Then he says, how did you know? Why is it that you say you 

don't know?  Do you know why we did not know?  Because we 

did not know as the world did not know.  Paul Martin, Star-

Phoenix, editorial column, quote:  without resorting to partisan 

or large "P" political shots, the commission documented a 

shameful addiction to secrecy dominating the mind-set of the 

previous administration headed by Grant Devine.  End quote. 

 

Quote: Abuse of authority, cover-up, and overt attempts to 

circumvent the public scrutiny of the Legislative Assembly 

clearly became the operating practice of the former cabinet, 

most notably in the area of economic development.  Vehicles 

such as the Saskatchewan Diversification Corporation, SDC, 

Saskatchewan government growth fund, SGGF, became the 

Saskatchewan equivalent of Ollie North's clandestine White 

House antics.  End quote. 

 

Goes on to say, quote: for example, you may recall the 

formation of the SDC was a closely-held piece of 

information.  Few, recently few, certainly few in the business 

community this organization was allegedly designed to assist 

had ever heard of SDC.  Similarly, senior members in the New 

Democratic caucus were caught by surprise when news of 

SDC's existence broke.  SDC was not a household name in 

Regina before the election, leaving little doubt secrecy was the 

previous administration's theme song.  If nothing else, the Gass 

Commission's findings stand as a powerful argument for 

keeping government out of business.  As it turns out, the 

provincial election became the ultimate check and balance in 

Saskatchewan democracy. 

 

It's interesting to note that not one single member of Devine's 

economic unit was returned in the general election.  You can't 

tell me, Martin writes, the people of Saskatchewan don't know 

a snake oil salesman when they see one.  The Gass 

Commission's report verifies everything the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan knew. 

 

Now you can say that he is writing maliciously.  You can say 

that I am trying to be wilfully blind.  You've been at this for the 

last hour and a half.  All I'm telling you is if you make that 

allegation about me, then I am in good company, sir -- in good 

company.  Not only editorialists but everybody else who has 

said that this is the case that is going around -- in good 

company.  Now I will not convince you and you won't 

convince me. 

 

Now my last point is, what gives us the confidence?  This is the 

crucial aspect of the question.  I don't want to fight the '91 

election all over again, maybe the member from Estevan does. 

 

What gives us the confidence is . . . as he started out, I'll close 

on my answer.  What gives us the hope, I'll put it that way, and 

the confidence are this: the economic indicators which I have 

recited; the fact that we do have a co-op small business strategy 

-- small business corporation tax reduced; no payroll tax; the 

establishment of incentives for investment; manufacturing and 

processing tax credit; phasing out of E&H (education and 

health) on manufacturing processing; labour-sponsored venture 

capital program; the 1-800, which is only one aspect of the 

Sears call line, only one aspect; the E&H removal on the 

1-800; and the promotion of value-added processing; and the 

partnership paper. 

 

Now do I know that this is going to succeed?  I do not know 

this is going to succeed.  All that I can say is what I said to the 

former premier.  I really believe that on the best evidence that 

we have before us and the most independent facts that we can 

get, since nobody has attacked these numbers as being wildly 

unrealistic, we've got a chance -- we've got a chance.  And the 

predictions are reasonable and sound. 

 

And I appeal to him . . . I mean, I don't know what his political 

future is going to be.  He's going to make that choice, and he 

can do whatever he wants, of course, but he's now not only in 

politics, but in the business community.  I appeal to him to take 

a look at the 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2709 

positive side of things here, to take a look at the partnerships 

which we are trying to develop.  In 18 months we have not 

gotten out of the situation we're in.  There's no doubt about 

that.  But we didn't get into it in 18 months. 

 

So there's my comment.  The former premier wants to come 

back to give me one more good shot, so I'm ready and give it to 

me. 

 

(1745) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well let me just say a couple of things.  One is 

that the reason that I'm concerned is because I do farm in 

Saskatchewan and I do operate a business in Saskatchewan as 

well as being involved in public life.  And I would think a more 

streamlined and a targeted and a strategic taxation regime 

would really help the province of Saskatchewan.  I genuinely 

believe that. 

 

And you say you agree.  But so my concern is that I'm not 

convinced that you had a plan of any kind of taxation that 

would be anywhere close to being strategic and targeted and 

focused when you promised no PST and no new taxes and all 

this increase in spending without a debt.  I mean, there was a 

vacuum there.  And clearly, history is recorded that you have 

filled it. 

 

Now one of the reasons that leads me to believe that perhaps 

you don't have a very good . . . whether it's appreciation or 

handle on an economic strategy, is that your recent comments 

are that you again -- and I don't understand it, I really don't -- 

not in favour or would not endorse more liberalized trade 

between us and Mexico, and us and the United States and 

Mexico. 

 

If you are in touch with the business community, certainly in 

the province of Saskatchewan . . . your Minister of Economic 

Development has been there and he talks about all the 

opportunities.  It's part of his so-called plan that you put 

together.  If I could see some consistency that you really 

believed in lower tariffs, opening up, encouraging businesses 

here . . . businesses are talking about, well we're going to 

manufacture in Saskatchewan and we're going to market here, 

add diversification, but the administration isn't in favour of 

more a more tariff-free environment with our partners to the 

south. 

 

You campaigned against free trade with the United States; you 

campaign now against . . . you just spoke against NAFTA 

(North American Free Trade Agreement).  And all it is is lower 

tariffs, that's the lowering of tariffs between . . . Big market.  

You've got people in your party and people in business and 

people who've raised funds for you, saying, for heaven's sakes, 

we need those markets. 

 

But you are leaving the impression that you have some other 

plan.  Now I don't see expansion in the Pacific Rim under your 

administration; I don't see the expansion that our new office or 

additional office or agents or whatever you might have, in 

Japan, in 

China, in Taiwan, in the Pacific Rim.  You've campaigned 

against the American opening up of trade and now you're 

against Mexico, and you're supposed to be with the business 

community. 

 

Well business people spend a great deal of money, and I'm sure 

you agree.  We go to other countries, we go for markets, we 

look for access, we look for the support, at least philosophical 

support, from businesses.  And then we look for partnerships in 

philosophy, at least, if governments would say you're welcome, 

come in here. 

 

How can we say and how can you say come on into 

Saskatchewan and manufacture when we've got 9 per cent sales 

tax on top of this federal tax, when we don't really favour trade 

and freer trade with other jurisdictions, when we're not 

encouraging that, when we're taking Crown corporations and 

expanding them to other jurisdictions?  And that one's got me.  

I mean, they're shaking their head in Manitoba over that one. 

 

A Crown corporation, SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance), is now going to expand across the country.  I mean 

it's . . . do you think that makes the insurance companies feel 

good that this is a government for the private sector?  You said 

five minutes ago, or ten minutes ago, you don't think 

government should be there.  Yet you've got a Crown 

corporation in another jurisdiction trying to compete in 

insurance.  What in the world is that for? 

 

So if you're anti-business and anti freer trade and you are 

taking your Crowns and putting them into other jurisdictions on 

top of the fact that you promised no new taxes and a big tax 

break and balanced budget and all . . . (inaudible) . . . none of it 

is coming to pass.  It doesn't ring. 

 

And you're the individual that nationalized the potash industry.  

And we can't just forget about that because you borrowed a 

bunch of money and I got the bills, and the rest of the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers, because you never paid it back.  

Interest rates go to 22 per cent and guess who pays?  

Somebody does. 

 

Now that philosophy, that flip-flop all over the place where you 

say here that you're for co-ops, and you're obviously in a major 

battle with the heart and soul of the cooperative movement, and 

you're for the business community but you've got all these 

inconsistencies in your personality and in your policies and in 

your administration. 

 

So it's not just the election of '91 where you promised lower 

taxes and you promised no new taxes and you promised more 

expenditures in health and education, it's since that time.  Since 

that time you have rung up more debt and more deficit and 

you've got a lower credit rating. 

 

And now you're talking about, as you court business, but I'm 

against trade with Mexico; I'm against freer trade with the 

United States.  You certainly haven't expanded your energies or 

helped people expand their energies in the Pacific Rim, and 

you've got 



2710 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

Crown corporations off competing in other provinces against 

the private sector.  Now it gets a little confounding, to say the 

least, when the public wants to know what your basic economic 

foundation and underpinnings are. 

 

So I mean it's . . . You're right.  You have not convinced me 

and perhaps several others in the province that you do have a 

strategic plan that says, come into my province because we 

believe in this with respect to economic development and 

growth.  And granted both . . . all people are concerned about 

debt and deficits.  And again I reiterate.  I was surprised that 

you could have all these promises, given your realization of a 

$14.2 billion debt that you campaigned against, but you did it.  

And it's out there. 

 

But now the other inconsistencies just add up as well.  So we 

just need to put them all in a package to find out what it is 

about this, the personality of the leader here that will give us 

the confidence for business people to invest and to build and to 

grow here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Premier, I've 

been reviewing the information that you were so kind to send 

over the other day.  And there's a few things here that I find a 

little bit bothersome and I think we should clear up before we 

finish these off. 

 

You seem to have had a lot of people here that worked for you 

for two, three, four months and then they head off to other 

areas.  I have a couple of questions there. 

 

I wonder if you would mind providing me with the area that 

each one of these individuals went to.  It says, accept position 

in a different agency.  And if they went to that agency, if they 

were at the same salary as what you are paying them or if 

they've gotten increases since then. 

 

And also, a couple of the individuals that I'd like to ask you 

about in there . . . I notice that Gordon Nystuen went on your 

payroll on February 2, '93, at $3,314, but also very shortly went 

on to the payroll of the Gaming Commission and the Liquor 

Board at a fairly high salary.  And I notice in the termination 

section, there is no termination for this individual, and I'm 

wondering how he made that quantum leap from your office to 

the other area without the termination occurring.  Was he being 

paid by one, two, or three agencies all at the same time? 

 

Another one for you to look up.  I notice here that you have a 

Cheryl Wilkie whose termination date is September 30, '93.  

We're some months away from September '93 and I'm 

wondering if that aide, if she is on your payroll till then in 

anticipation of going to another agency, or what exactly that 

individual is doing.  So I wonder if you could answer those 

questions before we go on to a few more. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- In the case of Nystuen, there is a 

secondment agreement.  He comes from Executive Council 

over to the Gaming Commission and only in a capacity of 

acting chief executive officer although I 

must say in our judgement he's doing an excellent job.  And 

what works out in the future I guess will depend to a large 

extent as to how that plays out.  But in any event there's 

contemplation of a return. 

 

With respect to Cheryl Wilkie, she left Executive Council and 

now works in the minister's office of associate Health . . . 

Associate Minister of Health. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Why is her termination date September 30,'93 

then, if this has happened? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Again perhaps I'm misreading this.  

But I see on my document, Cheryl Wilkie, 

receptionist-switchboard, March 31,'93 or termination.  And 

then transferred to Health on September 30, 1992.  So it would 

either be March 31, '93 or as of September 30, 1992, the 

termination time . . . or the transfer time.  That would be the 

operative date. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I must not have that page, Mr. Premier.  

The page I have here is 2/33 that I'm working off, and my first 

name on terminations here is Abells, Janet Abells. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Yes, we've summarized it.  That's 

right.  That is a typo, I'm told.  That is September 30, '92, but it 

is typed September 30, '93.  You're right.  But in actual . . . the 

document briefing note which I have, which is the same 

information, it was September 30, '92. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay.  That clears that up.  And the question 

I asked you about all of these other agencies, will I be provided 

with where these people all went to and the salaries that they're 

at in these new agencies? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Yes, we can get this compiled for you 

and indicate where they are and the information that you want.  

Some have simply been laid off or terminated, some transferred 

and the like, and we can provide that.  Some even unfortunately 

death.  But we'll do that. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Premier, while you were in opposition, 

you and your party talked a lot about secondments and how 

you didn't like them particularly.  I notice, going through these, 

that you've got about 15 of them at present on the go -- our 

friend in the Liquor Board and Gaming Commission being one 

of them.  But they seem to be all over the place.  Some of them 

are consultants; some of them are researchers; some of them 

are special advisers. 

 

Is it the practice to sort of run them through Executive Council 

until you can find the appropriate place in government to park 

these people?  Because as I go through them, they mostly all 

seem to be people with fairly prominent names in the New 

Democratic Party.  And I look at Dickson Bailey and others of 

his stature in your party, and I'm just wondering . . . Delaine 

Scotton.  I can pick out many here that seem to park themselves 

in your office for a little while, either under a secondment or 

some type of temporary employment before they go off to 

another agency.  And I'm 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2711 

wondering what policy decision that you're working with these 

days. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of 

all, I'm advised by my officials that as far as Executive Council 

is concerned, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, we do not in 

Executive Council second MAs or ministerial assistants 

working in political offices.  We try to take into our shop, if I 

can put it that way -- by way of secondments, I'm talking about 

-- people who are within the regular civil service, if I may 

describe it, non-ministerial offices. 

 

Now the policy is very simple.  We believe that secondments 

provide temporary job assignments to public service employees 

to enhance skills, knowledge, and experience, competence and 

flexibility of the human resources and allow departments 

flexibility to respond quickly to the changing human resources 

needs and that they are vital to interchange and creativity. 

 

I don't want this to be thought of in political terms.  But the 

Provincial Auditor has been highly critical of the secondment 

system up to date and as a result we have taken the following 

steps to change it based on the Provincial Auditor's criticisms.  

One, formal agreements are now in place for secondments over 

two months in duration; and two, agreements identify the 

length of the secondment and specify that the seconding agency 

will be responsible for all expenses and salaries after two 

months.  This is currently under review by PSC (Public Service 

Commission) as part of a development of a general secondment 

policy for government overall.  Permanent heads of both 

agencies and the individuals seconded must sign the agreement. 

 

So when you say why did we complain before, it was because 

the Provincial Auditor subsequently indicated that the system 

was not properly tracked or accounted for.  We think we've put 

into places as he has recommended proper tracking and 

identification, and we followed that policy and general 

approach. 

 

(1800) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Premier, I hardly agree with his 

comments as far as public servants, and there are some of these 

people are long-time public servants.  I see one that even used 

to work for me here in Energy and Mines.  But they are the 

exception rather than the rule.  I mean, to call Mr. Dickson 

Bailey or Susan Bates or Nystuen or Scotton or Andrew 

Thomson or Mark Stobbe or Sheena Weir, Don McMillan . . . I 

haven't had time to pick them all out of here, Mr. Premier, but 

these are not long-time public servants.  As one of our friends 

in the media . . . and we never want to always believe them, do 

we? -- when some of them were described the other day as 

cronyism, and some of them weren't cronies, they were 

patronage appointments because nobody liked them any more 

and that type of thing.  But you have an awful lot of plain and 

simple New Democrats salted in through here, Mr. Premier, 

that are not public servants; they're political friends of yourself 

or others. 

And it just seems that we have an ongoing process of them 

working for you for a few months and then going elsewhere, or 

else they're somewhere else and then you bring them in for a 

few months.  And it almost appears to me that what we have 

here is a clearing house of individuals from the New 

Democratic Party who can then get themselves a government 

job at some point. 

 

I'm wondering, Mr. Premier, if you could tell me how many of 

these positions were advertised?  I know that there was some 

comment earlier on in your term that it would be an open 

advertising process for these positions.  So if these ones that 

have been moving around government and accepting positions 

in other agencies and some of these ones that clearly are New 

Democrats, if you could tell me if they were advertised 

positions that they've gone to, and if so, would you provide me 

with copies of the advertisement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- We'll see if we can find the paper for 

the latter question.  But I want to disabuse the hon. member 

from the, I think, the wrong assumption that he makes, the 

information which we gave to him with respect to Executive 

Council employees who have left being all secondment 

employees. 

 

That's not the case.  Some have died.  One person . . . I mean 

there's no secondment there.  And some have left for other 

reasons; either leaving the government service or resignation or 

termination, so that this is not necessarily a secondment. 

 

What we're really talking about for the vast majority of the 

employees that you're looking at is simple transference out of 

Executive Council into other areas of government.  No 

secondment.  In the case of Nystuen, that was a secondment 

agreement on the terms and the policies which I have 

articulated to you. 

 

Now I'm given the following: in '92-93, Mr. Leader, there were 

513 placements of which 414 -- 80.7 per cent -- were hired by 

competition under the terms of the collective agreement; 75, 

namely 14.6 per cent, were due to reclassification; 22, or 4.3 

per cent, were the result of redeployment, a small percentage; 

and 4 -- .8 per cent -- were section 7.23 appointments.  I don't 

know what section 7.23 is . . . Yes, under special authority of 

the chair of the Public Service Commission.  So that is the 

case. 

 

Now in Executive Council, the competition were as follows: 

secretary to the associate deputy minister, the chief electoral 

officer, the international officer, five senior policy advisers, 

admin. officer, as listed here.  And there may be others which 

are not set out. 

 

Now in the case of Nystuen, which you referred to, I've 

explained that.  That's a simple matter of secondment because 

we needed, we felt, someone of Nystuen's calibre in that 

position quickly as possible. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, I wouldn't have 

to go through person by person, but I 



2712 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

guess we'll have to do this, and you can tell me whether this is 

an advertised position or not. 

 

We've got Janet Abells, special adviser, accepted a position at a 

different agency as of January 31 '93; Dickson Bailey accepted 

a position in a different agency, February 28, '93; Susan Bates 

accepted a position in a different agency, January 11, '93;  

Caroline Brisbois accepted a position in a different agency, 

November 17, 92; Debi Chambers accepted a position in a 

different agency, October 7, '92. 

 

So I mean those are the ones that I'm interested in . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I make a commitment to the Leader of 

the Opposition that we will augment the general department 

agency report to identify competition or not competition.  And 

the reason I say that is if we go by this . . . I mean we can take 

the time, but I think it would be not a useful use of the 

committee's time. 

 

Janet Abells, MA, that classification, you'll see it in category 3 

of your document -- name, title, classification -- that is a 

political position; there's no competition for that.  Bailey, 

consultant, there's no competition for that.  Susan Bates, MA, 

works in the Minister of Finance's office. 

 

But then you find others that do have competition.  Barbara 

Cross, CT (clerk typist)III, and so it goes down the line.  

There's a PL (professional level)8, and I won't mention the 

name but that's an abolition in termination of position.  So we'll 

give you that material as to what competition took place and 

what did not take place for whom. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well thank you, Mr. Premier.  I will accept 

the offer and gladly take it.  I wished we'd had a few more days 

of sitting to go through that and just analyse it a little bit but . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, we'll get through this, don't 

worry. 

 

I notice also, Mr. Premier, in your list of committees and 

reviews you do not list the actual committees.  So I'd like to ask 

you if these are your committees, or if they belong to 

somebody else.  Because where they're funded from and that 

type of thing I think is important. 

 

For instance, the Premier's action committee on the economy is 

not on the list.  And I ask you, if the PACE committee is your 

committee, then it should be funded, I would presume, from 

your allotment, or is it the Economic Development minister's 

committee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Actually, first of all, PACE, we call it, 

occasionally, Premier's action committee on the economy, Mr. 

House Leader . . . Mr. Leader, but it's really a provincial action 

committee and it comes under Economic Development.  So 

therefore it's not listed. 

 

I might add about PACE for example, that there are no per 

diems being charged here.  These are people who volunteer 

their efforts and the work.  I think the only 

expense is the hiring of the room for the meeting.  Pretty well 

everything else . . . maybe some travel expense, minor travel 

expense.  That's the reason why it's not listed here; it's under 

Ec. Development. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I wonder, Mr. Premier, you've got a few 

office locations around that I notice, office locations where 

your people are located.  I wonder if you could tell me what the 

office space that Executive Council has in the CIC (Crown 

Investments Corporation) building is for and who would be 

occupying that particular office space and what exactly do they 

do.  And if they are part of the people that we've been recently 

talking about, you can indicate what. 

 

 And there's another one I noticed on here and it's a building 

that's unfamiliar to me so I wanted to find out about it.  You 

have office space in the Rolloflex building, Rolloflex building, 

and I wonder what the purpose of that office space is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- First of all, the space at CIC is 

unrelated to your dear friend, the evil Mr. Ching, or anybody 

tied up with that operation.  He's not tied up with this.  This 

was a space which is terminated effective March 31, '93, and it 

was a straight, what they call program review by people who 

are -- how should I word this? -- not with any aspersion on Mr. 

Ching, but the regular civil service, if I may put it that way.  

And that's gone. 

 

With respect to the Rolloflex, I'm advised that this is 

warehouse space -- warehouse space for the Chief Electoral 

Officer.  That's what I'm told, and it has been that way for 

many years. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I wonder, we might be doubling up with this 

question too.  Under personnel, no. 1, for the '92 fiscal year, 

you've got 5 million listed as "other".  The employees are not in 

scope, I understand, and I'm wondering what the list of people 

that are in this particular sum of money and provide a list of 

each job covered for the 5 million under "other". 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- These are the salary dollars for the 

Executive Council, and I believe we've undertaken for the 

member from Greystone to provide a breakdown of that for 

that member and we're prepared to do the same thing for you, 

but you'll just see the salaries that are set out there. 

 

Maybe I've got the wrong document here.  It's under electoral 

that you have that?  Is the heading at the very top, upper 

left-hand side: Executive Council, electoral? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Personnel, no. 1. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Personnel, no. 1.  Maybe . . . damn, 

the government's still too large.  Yes, the number you're 

referring to is 5 million; the number that I have is 3 million.  

Where do you get that 5 million from? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I'm just, Mr. Chairman, going 



June 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2713 

off my notes here, so I'm going to have to take the Premier's 

word at it that it's simply 3 million and not 5, because I . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I will make a commitment to you in 

order to speed this along a little bit.  If you and the House 

Leader, or for that matter if we could send somebody from 

Exec Council to meet with you, we will provide a written 

response.  Because the number that we have is $5 million. 

 

Personnel report no. 1 -- we've got it noted -- that is, I'm told, 

all of the expenses for the running of elections.  That's what it 

includes. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay.  If that's the case, would that include 

the three plebiscite questions that were also asked along with 

it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Everything paid for by the electoral 

office is in that number. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I have one final set of questions, Mr. Premier, 

and it's something that I don't have a lot of detail on but I think 

we need a little enlightenment. 

 

You, or your department, I believe, is in charge of Executive 

Air.  And I understand that there are a couple of individuals 

over there who are under suspension right now from Transport 

Canada, but they are at full pay.  And there are some 

allegations of time sheets not being correct; of planes that were 

taking ministers to specific places, turning around and coming 

back to Regina for supposedly mechanical reasons, but in fact 

perhaps weren't. 

 

And I think, Mr. Premier, that given the public's interest in 

anything to do with how cabinet or MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) travel or do things, that it behoves you 

to give us some kind of an explanation exactly what's going on 

there. 

 

(1815) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- First of all, Mr. Chairman, I'll answer 

this question.  It's important, but this is not an Executive 

Council line . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm sorry, if I could 

just finish this off so that you could hear the answer.  This is 

not an Executive Council line responsibility; it's a Property 

Management Corporation responsibility.  And there has been -- 

how should I describe it? -- investigation, perhaps is the word 

to use, by the Department of Transport, Ministry of Transport, 

over a period of time with respect to the filing of logs and 

flights by pilots and perhaps even mechanics. 

 

SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) is 

awaiting or has received -- it's in that time frame -- from the 

Department of Transport a recommended solution as to what 

should or shouldn't happen, and management is trying to solve 

it in that context. 

 

The suspensions are just that, suspensions with pay, until the 

matter is straightened away.  We're dealing 

here with long-term employees. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I can appreciate that, Mr. Premier.  Who 

makes the decision then as to whether they are under . . . they 

continue to be paid at full remuneration or not?  Is that SPMC's 

minister makes that decision?  Or who does that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- This is, at the end of the day, a 

management decision by the Property Management 

Corporation; by the Property Management Corporation is the 

decision. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I have 

just one brief set of questions for the Premier, and that deals 

with advertising and local papers and newspapers and so on, 

Mr. Premier. 

 

I have two newspapers in my constituency.  One is the 

Saskatchewan Valley News and the other one is The Village 

Press.  The owner of The Village Press, quite frankly, when I 

read his newspaper and his articles and so on, probably doesn't 

like your political stance.  And he let's it be known in no 

uncertain term.  There's a concern here, Mr. Premier, that this 

particular newspaper and one other in the province has been 

denied any government advertising over the last period of time, 

while the other more medium, run-of-the-road type of 

newspaper is getting a fair amount of advertising, but this one, 

The Village Press is getting no advertising, Mr. Premier.  Is 

this a policy of your government, that people who stand up and 

protest, that they pay the price? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- No, it is not a policy.  I stopped 

reading newspapers a long time ago.  It isn't a policy. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Except The Globe and Mail. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Except The Globe and Mail.  You're 

right about that.  That is the one paper I still read.  I don't know 

why, but I do.  It is not a policy. 

 

This is a result of the following factors.  We have very 

substantially reduced the total amount spent on advertising for 

newspapers, big numbers.  The weekly newspapers 

associations are not happy with this; they want us to open up 

some more for obvious reasons.  Then when you have fewer 

bucks it's a question now of circulation, exposure, readership, 

market areas -- whether it can be done by other newspapers, 

depending upon where the community is functioning, and what 

advertising competition there is. 

 

What we do with respect to advertising is we have introduced 

an advertising policy which is low-bid tender, or at least is a 

tendering process which everybody knows about.  But as to 

placement, this will depend on exactly numbers like readership.  

This has nothing to do with the Valley News.  I don't know 

what their position is.  I haven't read Valley News at all, and so 

far as I know most people around here haven't done it.  That's 

the simple situation. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- It's not the Valley News that is 



2714 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1993 

making the complaint, sir, it's The Village Press, which is out 

of Warman and out of Dalmeny area.  I have no problem, Mr. 

Premier, of you saying that we've got to take a look at the 

amount of money that we're spending in advertising, cutting 

back.  That's not the complaint, Mr. Premier. 

 

The complaint is that SWNA (Saskatchewan Weekly 

Newspapers Association), the other members of it are getting 

their fair share of advertising dollars.  This particular paper is 

not getting any advertising.  That is the problem.  It's not the 

amount across the piece.  It's that this paper seems to be almost 

singled out because of its political stance, that it is not getting 

the kind of political advertising that the Valley News for 

example, just 12 miles down the road or so, is getting.  That's 

what I want.  Now to draw into a nutshell, Mr. Premier, I'm 

going to ask you to make a commitment that you will have 

your officials look at the amount of advertising that this Village 

Press is getting, and if indeed it's getting its fair share of 

advertising.  And that if not, that you will see to it that this 

problem is going to be addressed in a fair manner. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I'll commit to the hon. member to take 

a look at this and I'll instruct my officials to give me a report or 

at least an examination as to what the situation there is.  The 

first I hear of it, and so far as I know it's the first that they hear 

about it.  We'll check it to see if there's something which is 

amiss or remiss there.  But I tell you, we don't place on the 

basis of favourable editorial comments because if we did I 

think we could reduce the advertising budget to pretty well 

zero. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 

 


