




















































Hansard: March 19, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 433 

 March 19, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that 

I shall on Tuesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Health and the prescription 

drug plan: (1) how much was paid by users of the plan in 

premiums in the last year; (2) how many persons received 

benefits from the plan during the last year; (3) what was the 

value of the benefits received; (4) how many of those 

receiving benefits were seniors, on social assistance, or 

considered chronically ill? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's a 

pleasure for me to introduce two young people who are seated 

in your gallery.  They are Liz Warden and Bob Haynes who are 

here from Scarborough, Ontario.  They're presently practising 

with the Regina Optimist Dolphins swim club.  They will be 

going to Germany to compete in the meet over there, leaving 

on April 5. 

 

I'd like members to join me in welcoming them and wish them 

the best in their competitive spirit. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce 

to you and through you to the members of the Assembly 10 

guests from the Regina Open Door Society, frequent visitors to 

the legislature, with their teacher -- and I hope I get your name 

right -- Roshnie Thaver.  And I hope to meet with you later.  

Thanks very much for coming. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Legislative Assembly, 30 grade 11 and 12 students from 

Wakaw.  They're accompanied by their teachers, Raymond 

Rivard and Jack McGarvey and Leanne Durand.  Mr. Speaker, 

they're seated in your gallery. 

 

Wakaw is geographically located basically at the centre of my 

constituency.  It's basically a farming community.  It also has 

quite a bit of tourism attraction to the community.  And it's 

certainly the home of my constituency office. 

 

I had an opportunity earlier this fall to meet with these young 

people and discuss the future of our country and in particular 

the constitutional debate that was being waged at that particular 

time. 

Mr. Speaker, I welcome these students to Regina and to the 

Legislative Assembly.  I look forward to meeting with them 

after the question period to answer any of their questions.  And 

certainly I welcome . . . and hopefully they have a beautiful 

stay in Regina.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I would like 

to introduce through you and to other members of the 

Assembly a couple of people in your gallery, one being my 

sister, Wanda Upshall, and the other being Jerome Bombreck.  

Just, Mr. Speaker, as this government with our budget has 

embarked in a new relationship with the people of 

Saskatchewan, a recent engagement is going to result hopefully 

in a long relationship between these two people.  I'd like all 

members to welcome them to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and 

through you, two members of the francophone community, 

they're Mr. Roger Gauthier and M. Gérald LeBlanc, who work 

on behalf of the association of francophone parents in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  I'm glad to see them here today and 

I welcome and I hope their stay is pleasant. 

 

M. le président, je voudrais vous présenter deux membres du 

communauté francophone, M. Roger Gauthier, M. Gérald 

LeBlanc, qui travaillent pour l'association des parents 

francophones de la province.  Je vous invite aujourd'hui d'être 

ici puis je vais les voir après la période de question.  Merci, M. 

le président. 

 

(Translation:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you two 

members of the francophone community who work for the 

provincial association of francophone parents.  I welcome you 

here today and will meet with you after question period.  Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker.) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Budget Provisions 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question will 

be to the Finance minister. 

 

Madam Minister, the reaction of Saskatchewan taxpayers is 

coming in from all around this province.  And that reaction to 

your budget delivered yesterday, Madam Minister, is one of 

universal condemnation.  And I quote to you, Madam Minister, 

from the Star-Phoenix this morning: 

 

 "A tax revolt is coming," warned Jim McGeary, president of 

the College Park Community Association. 



434 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1993 

 "I'm personally overburdened already . . ." 

 

 "People will just stop spending," said the father of three 

elementary-school children, in reference to the increase in the 

education and health tax. 

 

Madam Minister, you and your Premier, who a short time ago 

promised this province that there would be no tax increases 

under a New Democratic Party government, yesterday went out 

and picked the pockets of this province for another $200 

million in increased taxes -- the absolute antithesis of what you 

promised in that election campaign. 

 

Madam Minister, how can you answer people like Mr. 

McGeary in Saskatoon? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a very good 

answer for that gentleman.  And that answer is this: how did we 

get into the situation that we are in? 

 

Let's be clear about this.  The members opposite took a once 

proud and independent province which, in 1982, had one of the 

highest credit ratings in Canada, could borrow money wherever 

it wanted, independent of any scrutiny, and have reduced us to 

the situation that we have bond rating agencies regularly 

overlooking our shoulder. 

 

They did that by decisions like privatizing the Potash 

Corporation for a loss of $400 million. And I will mention 

other decisions later. 

 

What this government is doing is it's fighting to preserve our 

capacity to borrow money independent of conditions, and we 

have the people of Saskatchewan behind us in that fight. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question to the 

same minister.  Madam Minister, that is sheer nonsense and 

you know it.  Your leader and your Premier had the absolute 

confidence to stand on province-wide TV in the leaders' debate 

in the election campaign and talk about a $14.2 billion deficit 

in the province in Saskatchewan.  He had absolute confidence 

that he could handle a debt that size with no tax increases. 

 

Madam Minister, today SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) are saying that the people 

that they represent are in tax revolt.  The businesses that pay 

the taxes are in tax revolt.  And you promised them, Madam 

Minister, that that wouldn't happen. 

 

And I remind you, Madam Minister, that it is your government 

that has added onto the 14.2 that your Premier talked about in 

the election campaign. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, in light of the fact that individuals, that 

the people that SUMA and SARM are saying are in tax revolt, 

Madam Minister, would you 

explain to these people how you can add another half a billion 

in hidden taxes over the next four years on the backs of those 

people that are already in tax revolt? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I think we have to 

clarify the terms and conditions of this debate.  What is 

absolute nonsense?  Are you telling me that this province has a 

major financial problem is absolute nonsense?  Because if that's 

what you're saying, I will spend the rest of this question period 

reading comments by outside observers to the contrary. 

 

I will start by Nesbitt Thomson, describing Saskatchewan's 

credit position as terrifying.  I will add, it's not terrifying to us 

because we have a plan to deal with it.  But I will go on to the 

Canadian Bankers' Association, talking about our debt being 

$15 billion, and making this comment:  the recession is in part 

due to our continued deficits and our accumulated debt load.  

That is what they're saying, is our capacity to come out of the 

recession is being strangled by the level of our debt load. 

 

I will go on to the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce.  They 

say: the deficit has to be the number one priority of the 

government.  They say: these deficits will have a major effect 

on the province's ability to take advantage of economic 

recovery. 

 

So what I ask the member opposite: is he still in denial?  Is he 

still saying there's no financial problem in this province?  

Because if so, that's what we'll debate for the rest of this 

question period. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question to the 

same minister.  Madam Minister, it's a question of how you 

manage that is important here.  Madam Minister, let me quote 

to you some more people who today are in condemnation of the 

way that you manage.  And I quote from the Star-Phoenix, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

 The province and municipalities are eyeball-to-eyeball over 

how much of the provincial deficit property owners will 

carry, Bernard Kirwan warned Thursday. 

 

 "Property taxpayers have said they can't be pushed any 

further," he said.  "There will be a tax revolt . . ." 

 

 Many municipalities can't take any more cuts, said Ted 

Cholod, president of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association. 

 

 "Businesses are talking about a tax revolt." 

 

Madam Minister, I say to you, the people that have to be your 

partners in management in this province are universally 

condemning the way that you are 



March 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 435 

handling the debt problem in this province, the job creation 

problem in this province.  And then to top it off, they resent the 

fact that you would dump another half a billion dollars in 

offloading onto the backs of their taxpayers. 

 

Madam Minister, you still haven't answered the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, assuming the member 

opposite has accepted the fact that we have a financial problem, 

I will move on to deal with your question.  Our problem is 

simple.  If you take interest on the public debt, which is 

something that has to be paid, you take health care, education, 

social services, agriculture, and economic development, that's 

90 per cent of the expenditures of this government.  The 

tragedy is, the situation that you have left us in is a situation 

where we have to make cuts in areas that we would never 

choose to make cuts.  We are not like your counter . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Could I ask the members, 

please give the minister an opportunity to answer the question.  

You can't constantly interrupt. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- We are not like your counterparts in 

Ottawa who have a $6 billion helicopter program that they 

could cancel or a Department of Defence.  Your government 

created the problem; we have devised the solution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Madam Minister, people around this province 

are saying they don't like your solution.  The Saskatchewan 

association of taxpayers this morning says, just the upfront 

stuff is another thousand bucks a family -- another thousand 

dollars, Madam Minister, to people that are already suffering 

the burden of tax increases from your government a year 

earlier, suffering the burden of increased utility rate increases 

that you said you wouldn't do, suffering under all sorts of 

increases that people have never seen before, Madam Minister. 

 

And on top of the thousand dollars upfront, they are saying 

there will be another half a billion dollars in hidden taxes of 

offloading to the property tax base in this province, Madam 

Minister.  Maybe you would be so kind to table in this 

legislature what that half billion dollars in extra costs will do to 

the provincial economy.  Surely you've got it figured out.  Tell 

us about that half a billion dollars, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

saddled my children and the other children in this province 

with an incredible burden of debt.  They spent without thinking 

about the future and who was going to pay.  That era is over in 

Saskatchewan.  We now have a government committed to 

living 

within its means and planning for the future.  We plan to sit 

down with our partners at the local level to help them 

restructure, rationalize, and to work in a cooperative way to 

deal with the problems. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the same minister.  Madam Minister, once again people around 

this province are questioning your management and your plan.  

Ted Cholod, president of SUMA, says that since your 

government came in there's been a 33 per cent reduction to 

municipalities -- 33 per cent, Madam Minister.  That's an entire 

third of what these people deal with in the way of relationships 

with your government.  Now that process that you embarked on 

has already cost this province 9,000 jobs last year. 

 

And what they're afraid of, Madam Minister, is that because 

you're doing more of the same -- more offloading -- that rather 

than creating jobs, rather than allowing people to be creative, 

the people that pay the property taxes in our cities and our 

towns and our rural municipalities, more of them are going to 

lose their jobs and there'll be less of a tax base.  That's what 

they're trying to tell you this morning, Madam Minister. 

 

Now in the face of a 33 per cent reduction to urban 

municipalities, Madam Minister, how in the world can you 

justify offloading another half a billion in hidden taxes on their 

back?  You still haven't answered that question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

ranges from topic to topic.  Let me deal with the issue of jobs.  

This government came out with a plan for the economic 

development and job creation future of this province. 

 

What we did yesterday was we put our money where our 

mouth was.  We said co-ops and small businesses are the main 

engines of economic growth and job creation.  And we gave 

them tax breaks and other incentives to expand.  We also 

increased capital expenditures by 10 per cent to ensure that 

there were projects out there immediately to give people jobs in 

this province. 

 

This is a government with a plan, with a vision of the future.  

And we're prepared to put our money where our mouth is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  See, Madam Minister, there's where you've got 

it all mixed up.  That's not your money.  That's the taxpayers of 

this province's money.  It's not your money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



436 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1993 

Mr. Swenson: -- Now, Madam Minister, how are taxpayers 

supposed to believe that adding things on like another quarter 

of a million dollars to the fuel bill of the city of Regina, upping 

the sales tax by 29 per cent in two years time, how are 

taxpayers supposed to believe that that is going to create more 

jobs, more excitement, and less property taxes for them in the 

next four years, Madam Minister?  How are they supposed to 

believe that?  That's their money, not yours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I wish the member 

opposite would have been so concerned about taxpayers' 

money in the 1980s when they squandered so much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- This government has made difficult 

choices and we don't deny that these choices are difficult.  We 

are willing to work with our partners at the local level, to 

restructure, to rationalize, to improve the delivery of services.  

But please to understand, what this government has done is it 

has had the courage to take the difficult choices now and to do 

them within the context of a long-term plan for the future, a 

plan that will eliminate this deficit, a plan that will create jobs, 

and a plan that shows compassion.  It's a plan that I'm quite 

proud of. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

you talk about courage.  I say to you, it is a lot closer to 

hypocrisy.  Yesterday in the budget, you are going to the 

manufacturing and processing sector in this province and 

saying, we're going to give you harmonization for eight 

months.  And that's going to kick-start your industry.  You are 

going to hire people.  You're going to create jobs.  You're going 

to place Saskatchewan industry in a better position 

competitively in North America and around the world because 

you're going to give harmonization at 9 per cent for eight 

months. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I say to you: if you really truly believe 

that, you probably would have given every businessman in the 

province harmonization for eight months at 7 per cent and had 

some money to balance your budget to boot.  I say, Madam 

Minister, it's hypocrisy. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, the member has 

alleged hypocrisy.  I want to tell you a tale of true hypocrisy.  

In 1982 the members opposite were elected on the promise that 

they would eliminate the E&H (education and health) tax.  

They didn't eliminate it; they increased it two points before 

they had finished. 

 

In 1982 they were elected on the promise that they would 

reduce personal income taxes by 10 per cent.  They didn't 

reduce them; they increased them by putting on the 2 per cent 

flat tax, a tax grab to the tune 

of $260 million. 

 

They were elected on the promise that they would eliminate the 

gas tax, and it kind of did disappear for a while.  But I'll tell 

you, it was back and it was higher by the time they were 

finished.  And I could go on and on and on. 

 

Please, sir, don't give us any lectures about hypocrisy.  We 

know where hypocrisy is in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question to the 

same minister.  Madam Minister, it was your Premier that 

promised the people of this province no tax increases.  I can 

live on 4.5 and I'm not going to offload on anyone; and besides 

that, I am going to go to Ottawa and get the province's farmers 

a whole bunch of money. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, yesterday you came in and told rural 

Saskatchewan that there was $60 million less in agriculture; 

that you're going to offload on rural government another half a 

billion dollars.  Madam Minister, those taxpayers out there 

can't take any more.  And you cancelled GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) on them. 

 

So, Madam Minister, would you please today tell rural people 

how a 18 per cent reduction in the agriculture budget in this 

province and offloading on rural municipalities is going to 

make their lives better?  Would you answer that today, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

should have asked those sorts of questions when they racked up 

the debt that we are dealing with.  It's not just the actions of the 

members opposite that have to be recalled; it has to be their 

attitude that we remember as well.  Saskatchewan has so much 

going for it that you can afford to mismanage it and still break 

even: the former premier in 1983.  When you have an attitude 

like that prevalent on the government benches in this province, 

that's why you end up in the kind of situation in which we are 

in. 

 

We had to make difficult choices.  People in this province are 

going to have to live with difficult choices, but we are doing 

them because we are committed to turning around this province 

and securing the future for our children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Madam Minister, but that's the point.  People 

all around the province this morning are saying that you have 

made the wrong choices.  It doesn't matter if it's government, 

urban government, rural government, farmers, business people; 

all of the so-called partners that are supposed to help you out of 

this situation are all saying you made the wrong choices this 

morning. 

 

Madam Minister, this morning on CKCK Radio, they 



March 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 437 

interviewed several Regina residents last night at a drugstore 

and, Madam Minister, those people said you had made the 

wrong choices again.  And in the words of the one lady: how 

can this Finance minister complain about federal offloading 

when all she's been doing is offloading on me all day long?  

Madam Minister, how do you answer the lady that was lined up 

at the drugstore last night, suffering from your offloading?  

How do you answer that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, we're now talking 

about choices.  Yes, there are choices to be made.  What I want 

to ask the members opposite is: what choices would they have 

made?  Would they ignore the deficit?  Would they ignore the 

deficit and get to the point where this province no longer has 

the capacity to borrow money?  Is that a choice? 

 

I think it may be a choice of theirs because I have people in the 

Department of Finance now costing out an amendment to one 

of our Acts that you proposed.  The cost of that amendment, I 

think, is about half a billion dollars.  Is that the choice?  Or if 

your choice is not to tax, is your choice then to take away all 

safety nets to protect the most vulnerable people in our society?  

Is that your choice? 

 

We have made our choices, balancing revenue and expenditure 

measures.  We have justified our choices.  I would like to hear 

your choices and how you would justify them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Madam Minister, if you'd like to trade seats I'd 

be more than happy, I'd be more than happy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, I'd be more than happy to 

sit down with the taxpayers and the chamber of commerce and 

SUMA and SARM and the lady that was lined up outside the 

drugstore to talk about a plan.  Because, Madam Minister, this 

party had a plan and it stood by its plan. 

 

You didn't have one.  You didn't have one, Madam Minister, 

and that's why we're floundering today.  That's why 

everybody's saying you've made the wrong choices. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, there has been universal condemnation.  

I go back to the first point that I made today.  My question, 

Madam Minister, is this:  given that SUMA and SARM have 

said their taxpayers are in revolt over another half a billion 

dollars in hidden taxes, Madam Minister, will you give a 

commitment today to meet with those people and be prepared 

to change your budget sufficiently enough that those people 

don't have to revolt on you?  Would you do that, Madam 

Minister? 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

talks about choices.  We don't have to guess what their choices 

are; we know what their choices were.  They chose to raise 

taxes in the 1980s at the same time as they racked up a debt on 

average of a billion dollars each and every year.  That was their 

choice -- raise taxes, spend, and increase the deficit.  And look 

what it has got us. 

 

What we have said is that this is a new era in Saskatchewan.  

We are not prepared to burden our children with a massive 

debt.  We are beginning to live within our means in this 

province.  And we're planning for the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

the deception and the betrayal that you have woven in this 

budget, I'm going to give you one more example of that 

deception and betrayal, Madam Minister.  Yesterday the 

president of SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association) was here, talking about what was going to happen 

to the rural property tax base of this province because of what 

you've been doing.  The deception and the betrayal was there 

because it means that schools are going to close; the teachers 

are going to be laid off. 

 

Madam Minister, the condemnation is universal.  What do you 

say to those rural trustees who are going to have to go out and 

ask the tax base that you have abandoned to come up with 

more money so that they don't have to close their schools, so 

that they don't have to fire their teachers?  What are you going 

to say to them, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, what I'm going to say 

to them is this.  Yesterday this government became the first 

government in Canada to come out with a long-term plan to 

balance the budget of this province within four years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Not only do we have a plan to 

balance the budget, we have a plan to stimulate the economy 

and create jobs.  And our plan is a plan with a difference 

because it has compassion involved. 

 

The eyes of the rest of Canada are focusing on Saskatchewan 

because once again we are leading the way.  We are leading the 

way to solutions to this country's problems.  And I'm very 

proud to be part of this government leading the way to 

solutions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

just because the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 

comes and sets up in the rotunda, don't be deceived that you're 

leading the way. 



438 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1993 

There are people all across this province who say that your plan 

is very seriously flawed.  Madam Minister, on the west side of 

this province today there are people shopping in Alberta 

because your plan is so seriously flawed. 

 

Madam Minister, why don't today in this legislature, you tell 

the folks from Lloydminster to Maple Creek, how your 

increases and your deception is going to keep jobs and activity 

in their towns and communities.  Maybe you could do that, 

Madam Minister.  Tell them today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, once again I come 

back to two points.  We inherited a mess from the members 

opposite.  We are committed to cleaning up that mess.  You 

have asked us about our choices; we made them yesterday.  By 

the end of the four-year period, expenditure cuts will be greater 

than tax increases.  But if you're saying to me that you do not 

want to increase taxes at all . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I challenge any of the members 

to hear what the minister is saying.  There is so much noise in 

the Chamber we simply can't hear.  Order!  Will the member 

from Rosthern please come to order. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- We made our choices yesterday; we 

laid them before the people of Saskatchewan within the context 

of a long-term plan to turn around this province.  If you don't 

agree with those choices, then I would like to see your choices.  

Are you going to remove the safety nets for all of the most 

vulnerable?  Are you going to totally eliminate highway 

construction?  How are you going to find that other revenue to 

balance the books?  Or is it in fact true that you still don't care 

about balancing the books and living within your means?  

Because if that's true, we fundamentally . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

International Day for the Elimination of Racial 

Discrimination 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to take a few 

moments this morning to commemorate in this Legislative 

Assembly the designation of Sunday, March 21, as 

International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination.  

I will also recognize the United Nations' designation of 1993 as 

International Year of the World's Indigenous People. 

 

In 1966 the United Nations designated March 21 as 

International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 

in order to mark the anniversary of the Sharpeville massacre in 

South Africa.  In that incident, individuals peacefully 

demonstrating against apartheid were wounded and killed. 

In 1983 the United Nations General Assembly called upon all 

states and organizations to participate in the program of action 

for the second decade to combat racism and racial 

discrimination. 

 

In 1986 our federal government proclaimed Canada's 

participation in this program of action.  Also in 1986 the Prime 

Minister of Canada called upon all Canadians to extend their 

efforts to ensure the rapid eradication of racism and racial 

discrimination and the realization of mutual understanding, 

respect, equality, and justice for all Canadians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as International Day for the Elimination of Racial 

Discrimination approaches once again, I am pleased to firmly 

restate this government's commitment to the eradication of 

racial discrimination and our commitment to the realization of 

mutual understanding, respect, equality, and justice for all. 

 

Governments in this country through legislation and policies 

and programs, and our courts through rulings based on our 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms, have helped to ensure that our 

society does not overtly tolerate discrimination based on race.  

Yet we are familiar with how subtle and yet how devastating 

discrimination can be, and therefore how difficult it can be to 

eliminate. 

 

We live in an imperfect world.  There are some days when the 

gap between the way things are now and the way we want our 

society to be seems immense and impossible to bridge. 

 

At the same time, this country and this province have a number 

of things to celebrate.  We are and have been since the 

formation of Canada as a nation, a multicultural society.  We 

may struggle at times and sometimes fail tragically at living 

peacefully and productively together, but at the same time 

Canada can also continue to be proud of the relative calm and 

safety of our society. 

 

On Sunday I believe we should all stop and reflect for a 

moment on what it would mean to each of us to have a society 

completely free of racial discrimination.  A society without 

racial discrimination would be a society free of hate, fear, and 

ignorance associated with racist beliefs and behaviour and the 

sometimes dire consequences of these emotions. 

 

Racial discrimination cripples and limits the freedoms and 

opportunities of us all.  Commemorating March 21 reminds all 

of us that a society free of racial discrimination is within our 

reach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I also want to take a moment to note that 

1993 is International Year of the World's Indigenous People.  

This year has been designated by the United Nations to 

strengthen international cooperation to solve problems faced by 

indigenous communities with regard to such issues as human 

rights, the environment, development, education, and health. 



March 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 439 

As culturally diverse as the indigenous people of this world are, 

they also, frighteningly, share many similarities in terms of the 

dire economic and health and social conditions they face. 

 

As the member nations of the United Nations mark this year, 

we in Canada must also ensure our strong commitment to 

ensuring a brighter future for the indigenous people of this 

country. 

 

Canada's aboriginal peoples have proud heritages. Strong 

cultural beliefs and traditions have served them well as they 

survived and flourished for generations in the often harsh 

environment of this country. 

 

The Indian, Metis, and Inuit people of this country contribute 

immensely to the rich mosaic of Canada, to the diverse heritage 

we all claim as our own.  This said, it is apparent that our 

aboriginal peoples face discrimination and racism on a regular 

basis.  We must all work together to change attitudes and 

remove structural barriers. 

 

The establishment of new partnerships with Indian and Metis 

peoples, along with our emphasis on equity and harmonious 

race relations, will go a long way towards the elimination of 

racial discrimination in Saskatchewan.  The full participation of 

aboriginal people at every level of our society is essential to the 

future of our province and this country. 

 

I understand the aboriginal people of this province plan to mark 

International Year of the World's Indigenous People through 

various means during the next few months.  The designation of 

1993 as International Year of the World's Indigenous People is 

highly significant and warrants the recognition and support of 

all segments of our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all citizens of this province to reaffirm their 

commitment to a society free of racial discrimination, a society 

where citizens of every conceivable racial heritage have the 

opportunity to make the most of their gifts and strengths as full 

members of our society. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I recognize the member from 

Moosomin, I do want to remind ministers that ministerial 

statements are to be short and to the point.  This statement was 

much too long for a ministerial statement and I want to remind 

ministers of that. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I just 

want to take a moment to respond to the statement, the 

ministerial statement, made by the minister and certainly stand 

with the minister in support of our province and our legislature 

standing out in support of racial discrimination and supporting 

governments and countries where we take a stand against this 

type of abuse that we have seen take place over the years. 

Certainly we live in a very fortunate land.  We are privileged 

people, Mr. Speaker.  We look around the world today and we 

see many areas where men and women are very literally 

fighting for their very existence.  Yugoslavia is a prime 

example of discrimination and how the adverse effects it can 

have on people's lives and how it disrupts lives.  Somalia is 

another example. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, we in this province and in Canada 

can be proud of the heritage we have, the ethnic cultures that 

have come to this country to make up this nation.  However, it 

doesn't free us from the fact that there has been some racial 

prejudice over the years.  And I believe, Mr. Speaker, it is 

imperative that we stand together and stand against racial 

discrimination. 

 

I would also like to comment on the fact that, Mr. Speaker, we 

need to find ways in which we can work closer with our 

indigenous people in helping them achieve their ultimate goals 

and aims as well to be a very major part and parcel of our 

society. 

 

And I join with the minister in standing behind the United 

Nations in the . . . joining with the . . . designating the year 

1993 as International Year of the World's Indigenous People. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of the 

people in the party I represent I merely wish to wholeheartedly 

support the Minister of Justice and the words from the member 

from Moosomin in stating that we truly are a blessed people.  

And I do hope that we can all work in order to look at the 

strengths and the real, I think, abilities of people rather than 

simply their races and perhaps we'd just all be strengthened by 

that.  In fact we know we would be strengthened by it. 

 

It's a great privilege for me to lend support to the very 

articulate words expressed by the Attorney General. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 39 -- An Act to amend The Education Act 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that The 

Education Amendment Act be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

National Francophone Week 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to announce to you 



440 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1993 

and to the members of the Legislative Assembly and to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan that between March 20 

and 26 has been designated as National Francophone Week 

across Canada. 

 

In order to show Saskatchewan's support to the Fransaskois 

community, our Premier has officially designated this week to 

be the National Francophone Week in Saskatchewan.  The 

Hon. Ed Tchorzewski will officially launch the week during a 

ceremony in the rotunda of the legislature here on Monday, 

March 22 at 10:30.  During this week, Mr. Speaker, the 

Fransaskois from all over the province will celebrate this week 

with a program of special events which will take place all week 

long in as many as 12 communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Canada is a country which promotes two official 

languages, French and English, and it is one important element 

which makes us unique. 

 

La Semaine Nationale de la Francophonie is an occasion which 

encourages Canadians living in Saskatchewan to express their 

support for the expansion and development of official linguistic 

minorities. 

 

(1045) 

 

M. le président, je vous annonce et à mes homologues dans la 

Chambre que le 20 mars est la Journée Internationale de la 

Francophonie.  Cette journée marquera le coup d'envoi de la 

Semaine Nationale de la Francophonie au Canada.  Pour 

souligner l'événement, notre premier-ministre de la 

Saskatchewan, M. Roy Romanow, a décréter que la semaine du 

20 au 26 mars, 1993, sera la Semaine Nationale de la 

Francophonie en Saskatchewan.  Le lancement officiel de cette 

semaine sera fait par le vice-premier-ministre, l'Hon. Ed 

Tchorzewski, le lundi 22 mars à 10h30 dans la rotonde de la 

législature.  Les fransaskois et fransaskoises célébront cette 

semaine d'un bout à l'autre de la province par diverses activités 

socio-culturelles telles que théâtres, rencontres, danses, etc. 

 

M. le président, le Canada est un pays où deux langues 

officielles sont reconnues, ce qui fait sa richesse.  La Semaine 

Nationale de la Francophonie c'est l'occasion de montrer que 

nous sommes fiers de cette richesse et que nous appuyons 

l'épanouissement de la langue francaise.  Merci, M. le 

président. 

 

(Translation: Mr. Speaker, I would like to announce to you and 

to my colleagues in the Assembly that March 20 is 

International Francophone Day.  This day marks the kick-off of 

National Francophone Week in Canada.  To highlight this 

event, Saskatchewan's Premier, Mr. Roy Romanow, has 

declared March 20 to 26 as National Francophone Week in 

Saskatchewan.  The official launch for this week will be made 

by the Deputy Premier, Hon. Ed Tchorzewski, on Monday, 

March 22 at 10:30 a.m. in the rotunda of the legislature.  From 

one end of the province to the other, Fransaskois of the 

province will 

be celebrating with such socio-cultural events as theatres, 

gatherings, dances, etc. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Canada is a country where two official languages 

are recognized, which makes up its richness.  National 

Francophone Week is an opportunity to show that we are proud 

of this richness and that we support the flowering of the French 

language.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.) 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

join with the member from Kinistino in welcoming a 

Fransaskois Week in Saskatchewan from March 20 to 26.  I 

have a large francophone community in my constituency and 

I'm sure they'll be very proud to participate in this activity. 

 

The Fransaskois across North America were the first to explore 

the North American continent.  In fact La Vérendrye was the 

first white man to see the Rockies.  He was ably led across this 

continent by our aboriginal people.  And I think we need to 

give recognition to the Fransaskois community for the service, 

for the hard work and diligence, for the creation of the North 

American economy, for the people in North America as we 

know it today. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone . . . Well I'll recognize her now.  I assume 

you want to speak to this? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Yes, I do.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too 

would like to add my support to the Premier's decision to 

declare Fransaskois Week. 

 

And I think many of us forget that the percentage of 

Fransaskois in Saskatchewan is equal to the percentage of 

Saskatchewan people in our nation of Canada.  It's very 

important for us to acknowledge their value and their 

importance, just as we as Saskatchewan citizens want to be 

acknowledged for our value within the nation. 

 

So I'm very, very pleased that next week we will be able to 

celebrate.  Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: -- Before we move on to the next item, I do want 

to remind all members, but in this particular case the member 

from Kinistino, that in his statement he referred to the Premier 

by his first name; he referred to the Deputy Premier by his first 

name.  And you are to refer to them either by their constituency 

or by the position that they hold, not by their names. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

questions no. 87 and 88, put by the member from 



March 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 441 

Greystone, I would request that they be converted to motions 

for returns (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motions for returns (debatable). 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to return 

no. 186, put by the member for Morse, I would request that it 

be converted to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motions for returns (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to motion 

for return no. 187 (not debatable), I hereby table the answer. 

 

The Speaker: -- Answer tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think it's most 

appropriate that I rise again in debate on the budget just 

presented by the New Democratic Party government in this 

province.  Especially since we see almost universal 

condemnation, universal condemnation of what was 

perpetrated on the taxpayers of this province yesterday. 

 

As I said in my remarks yesterday, Mr. Speaker, this was the 

culmination of an 18-month PR (public relations), media, and 

political campaign that was almost of biblical proportions by 

the New Democrats in this province, to try and throw up a big 

enough smokescreen over the promises that they made to 

Saskatchewan people in the fall of 1991, that they wouldn't be 

held accountable by the taxpayers of this province for those 

promises and for the direction that they've set for this province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as question period showed today, the names 

are starting to add up, the associations are starting to add up 

that universally around this province people are saying, you're 

not managing well, given what you promised to Saskatchewan 

taxpayers and what you've delivered.  There's obviously a very, 

very wide gap -- a very wide gap between the taxpayers of this 

province, the associations that represent taxpayers in this 

province, and the provincial government that is supposed to 

work in concert with them. 

 

The challenges before this province are large, Mr. Speaker.  

There isn't a person that lives here, that works here, that farms 

here, blue-collar, white-collar, government worker, private 

sector worker, that 

doesn't know that the challenges, the challenges will be 

difficult.  And what they want, Mr. Speaker, is not a 

government that simply lives on politics but a government that 

is ready to cooperate, is ready to work with them in a 

meaningful way. 

 

And it is interesting, Mr. Speaker, to watch this New 

Democratic Party government cherry-pick their way through 

Saskatchewan society, always with the intention of managing 

to save their own political hides at each and every instance. 

 

The other day my colleague, the member from Rosthern, stood 

in this House for some two hours talking about health care, 

talking about the offloading, talking about the hurt that is going 

to result from the moves of this government who promised 

Saskatchewan people exactly the opposite.  And the things that 

he was saying the other day, Mr. Speaker, the prophecies about 

what was going to come down in this budget, have become true 

today.  And those prophecies, Mr. Speaker, are being echoed 

by people by the hundreds and the thousands in this city and in 

other cities and towns and villages and on the farms of our 

province.  People who have lined up at the drugstores, people 

who have talked to their doctors, and people who are waiting to 

have their property taxes raised like they haven't had them 

raised in the history of this province, in order to make up for 

the half a billion dollars in offloading that we're going to see 

come from this New Democratic Party government -- the party 

of medicare, the party that says that we are the people that have 

always cared the most for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Well I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the budget delivered 

yesterday shows that this is the party of I don't care.  I don't 

care because I'm more worried about my political hide than I 

am about the true families of this province, the families that 

will have to pay the increased property taxes; the families that 

will pay the increased sales taxes; the families that will pay for 

the increases in utilities and fees and services, and will pay and 

pay and pay like they have never paid before. 

 

And I guess what's so frustrating to them, Mr. Speaker, what is 

so frustrating to the Saskatchewan association of taxpayers, 

what is so frustrating to the chamber of commerce, what is so 

frustrating to working men and women around this province, is 

that they had choices, they had alternatives, they had ways to 

implement tax increases that wouldn't be so hurtful, that would 

be fairer, that would maintain some minimum levels of services 

to Saskatchewan people. 

 

But because those choices, Mr. Speaker, meant that New 

Democrats in power, and their friends who they brought along 

with them, would have to admit that they misled Saskatchewan 

people such a short time ago, they would have to admit that the 

promises made were not to be promises kept . . . They were 

promises made so that the members of the New Democratic 

Party in this legislature could move to the other side of the 

Chamber.  That the member from Riversdale could become the 

Premier of the province, and that they 



442 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1993 

could exercise political power in this province, not live up to 

the promises made to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder what would have happened in the fall of 

1991 after the Premier appeared on province-wide TV and said, 

I know there is $14.2 billion in debt, but that doesn't mean that 

any child in this province shouldn't get an education, a good 

education, because there always will be money for education. 

 

I wonder what would have happened if the Premier of this 

province on province-wide TV, after he talked about a $14.2 

billion deficit, said we will be more to medicare, we will be 

more to health care because we will simply manage better, and 

we will improve the services that the former government has 

taken away. 

 

And I wonder what would have happened if the Premier, the 

then Leader of the Opposition, the member from Riversdale, 

had said to Saskatchewan people on province-wide TV after he 

admitted that there was a $14.2 billion deficit, if he had said, on 

top of that I am going to remove all the sales taxes in this 

province. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, the other shoe fell, and in fact what we 

find is another $778 million in sales tax tacked onto the backs 

of Saskatchewan taxpayers from a Premier and a government 

that said that they wouldn't do that. 

 

I want to read into the record, Mr. Speaker, a couple of 

quotations, and I think they're important.  Because today in 

question period we saw the Minister of Finance once again 

lighting up the blame thrower, trying to blame anyone and 

everyone besides her caucus and her political party, for the 

mess that Saskatchewan is in. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it's important that Saskatchewan 

people, that Saskatchewan people know the truth in this matter.  

And I want to quote from Don Gass, the head of the Financial 

Review Commission sponsored by this New Democratic Party 

government.  And this was on CKCK-TV News on February 

18, 1991 -- that should be 1992 -- and I quote: the Tories made 

no attempt to hide the province's financial standing.  In fact, the 

books were open all along to credit agencies or anyone else 

interested. 

 

Well I find it rather strange, Mr. Speaker, that a man running to 

become the premier of this province wasn't interested enough, 

wasn't interested enough to take a look before he should go out 

and make such wild promises to the people of this province in 

October of 1991. 

 

(1100) 

 

And Mr. Gass also had this to say, and I quote again, same TV 

news story: Blakeney -- referring to the Hon. Allan, past 

premier of the province of Saskatchewan -- used the same 

accounting principles and the figures were correct.  The main 

reason for the increase 

in deficit is due to accounting principles, and under the 

accounting principles the main element is unfunded pension 

liability. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when one takes the time to review the 

record of the province of Saskatchewan . . . and even the 

member from Regina Dewdney under questioning in this 

House last year in estimates admitted that the largest proportion 

of unfunded liability in pension funds in this province occurred 

during the 1970s when the New Democratic Party was in 

government in this province. 

 

Don Gass is saying that the only difference, Mr. Speaker, is 

whether you include or don't include that unfunded pension 

liability.  And you add about $800 million in loan guarantees or 

direct participation by the Government of Saskatchewan in 

projects -- which I remind you, sir, and everyone else in this 

Assembly and around the province were all at commercial rates 

or higher and therefore are not a liability -- that what Mr. Gass 

is saying that the numbers are the same. 

 

And yet this member, this Premier, this member from 

Riversdale, now tries to hide behind some kind of a financial 

charade, a charade of doom and gloom in order to take the 

responsibility off of his shoulders for the promises made to 

Saskatchewan people such a short time ago. 

 

And that is why, Mr. Speaker, that you're finding this morning 

around this province universal condemnation -- universal 

condemnation of what this government brought forward 

yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there isn't a person in this province that doesn't 

believe that debt and deficit reduction and debt control and the 

elimination of the deficit aren't a high priority of Saskatchewan 

citizens.  What they take issue with is the way that this 

government has handled the situation. 

 

I point out to you, Mr. Speaker, yesterday another province in 

Canada was faced with the same problems -- even worse.  

Newfoundland was a guaranteed BBB rating.  There was no 

light at the end of the tunnel at all for Newfoundland.  Did they 

raise taxes?  No.  Did they attack the business community?  

No.  Did they attack schools and hospitals?  No.  What the 

Government of Newfoundland did yesterday was they cut 

themselves.  They cut deep.  They cut hard.  They cut 

themselves before they would cut the taxpayers of the province 

of Newfoundland. 

 

And yesterday person after person said this government had the 

ideal opportunity -- this government had the ideal opportunity 

to downsize government, to cut themselves, to start at the 

provincial cabinet and work down in a systematic and real way 

to show the leadership necessary in this province to handle our 

financial problems. 

 

And that is why, Mr. Speaker, this morning the condemnation 

is universal.  Because for every dollar that the government has 

purported to save, they have 



March 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 443 

taxed Saskatchewan people for two more dollars.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, anyone in business, anyone who financially plans, 

will tell you that that ratio is exactly the opposite of what it 

should be.  That there should have been two dollars of cutting, 

two dollars of cutting by the Government of Saskatchewan for 

every dollar picked out of the pockets of Saskatchewan 

taxpayers in yesterday's budget. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, what the reality will be, what the reality 

will be when one adds in this half a billion dollars of 

offloading, is that municipal government, hospitals, and 

schools, the very infrastructure of our province, will now have 

to go through that process of shutting down institutions, of 

cutting their payrolls, of cutting the very people who educate 

and provide services to our children. 

 

And they will have to do that so that this Premier and his 

Minister of Finance, the member from Westmount, will not 

have to show the leadership that they should have and will be 

making people all across this province, all across this province, 

wear the goat horns that they should have worn by bringing 

down those decisions. 

 

It'll be interesting, Mr. Speaker, as other provinces across 

Canada bring down their budgets, what the reaction will be and 

what the tack that others will bring forward. 

 

But I say to you, Mr. Speaker, there was a fundamental choice 

made by this government, who were afraid to do the right thing 

because they were afraid of their friends, the union bosses of 

this province.  And you know, Mr. Speaker, ultimately, 

ultimately it is always the rank and file that will pay the price 

for these political decisions cooked up between the members of 

the treasury benches and their union-boss friends. 

 

Because the reaction of people, the reaction of taxpayers in this 

province, is going to be one that I wouldn't want to have to live 

with if I were a member of the public service today.  Because 

taxpayers are going to say that it was unfair, and instead of 

having an orderly downsizing of government over the next four 

years that would be meaningful and would show Saskatchewan 

taxpayers the way, we've got a government that shoved that 

option aside and said, we'll simply pick your pocket for more.  

We'll simply pick your pocket for more -- and right now it 

stands at about a thousand dollars a family and counting, Mr. 

Speaker -- rather than do what we should have done, what 

people elected us to do. 

 

It's interesting, Mr. Speaker, that I've been getting back some 

responses.  I just recently mailed a questionnaire around my 

constituency as part of a report from the legislature.  And in it I 

provide an 11-question survey form for people to fill out in my 

riding, and also have given them the opportunity to comment 

on the back page and mail it back into me.  And those returns 

are just starting to come in yesterday in fact, Mr. Speaker. And 

I suspect after the budget delivered in this House yesterday that 

they will come in by the tens and by the hundreds and perhaps 

even 

by the thousands. 

 

I have eight of them here, Mr. Speaker.  And you know what?  

The theme through each and every one of them is the same.  I 

represent a riding of rural people, Mr. Speaker, farm people, 

people in small towns and villages.  And they have been 

feeling the hurt of this government for some time now.  They 

have been feeling the hurt started by the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose in this Assembly, the biggest betrayal of 

agriculture people ever brought forward in this province, longer 

than others. 

 

But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, when this gentleman here, Mr. 

Gusretser writes a PS (postscript) note at the bottom.  He says:   

I just learned this morning that my wife who is taking shots for 

allergies will have to pay $10 per shot starting April 1, '93, 

adding a further cost of $40 per month to our cost of living. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that he is only echoing the remarks of not only 

the constituents of Thunder Creek, but echoing the remarks of 

people all across this province this morning who are feeling 

terribly let down and betrayed by this New Democratic Party 

government who promised them so much in the fall of 1991 

and have delivered so little and have broken so many promises. 

 

When we look at this budget, Mr. Speaker, and we hear the 

Minister of Finance telling the people of this province 

yesterday that the tools for economic renewal are built within 

it; we heard the Minister of Finance yesterday talk about 

creating thousands of jobs, that the tools to put Saskatchewan 

on a road to economic recovery were in this budget. 

 

And it was interesting to note that as a section of that recovery 

she is going to harmonize the manufacturing and processing 

sector of this province for eight months.  That these are the 

people because of Saskatchewan's strong position in trade, in 

international trade -- these are the people that are going to lead 

the way.  These are the people that are going to hit that 

projection of, I believe it's 3.6 of GDP (gross domestic 

product), of growth in Canada; that this was the sector that 

would lead the way because she was going to harmonize them 

at 9 per cent. 

 

In other words when those industries, those manufacturing and 

processing industries go out and purchase goods and services 

and they pay their 9 per cent PST (provincial sales tax) and 

they pay their GST (goods and services tax), and then they 

apply for a refund from the provincial government and federal 

government, that that money that they're refunded is going to 

allow them to go out and buy new equipment and hire new 

employees and seek out new market-places, and by doing so 

they're going to strengthen the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that that option was 

available to the government on a province-wide basis, and that 

that option for the business people of this province and the 

farmers of this province at a lower rate would have generated 

more money than 



444 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1993 

what we saw come down yesterday, with less pain, less 

dislocation, less job loss. And yet this government rejected it 

simply on the basis of politics. 

 

Because in 1991 the member from Riversdale, as he went 

across this province promising people, said that we can't have 

an increase in sales tax, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 No new taxes would be imposed; instead, the NDP would cut 

wasteful spending and encourage new economic 

development. 

 

The Leader-Post, September 6, 1991, member from Riversdale. 

 

A 7 per cent harmonized sales tax will lead to increased 

inflation, reduce consumer spending and consumer confidence, 

thousands of lost jobs, and hundreds of millions of dollars lost 

in economic activity within the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Well, well, well.  The very thing that is now going to make the 

processing and manufacturing sector of this province the 

leading edge of the Minister of Finance's budget, the leading 

edge of job creation and development in this province, the 

leading edge of technological development, and the leading 

edge of employment at 9 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a 9 per cent harmonization tells me that there was 

a great deal of misleading information, to put it in the kindest 

terms, a great deal of hypocrisy on the loose in this province in 

the summer and the fall of 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all it says to me was the member from Riversdale 

and his cohorts didn't have the political courage to face 

Saskatchewan people in here yesterday and say yes, we made a 

mistake; yes, we misled you; and yes, we are prepared to do the 

right thing in this province now so that Saskatchewan can get 

back on the road to economic recovery; and that the political 

hides of the New Democratic Party members of this legislature 

come second, come second to the needs and the wants of 

Saskatchewan taxpayers, not first. 

 

(1115) 

 

But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we see the denial written 

across their collective faces.  We see the Minister of Finance in 

question period this morning denying, denying, denying the 

true aspirations of Saskatchewan taxpayers.  Instead of coming 

clean with people, she simply lights up the blame thrower and 

tries to pass the buck to someone else. 

 

It's like the Minister of Health who repeatedly has stood in this 

legislature, Mr. Speaker, and denied that there was going to be 

offloading occurring of tremendous proportions, is denying in 

this legislature that she is pitting community against 

community in the face of dozens of quotations delivered by 

herself in this legislature and outside, at the Saskatchewan 

people. 

And I quote from Hansard, Mr. Speaker, in August, 1989: the 

opposition, the then New Democratic Party opposition is going 

to fight these health care cut-backs and these changes to 

medicare.  It's going to fight the erosion of the principles of 

medicare.  I feel rather certain we'll be having a change of 

government next time around and then the public isn't going to 

have to worry about these problems. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the folks lined up at the drugstores of this 

province last night were certainly worried about these 

problems.  And the people out there in rural Saskatchewan who 

are being forced into health regions that they don't want to be 

part of, who are having their communities pitted against each 

other in order to see their hospitals and their nursing homes 

closed, they are having to worry about the problems and the 

offloading managed by the Minister of Finance, the hon. 

member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people all around this province have been faced 

with offloading for the last 18 months by this New Democratic 

Party government.  And now they are going to have to pick up 

the slack and deal with another half a billion dollars over the 

next four years. 

 

We had a person phone in this morning, Mr. Speaker, who has 

done some initial calculations on what that's going to mean to 

his family.  And he wasn't able yet to calculate, Mr. Speaker, 

what exactly the property tax load will be.  But I'm just going 

to run through some of the items, and this is a taxpayer family, 

city of Regina. 

 

And I think their requirements in life seem to be fairly modest, 

Mr. Speaker.  Spending only $500 a year on clothing for the 

two adults in this family will mean another $45 in taxation.  

You add to that another general sales tax of $300. 

 

And these people are now faced, you have to understand, Mr. 

Speaker, with picking up some medical insurance that they 

didn't have to have before.  They're looking at, in his estimation 

-- and I appreciate the fine tuning here -- $456 in added health 

care premium costs in order to cover off the things that weren't 

there before.  And when you add in the kids in the family 

through the dental program to that, they come up with about 

$850 of an increase to this family in Regina. 

 

The gas tax alone, he says $63.  I think that's probably on the 

light side.  I think this individual's got a fairly fuel efficient 

vehicle if he's going to get away with $63 in increased fuel tax 

for the next year. 

 

And I think he's also being very modest when he figures there's 

only going to be $240 in pharmaceuticals.  I think that'll be 

very modest, Mr. Speaker, considering the rise in drug costs 

that most people in this province will face in the next year. 

 

But I mean the bottom line of all of this, Mr. Speaker, the 

bottom line when you start adding these things up, and they 

seem very small in themselves, but the 



March 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 445 

bottom line is you're looking at a couple of thousand dollars, 

Mr. Speaker.  A couple of thousand bucks in the face of a party 

and a government that said none of that would occur; that they 

simply would eliminate some waste and mismanagement.  

They would live on $4.5 billion a year and they would do it 

smarter, knowing full well what the size of the provincial debt 

was. 

 

And now it's just come . . . it has come home like a steamroller, 

Mr. Speaker, to this individual.  And as I said, he hasn't been 

able to calculate what the difference is going to be in property 

tax increases because of the half billion dollars in offloading 

which has occurred in this budget over the next four years on 

the health and the education and the snowplough and the 

school bus and all of those items that are part and parcel of 

being a property tax owner in this province. 

 

How many mills are we talking about here, Mr. Speaker?  Is 

that why the Minister of Finance won't answer our questions 

about when we ask, what is the true cost to Saskatchewan 

taxpayers when you add these things up?  What is the true cost 

of a half a billion dollars in offloading?  I suggest to you, Mr. 

Speaker, and I suggest to the minister that we're not talking 1 

mill or 2; we are talking 7, 8, 9, 10.  We're talking double digit 

increases over the next four years in the mill rates. 

 

Because people out there are not stupid, Mr. Speaker.  They 

know that there is an unsettled teachers' salary dispute to be 

made up.  They know that Saskatchewan government workers 

have been on a rotating strike.  They know, Mr. Speaker, that 

there are people all across society who are in bargaining 

positions that are going to add to the cost of the average 

taxpayer in this province. 

 

And yet we have the Minister of Finance, had the gall to stand 

in this legislature and say that a half a billion dollars in 

offloading on taxpayers, on the property tax base of this 

province, isn't going to hurt anything.  In fact it's going to 

create jobs and employment, and it's going to lead the way. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that is why this morning the newspapers of 

our province are filled with condemnation of this plan, this 

route to recovery.  Because ultimately, Mr. Speaker, when you 

put the property tax base of this province at risk, nothing will 

be generated -- nothing at all. 

 

That is why the members of the opposition have brought Bill 

10 forward each and every day, almost, in this legislature to ask 

this government to repeal that hospitals tax Act.  Repeal it, give 

Saskatchewan taxpayers the comfort zone that they need to 

know that the Minister of Finance or the Minister of Health, by 

simply issuing an edict, can go out and tack a couple of mills 

onto one of our new hospital districts. 

 

That is why SUMA and SARM requested the same of this 

government, because they feared for their taxpayers' base.  

They feared for the property tax base of this province and the 

pressures being put upon it. 

 And that's why they said, government do the right thing and 

repeal this Act so that we have the comfort zone that we need; 

that you aren't going to pick our pockets. 

 

Have they been given that comfort?  No, Mr. Speaker, not only 

will they repeal a seldom used Act of this legislature . . . not 

only will they not repeal it, yesterday the Minister of Finance 

compounded the situation over and over and over again by 

ensuring that there would be a half a billion dollars offloaded 

on those same property owners. 

 

So now, Mr. Speaker, we're faced with not only having this 

half billion dollars, but we're faced with having that Act of this 

legislature brought into play by the Minister of Health at any 

time, in any jurisdiction outside of a union hospital district, to 

save her political hide.  Because, Mr. Speaker, that would be 

the only reason, the only reason for the implementation of that 

Act -- to take off the pressure and heat of promises made and 

promises broken to the people expecting more on the 

health-care side, from this New Democratic Party government.  

That is the only reason we would see the Minister of Health in 

conjunction with the Minister of Finance implementing that 

Act. 

 

And I say to the government today, at least give taxpayers, 

property holders in this province, a little bit of comfort, that as 

they have to face this half a billion dollars in offloading in the 

next four years, that you will not compound it by this Act of 

the legislature, that you will bring it forward and repeal it so 

that they know it will not be tacked on top of what already they 

face. 

 

That is the least that this government could do, Mr. Speaker, 

given their commitment -- the party of medicare -- given their 

commitment.  Because I say to you, Mr. Speaker, if they don't, 

it is one more piece of evidence that this has become the party 

of I don't care, the party of I don't care, to Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss in this debate if we did not talk 

about the agricultural sector of our province for a while.  Mr. 

Speaker, agriculture in this province faces a crisis like they 

have not faced since the 1930s.  Net farm income in this 

province is projected at $241 million.  Mr. Speaker, that is a 

level that is almost unprecedented in the history of our 

province, going back for decades. 

 

It's a level, Mr. Speaker, that makes the words "sustainable 

agriculture" almost an oxymoron.  Two hundred and forty-one 

million dollars of net farm income, Mr. Speaker, in this 

province means that 60,000 farm families are at risk. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I do not deny for a moment, I do not deny 

for a moment . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm asking leave to 



446 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1993 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, a former colleague of mine on city council, Mr. 

Mike Badham.  Mr. Badham has brought with him today some 

visiting guests from the Hunan province in China on an 

educational tour and with, I hope, a furthering of our twinning 

arrangement. 

 

I would also like to introduce Mr. Feng Xiangqin, who is the 

supervisor of the state education commission for the People's 

Republic of China, and also the delegation that's with him.  We 

welcome him and hope that he is having a good visit in Regina 

and being greeted with the warmth of our community. 

 

So I would ask members to join with me in welcoming our 

delegation from China and hope that their stay is very 

educational and enjoyable. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1130) 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 

say hello to Councillor Badham and his guests.  We always 

enjoy having people from other countries and other places in 

our legislature.  And I hope you enjoy yourselves. 

 

As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, agriculture in this province is in 

a crisis situation.  And I don't deny for a moment that the 

former administration spent tens of millions and hundreds of 

millions and I would suggest to you even billions of dollars on 

that farm sector.  I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, that 

probably we spent more money on agriculture than this 

province could afford sometimes.  But I also say to you, Mr. 

Speaker, the very fact that most of those farm families are still 

there is ample evidence, ample evidence that those weren't such 

bad choices. 

 

In the face of those expenditures, Mr. Speaker, in 1991, we had 

the member from Riversdale and his political cohorts travelling 

around this province saying, you know it's not enough, that the 

billions of dollars spent on agriculture are not enough because 

you should have the cost of production built into those plans.  

But not only should you have security on the price side, that 

you should have the cost of production built into it besides.  

And you elect us and we're going to go to Ottawa and we're 

going to get you that cost of production and we're going to get 

you that guaranteed 

price and we will administrate it better than the current 

government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this budget the second offload 

occurred.  The budget was cut last year in '92, and it was 

further cut by 18 per cent, over $60 million to agriculture 

yesterday, to an agricultural industry that is suffering like it has 

never suffered before, in the face of the promises made by the 

member from Riversdale. 

 

Do you see, Mr. Speaker, the cost of production delivered in 

this budget?  No.  Do you see guaranteed price delivered in this 

budget?  No.  Do you see support of any kind, Mr. Speaker, 

delivered in this budget?  No.  In fact what we got . . . the 

commitment yesterday from the Minister of Finance was that 

within two years time potentially Saskatchewan farmers will be 

without any support at all, that they won't have access to the 

same insurance program that farmers all across this country 

will have, that they won't have access to federal dollars the 

same as other farmers in this country will have. 

 

They guaranteed yesterday, the culmination of the folly started 

by the member from Rosetown-Elrose in this Assembly last 

year that saw this Assembly hamstrung for 18 days, that saw 

thousands and thousands of farmers rally around this province 

in protest at the folly begun by that member, that member who 

was moved from his position in cabinet because of his folly, 

that member who was repudiated by his own Premier on Prince 

Albert radio earlier this year.  The member from Riversdale 

stood up and said, you know if I had to do it all over again, I 

wouldn't have touched it, I wouldn't have touched it. 

 

And yet yesterday we see the Minister of Finance come into 

this Assembly, cut the agricultural budget by another 60 

million bucks-plus and cancel the only farm support program 

people who are faced with $241 million in net farm income 

have.  And flawed as it is, flawed as it is, it is something.  This 

from a government that made a commitment to Saskatchewan 

farmers that they would put a committee, a non-political 

committee in place that would go out and study and find 

solutions and bring them into this House this spring. 

 

What in the world, Mr. Speaker, have 30-some people been 

doing, wandering around this province holding meetings, 

holding meetings supposedly to find solutions to the problems 

associated with GRIP.  And the minister walks in and just shuts 

the whole thing down.  What have they been doing?  They've 

been going around spending money, Mr. Speaker, holding 

meetings, going to farm families and saying, come forward, 

bring your solutions forward.  And before there's even an 

attempt at a solution, the Minister of Finance walks in and cans 

it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, something is terribly wrong with that 

process.  This is the open, consultative government that was 

promised to Saskatchewan people in the fall of 1991.  

Something is wrong with that process.  Where was the 

committee last year? 



March 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 447 

Well, Mr. Speaker, is there any wonder that there will be no 

confidence in rural Saskatchewan?  Is there any wonder that 

that preaching of doom and gloom by this government is now 

hanging over the head of every rural family?  Is there no 

wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the red meat industry, one of the few 

bright lights in agriculture, is probably retrenching as I speak, 

in fear because of what this government did in the budget 

yesterday? 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, there's one thing about it.  This bunch 

of new-found democrats is at least fair in their application of 

misery.  Because the grain sector got it last year from the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose, and the member from 

Westmount made sure that the rest of them got it yesterday.  At 

least it's fair, Mr. Speaker, I guess, that they have broken their 

promises universally to agriculture and just didn't confine it to 

one particular area. 

 

I challenge any member of the government, Mr. Speaker, to 

show me one place in that budget yesterday, one place where 

there will be one new job created in agriculture, one new job.  

Because, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you I can find places in that 

budget yesterday where there will be jobs lost, lots of jobs lost 

in agriculture.  Seventeen per cent of the workforce in this 

province is tied to that industry -- bigger than any other.  The 

government's own projections show that that labour force of 17 

per cent will be cut dramatically in the next four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what are we going to do with those people that 

are dislocated?  What are we going to do?  Where are we going 

to put them?  Where are they going to fit into the social 

contract of this province? 

 

Well I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that they aren't going to fit into 

the social contract of this province.  What they're going to do is 

get into their cars and they're going to the province of Alberta.  

Or they're going to go to the United States of America.  They're 

going to go anywhere except the place where they should be, 

which is on their farms contributing to their communities.  

They will be some place else where there is an opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, where there isn't dislocation because you happen to be 

a farmer. 

 

And probably the ultimate insult, Mr. Speaker, to these people 

who were abandoned so quickly by the members of the New 

Democratic Party, will come into this legislature some time this 

session with a Bill to redraw the boundaries of this province -- 

a short three years after the last redistribution. 

 

And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, what that Bill will show is a 

reduction in the seats, in the number of seats in this province, 

disproportionately born by the people of rural Saskatchewan so 

that the next time they wish to go and vote on a government 

that promises them certain things, they will not be able to cast 

retribution on this party and this Premier. 

 

That will be the ultimate insult, Mr. Speaker, that after you 

have stripped them from their ability to make a living, after you 

have stripped them of any opportunity 

to build and grow in this province, you ultimately will take 

away their opportunity for political representation.  And then I 

guess, Mr. Speaker, the package will be complete.  The 

package of the New Democratic Party will be complete.  The 

nails driven in the lid of the coffin by the Minister of Finance 

yesterday -- that process will be complete, Mr. Speaker.  And 

the agricultural community of this province will move off into 

second place.  Because, Mr. Speaker, I cannot take any other, 

any other direction than that from the plan laid forward by the 

Minister of Finance yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were clear choices for this government -- 

clear choices that they ignored because of ideology, that they 

ignored because of the promises made by the member from 

Riversdale such a short time ago. 

 

I raised with him yesterday the possibility that perhaps the 

natural gas pipelines of this province, of them being privatized.  

That shareholders in a pipeline would be better positioned to 

purchase over $60 million in large natural gas pipe and bury it 

in the ground of this province than the taxpayers of this 

province are positioned.  And that the half a billion dollars 

received from the sale could have stopped this massive 

offloading on Saskatchewan property owners. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, it wouldn't have even infringed 

upon their Crown corporation.  That doesn't harm SaskEnergy 

in the least.  SaskEnergy would stay a Crown corporation, and 

SaskEnergy would charge its tariff and its tolling, and 

SaskEnergy would collect its royalties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that gets them some chirping from their seats, 

because they are so blind, they are so driven by ideology, that 

when faced with those clear choices they would rather make 

sure that Saskatchewan families, Saskatchewan property 

owners, bear another half a billion dollars in burden -- a half a 

billion dollars in burden rather than let somebody else . . . And 

I remind the members opposite, the only jurisdiction in North 

America where the taxpayer has to pay for the large diameter 

pipe that's buried in the ground is right here in Saskatchewan.  

Good old Saskatchewan. 

 

These New Democrats are smarter than the other 300 or 290 

million people that live in the North American continent.  

Aren't they smart, Mr. Speaker?  The only place in North 

America where the taxpayer pays for the large diameter pipe is 

right here. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think there's a lot of taxpayers in this 

province, when the mill rate starts jumping 2 and 3 and 4 mills 

at a crack, might start asking some of those fundamental 

questions, fundamental questions about who should own the 

pipe buried in the ground, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it might surprise some of these members as to what the 

answer would be.  Matter of fact, I would challenge each and 

every one of them.  Why don't 



448 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1993 

they put a little survey out in 1993, post-budget, that lays that 

option out very clearly to the property taxpayers in their 

constituencies and see what the choice would be, see what the 

choice would be.  I think there might be a little bit of a surprise, 

Mr. Speaker, for some of these folks in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government had choices yesterday, very clear 

choices that they could have made.  And I think they would 

have had the business community, they would have had the 

professional community, they would have had taxpayers as a 

whole agreeing with certain things.  And because they are so 

hidebound by their ideology, so hidebound by the promises 

made by the member from Riversdale in the fall of 1991, and 

trying to cover up for those promises, that they won't make 

those obvious choices that so many people demand. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday there was a web, a web of deception 

and deceit woven across the face of this province.  Why else, 

Mr. Speaker, would you have things like this little item on page 

51 where you've got the '93-94 budget delivered in two 

different ways with about 50 million bucks difference.  All of a 

sudden when it chooses this government's political agenda, 

when this government chooses to implement something, they 

can change the numbers. 

 

One number shows the debt, the annual operating debt of the 

province at 296.3 million, but the number that we've been using 

consistently, Mr. Speaker, in this province since 1957 through 

CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and Liberal 

and Conservative and NDP (New Democratic Party) 

governments shows the debt would be at 340.1. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, why do that?  Why do you have to put a 

little footnote down at the bottom in very small print, in very 

small print, if you are not trying to weave a web of deception 

and deceit across the face of this province?  Because I'll tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, if it means that the taxpayers of this province 

are picking up the difference, are picking up the difference, 

they would like to know why that was done. 

 

And I suggest to you, sir, they are picking up the difference, 

that they're picking it up to the tune of $788 million in sales tax 

over the next four years, and they're taking on a half a billion 

dollars in offloaded property taxation in the next four years.  

They are picking up the difference, Mr. Speaker, that this 

government, this open accountable government . . . is so crass 

that they will put it in a small footnote on the bottom of page 

51.  I want to know what the truth is.  Which number do I 

believe?  So far nobody's come clean. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday, as further evidence, as further 

evidence, of what this government has tried to do with this 

web, this web of deceit, was we saw items pulled from past 

budgets that were normally dealt with as a line item and 

injected into the Speech from the Throne. 

And it just boggles your mind, Mr. Speaker, when you see 

agricultural research, which has been a component of the Ag 

Development Fund in this province for, I don't know, 5, 6, 7 

years -- just a line item -- brought into the speech at $12 

million.  Well the only problem, Mr. Speaker, was last year it 

was 17.  And as my colleague from Morse says, the year before 

that it was a lot more and a lot more and a lot more.  Yesterday 

it's brought into the Speech from the Throne by the minister 

from Saskatoon Westmount as if it was something brand-new 

that she'd thought up. 

 

Once again she's out picking the pockets of the research and 

development firms of this province, the people who benefit, the 

short line implement manufacturers, the people clustered 

around Innovation Place in Saskatoon, the people that work 

with the research capacity of the University of Saskatchewan 

and the Department of Agriculture, she picked their pocket 

yesterday but she put it into this speech in such a way that she 

wanted people to believe that it was a brand-new initiative of 

this government.  And in fact, Mr. Speaker, it was a massive 

cut to the ag research and development component of this 

province.  And yet she presents it yesterday as an initiative of 

this government. 

 

Well it is one more litany in the string of broken promises, Mr. 

Speaker, that we see in this budget brought forward by this 

New Democratic Party government.  And, Mr. Speaker, as you 

go through those pages you will find other items that used to be 

simple line items in past budgets brought forward, brought 

forward by this minister in order to deceive the people of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't think that the people who were quoted and 

reported on and visited with in this province this morning 

would have said the things they did about the betrayal of this 

budget if they had not known deep in their hearts that there 

honestly will be a tax revolt on in this province. 

 

That tax revolt will mean, Mr. Speaker, that the energies of 

people in this province, who should be directed at expansion of 

entrepreneurial initiative, of hiring more people, of leading the 

way in so many sectors of our economy, are now going to be 

devoted to conflict with our government; are now going to be 

devoted to try and hide their successes from the prying eyes of 

the Minister of Finance; who are now going to say that I'm not 

going to work that extra hour or two in a day because there's no 

point in it because the member from Westmount is going to 

strip those rewards away from me; who is going to tax my 

business on Main Street and who is going to tax my home. 

 

And then she is going to make sure through increased sales 

taxes and utility rates and gasoline taxes and property taxes that 

I don't have the ability to practise the God-given talents given 

to me and to my family.  That they'll be like the gentleman 

from Regina who phoned in and simply said, you are picking 

my pocket to the point where I really have to wonder about 

living 



March 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 449 

here any more. 

 

I'm going to make a prediction to you, Mr. Speaker, that the 

new Superstore being built in Medicine Hat, Alberta, being 

built in Medicine Hat, Alberta, will be flooded with customers 

from Maple Creek and Abbey and Lancer and Kindersley and 

Eston. 

 

All over the west side of our province, Mr. Speaker, those 

people are simply going to say, I'm not going to participate, 

Madam Minister, in your folly any more.  Number one, I can't 

afford it.  Number two, I'm just diametrically opposed to your 

game plan; I'm simply not going to participate in it any more, 

Madam Minister.  I'm going to take my dollars and my time 

and I'm going elsewhere. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately not everyone in the province 

of Saskatchewan has the ability to go to the province of Alberta 

to shop.  Some of us are going to have to stay here and 

shoulder the load.  Some of us are going to have to stay here 

and fight, fight this provincial government, who such a short 

time ago promised us so much, promised us so much with less, 

promised us so much with less pain, that promised us as 

taxpayers that our health and our education would be looked 

after, that promised us that the burden of sales tax would not be 

the inhibiting factor to growth in our province. 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the evidence, the 9,000 jobs 

less in the last year, the hundreds of millions of dollars in 

economic activity that didn't take place, is ample proof to so 

many people in our province that that was a false, false promise 

of such a short time ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I will be talking a lot about the 

broken promises of the member from Riversdale in the days to 

come.  We will be talking a lot about the flaws in the plan 

presented by the member from Saskatoon Westmount in the 

days to come.  And each and every day, Mr. Speaker, I suggest 

to you that there will be a mounting ground swell of 

Saskatchewan people who will join in, will join in with the 

opposition in attacking the plan laid down by the member from 

Westmount yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a very easy plan to oppose.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 

this opportunity to be able to participate in this budget debate.  

I want to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that what I'm going to be doing 

today in my remarks, I will be talking at first about the 

budgeting process that we went through here in this legislature, 

here on behalf of the government caucus.  I want to talk then 

about the overall concept of the budget and why this budget is 

the best option for Saskatchewan.  As an example, I'll want to 

relate a bit to some portion of the health budget.  And then last 

of all, I'll want to compare it with the thrust that we are now 

hearing from the Liberal Party and from the Conservative 

Party, both of which . . . or neither of which really have had 

any positive impact or any positive suggestions to answer the 

problems that Saskatchewan found itself in. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Minister of 

Finance and the Premier and the entire cabinet for the most 

well-thought-out budget delivered to this legislature in at least 

10 years.  This budget details the bold, decisive action that our 

government is taking to secure our future and to achieve 

financial freedom and to balance that budget within four years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, to come up with this budget, it 

took courage.  But I tell you, it's not simply a muscle-and-guts 

operation.  I said at the outset that this was a thoughtful budget.  

More than any recent budget, it required homework, weeks and 

weeks of homework.  And it required teamwork, repeated 

assemblages of teamwork. 

 

Mr. Speaker, following the outstanding leadership of our 

Premier and our Finance minister, I and all of my government 

colleagues took time to listen to constituents and to hear their 

aspirations.  And we took careful note of their advice with 

respect to a multitude of issues that face us these days, and we 

brought these ideas to our caucus.  We all had our say, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Constituent expressions were expressed and considered.  

Research and professional analysis were sought.  And then, 

according to the democratic principles, decisions were made on 

the basis of a vote or a consensus in caucus. 

 

This year's budget, as presented by the Minister of Finance, is a 

product of such a process, Mr. Speaker.  It's a half a year in the 

making.  It started with departmental proposals and then went 

through a series of consultations and adjustments. 

 

(1200) 

 

And I want to report to my constituents in Prince Albert 

Carlton that I am totally satisfied that those opinions that they 

have given to me to pass on have been expressed and have 

been heard.  And the budget which is before this Assembly 

today is truly the result of homework being done, and done 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budgeting process was a good one, a thorough 

one.  As a consequence, the budget itself is the right one.  It is 

the best option, and I am proud to be supporting it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- This budget charts the course for financial 

freedom.  When I went to the constituency, along with my 

colleagues, and we asked the question: what is it, what is it that 

the people really want?  And there are several things that they 

want, several pieces of advice that they gave us.  One of the 

first ones was 



450 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1993 

face reality, something that the people in the opposition are 

completely void of, facing reality. 

 

They said to us: face the same reality that every household, 

every business, every farmer, every wage-earner has to face at 

home in his finances or her finances.  They told us that 

government right now is like a business overextended.  Some 

said government is like a plane overloaded and underfueled and 

destined to crash unless you bring it down for a landing now. 

 

They saw a mountain of debt piled up by those members 

opposite, piled so high that it destabilized everything around.  

And the people at home feared an avalanche of that mountain.  

And they want us to cap that mountain of debt and to let the 

warmth of our economy radiate on that threatening glacier of 

debt and heat it to a steady retreat. 

 

People want a secure future, not only for themselves but for 

their children.  They want the province to achieve the financial 

freedom and enhance the vital social and economic programs 

for the future.  They want emphasis on job creation so that our 

population exodus will be put to a stop and so that our tax load 

would be shared by a larger number of people. 

 

This budget does that.  It faces the reality.  It's designed to 

secure the future.  It's designed to bring us the financial 

freedom.  It's designed for job creation.  And, Mr. Speaker, it's 

designed to do so with compassion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, over the last few years we 

have been dealing with debts approximating 10 years before 

that, debts by spending a billion dollars more than we've been 

taking in.  This was under the Tory management, the Tory 

mismanagement.  This year's budget follows the plan that we 

started a year ago to decrease that annual deficit.  And I'm 

proud to say that combined with savings and revenue increases, 

this year's deficit budget will be down to $296 million. 

 

But more importantly than that, Mr. Speaker, is what the plan 

is for the future, what portion this year is of the entire future of 

Saskatchewan, because it lays the course for the budget deficit 

to decrease from 296 million this year to 190 million the year 

after, and the year after, down to 70 million.  By 1996-95, our 

projection is that we should be in a balanced budget or even 

have a possibility of a slight surplus, Mr. Speaker.  Now that's 

progress. 

 

That's a complete reversal of trends of the 1980s under the 

Tories.  Assuming, Mr. Speaker, that there are no natural 

disasters and no more massive offloading by the federal 

government, we can achieve that financial freedom for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, debt is the biggest single threat to our province -- 

debt and the interest.  My constituents, my constituents in 

Prince Albert appreciate the emphasis we are putting on 

grappling with that mountain of 

debt.  Why?  Because in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, they have 

heard and they have happened about what happened to the city 

of Prince Albert way back in the years 1912 to 1915. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you come to Prince Albert and you travel 

downstream about 23 miles -- 23 miles east and downstream -- 

you will come across a chain of boulders and rapids and beside 

it stands a multimillion dollar concrete monument stretching a 

third of the way across the river.  It is a monument of waste and 

mismanagement, motivated by greed and paid for by the 

taxpayers of Prince Albert.  They never completed . . . pardon 

me, the never-completed dam at La Colle Falls is now a great 

tourist attraction.  And I invite you to come visit it. 

 

But more important and more to the point, I want to go back 

and give you a little history on this.  Because the cycle that the 

people of Prince Albert went through is very similar to what 

Saskatchewan is going through, or has gone through in the '80s. 

 

I'm going to call it the lesson of La Colle Falls, Mr. Speaker.  

And the lesson of La Colle Falls is, number one, if you don't 

manage your finances responsibly you will lose your ability to 

manage your finances.  And lesson number two of the La Colle 

Falls is interest rates eat up tax dollars which results in a 

reduction of programs, which happened to us in Prince Albert 

to our streets and roads and sewers and parks and civic 

facilities.  Prince Albert was behind most other cities until the 

1970s. 

 

And the third lesson is the relationship between business and 

government, something that is really an issue that the members 

opposite should pay for.  And that is, one of the rules of 

business is the purpose of business is to make a profit; not to be 

sustained by tax dollars.  And the second rule of business is 

you don't go into business unless you know something about it, 

Mr. Speaker.  The lessons of La Colle Falls. 

 

Let's go back -- 1910 to 1915 Prince Albert was regarded as a 

boom town.  Things were very volatile.  People were moving in 

and people were moving out; the population was transient.  It 

was based on . . . the economy was based on agriculture and 

lumber -- all of those being cyclical. 

 

But the city fathers thought that they were progressive and they 

were maybe perhaps a little excitable.  They decided that it was 

time to borrow some money for all this booming that was going 

on, or they thought was going on.  They borrowed $362,000 for 

water; another $584,000 for sewers; $76,000 for a sewage 

disposal plant; $90,000 for electricity; 19,000 for street lights.  

This is a litany of borrowing.  What does it sound like, Mr. 

Speaker?  What does that sound like? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Nineteen eighty-two to nineteen 

ninety-two. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- My colleague says it sounds like the 1980s.  

It sounds like the 1980s under the Tories.  They bought 

$19,000 for street lights; 106,000 for 



March 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 451 

sidewalks.  And they purchased road machinery and they 

purchased a gravel pit and they purchased barges and they 

purchased a steamboat; it was called the King George.  And 

they built a fire hall and a police station.  Good progressive 

moves, except that, except that they were doing this borrowing 

at a rate which they could not sustain. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, and then, Mr. Speaker, came along a 

fast-talking promoter.  His name was Charles Mitchell.  He was 

the predecessor, he was the man who introduced the original 

idea of GigaText to Saskatchewan.  He came to the province, to 

the city of Prince Albert, and he says: I suggest you borrow 

$800,000 dollars.  And he came up with an agreement.  The 

city borrowed $800,000 to build a dam at La Colle Falls.  This 

dam was financed by the city, even the provincial inspector 

was paid by the city -- I wonder why that was.  But it was 

controlled by the fast talker, Charles Mitchell.  He said Prince 

Albert would become a white coal city.  It's water power would 

light up the entire Saskatchewan valley.  I often wonder if he 

said that Prince Albert and La Colle would have so much going 

in it, you can mismanage it and still break even. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- I noticed a statement very similar to that was 

repeated in 1983 by the former premier, the former leader . . . 

the deposed leader of the Conservative Party, when he spoke in 

New York, and he said Saskatchewan has so much going for it 

that you can afford to mismanage and still break even. 

 

Well Charles Mitchell poured concrete, he employed milk, he 

promoted, but the city borrowed. 

 

And then at the same time another man, a Mr. Felix Frank, 

arrived from Germany.  He had some used equipment, and he 

said: listen, I'm going to open up a company here.  And he 

called this company the Great West Iron, Wood and Chemical 

Works. 

 

Now here was his promise.  He said he would employ 10,000 

men.  They were going to build boxcars; they were going to 

build Pullmans; they were going to build wheels for those 

railway cars.  They were going to build 1,000 windows a day 

and ship them all over Canada; they were going to build eight . 

. . six prefab homes per day, and they were going to ship out a 

carload of toothpicks per day from Prince Albert.  And they 

were going to build a paint production factory, and he said this 

paint was so good that it could even be applied when it was 

raining outside. 

 

Well what did the city fathers of Prince Albert do?  They 

contributed 15 acres of land to him and they guaranteed 

$125,000 worth of bonds.  I think Mr. Felix Frank was the 

original champion of Saskatchewan megaprojects, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

You know under the Tories, we had megaprojects.  Oil 

upgraders that we will be subsidizing until doomsday -- the 

taxpayers' money.  And they have about . . . this issue, this 

particular plot of Mr. Felix Frank had about 

as much chance of success as our GigaText, the Tory 

GigaText, or the Tory Supercarts.  Small wonder where Mr. 

Guy Montpetit came to take his lessons, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well what happened?  The city borrowed.  They borrowed for 

a power plant because that wasn't in the original plans.  And 

then they had to refinance.  So they refinanced.  Went back to 

the brokers, refinanced over the next couple of years. 

 

Then all of a sudden problems began to emerge.  City fathers 

found out that Mr. Charles Mitchell had forgot to include the 

interest cost in his projections.  They found out that Charles 

Mitchell had forgot to test the water flow levels and how they 

varied from spring to summer to fall to winter.  And they 

forgot, they forgot to bore into the river bottom to see if it 

could sustain the floods that came every spring. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as it happened, Mr. Felix Frank and his 

company, like GigaText, never came to production.  He went 

back to Germany just before World War I.  But what happened 

to the city?  Notice the parallel between that and what 

happened to the province.  The bond rating went down to 

something that must have approached ZZZ, Mr. Speaker.  The 

result was that in 1916 Prince Albert, with a population then of 

6,432 people, owed the bondholders $3,328,000. 

 

(1215) 

 

And on top of that, they had a bank overdraft of 401,000.  And 

on top of that, they had to pick up Mr. Felix Frank's loan of 

134,000.  Well that comes out to about $600 per man, woman, 

and child for the city of Prince Albert -- a figure that is very, 

very close to the debt of $15,000 per woman and man and child 

right here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, like in Saskatchewan, the course of Prince Albert 

had been set out for unlimited glory but it ended in unmanaged 

disaster.  The result is it took 50 years -- 50 years -- until the 

mortgage was burned, the mortgage that started with La Colle 

Falls.  It's interesting that the city of Prince Albert even tried to 

sell this albatross twice to SaskPower, but we didn't have a 

Conservative premier at that time to buy it.  Tommy Douglas 

refused to buy it in '59 and '63. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- There were two other results, Mr. Speaker.  

At that time, because of the fiasco that the city fathers put the 

taxpayer in, there was a lot of civic political strife and it was 

characterized by anger, by bitterness, and by disrepute. 

 

And there was a third lesson, a third result.  It took until 

mid-1940 that the city of Prince Albert was allowed to build 

anything without permission -- couldn't build anything.  And as 

a result, the infrastructure that the citizens of Prince Albert now 

enjoy was not put into place until the '70s -- until the '70s with 

the coming into place of the Blakeney government, Mr. 

Speaker. 



452 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1993 

There is a significant overall lesson on that, Mr. Speaker.  And 

the lesson is if you don't control your debt, others will do it for 

you, Mr. Speaker.  If you don't control your debt, others will do 

it for you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is why this budget . . . when I said that there 

was bold and decisive action taken in it in order to secure our 

future and in order to provide financial freedom so that we can 

enjoy the programs and sustain the programs that we feel are 

needed. 

 

That is why it is so important that the plan that is put in place is 

now followed through and that those people are not listened to 

and that the cabinet does not even begin to be moved by any of 

their scare tactics about some kind of a tax revolt, because the 

people of Saskatchewan want a plan that's going to get us out 

of the quagmire that those people put us into. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, one of the major thrusts of this 

government and of this budget is to revamp and to reorganize 

the entire health system.  And I want to speak for a few 

moments on this. 

 

We in the western world are now on what I would call the cusp 

of major changes in our way of thinking about health. 

 

There are several reasons that have brought us to this position.  

I want to talk to you about some of the current and emerging 

thinking about staying healthy, and I want to relate how this 

budget implements this new wave in health -- this new wave 

that we're calling wellness. 

 

Saskatchewan people have a lot to be proud of when it comes 

to health care.  In fact we often feel that we are world leaders.  

When Premiers Tommy Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd 

pioneered the introduction of medicare in 1962, they gave 

Saskatchewan people a gift that has been shared with other 

Canadians and others the world over.  This gift of medicare has 

been enshrined into our federal laws so that future generations 

are protected from having to face personal bankruptcy or lack 

of treatment due to financial constraints. 

 

Today we take all of this for granted.  It seems as if medicare is 

a fact of life that always was and always should be.  And what 

a shock it would be for any of us to take sick as citizens if we 

were living in a nation where there was no medicare.  If we 

took ill abroad, Mr. Speaker, I think that the cost of paying for 

the doctoring and the institutionalizing that we have grown 

accustomed to, could cause as much shock to us individually as 

the affliction itself. 

 

It's indeed the extent that we take medicare for granted that is a 

cause for concern.  Because we, the consumers of health, have 

taken for granted that any and all expenses in the name of 

health or medicare would automatically be paid by the 

government.  But what a shock it is to realize that the 

government's 

income must come from us.  And when $760 million of our tax 

income has to go to pay for the interest on the debt created by 

the former Conservative government, there simply isn't enough 

left to pay for everything else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my government has made a commitment to health 

reform.  This implies, as I mentioned earlier, reorganizing and 

revamping the entire system.  We're taking our cherished 

medicare on a journey -- a journey of renewal.  The result will 

be a sustainable and more comprehensive system.  It'll 

emphasize good health maintenance through prevention in 

addition to intervention.  It'll include paying attention to mental 

and spiritual, emotional, as well as the physical aspects of 

health.  We are calling this the wellness model.  It recognizes 

the interconnectedness of the body with the mind and with the 

spirit. 

 

And to reform our medicare system to include the wellness 

model, we need to change the way we have organized our 

delivery system to our regionally run system.  We need to 

reduce the duplication.  We need to reduce the competition for 

clients.  We need to broaden the health options available to 

consumers and we need to speed that transaction from 

high-tech institutionalization to staying healthy and to healing 

in our communities and in our homes. 

 

This budget, Mr. Speaker, provides a framework for these 

changes.  Local boards are given the responsibility of 

delivering a full range of services necessary to maintain good 

health in our communities.  Local boards with the 

responsibility of allocating funding will be closer to the 

care-giving professionals than a provincially based authority.  

Our government places that funding authority right next to 

where the action is, and local boards will allocate the funding 

according to community needs. 

 

Let me emphasize that it is well established that our health 

needs are changing.  This has been amply documented.  Our 

government's responsibility is to adapt to this in the context of 

our financial and fiscal strait-jacket. 

 

The basic objective of providing health care is changing from 

hiring somebody to heal us or to save us to us taking a greater 

responsibility for our own wellness.  We're still going to need 

our doctors, but the emphasis will be changing.  We will be 

depending more on our doctors to be your and my teachers and 

less to be your and my interveners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order to understand where we're going in 

health, in wellness, picture this analogy if you would. 

 

Picture a region which I will give the name of Freedom Place. 

Green fields, a lovely, beautiful lake with beaches, a stream 

flowing from the lake, a stream which gets faster and deeper, 

might have a couple of sharks in it, then some rapids, and then 

a waterfall, then a waterfall. 

 

And these people who are settled in this beautiful 



March 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 453 

place called Freedom Place, are having a good life.  But every 

once in a while somebody sitting on the bank notices that 

there's a person coming down the rapids and they're going to go 

over the waterfall. So somebody maybe by chance will go out 

there and save that person. 

 

Well soon the people of this area decide that perhaps they 

should have some sentries set up because these accidents could 

happen on a frequent basis.  So they set up sentries and soon 

they . . . and sitting on the bank they notice that there's another 

person coming down.  And then sometimes there's two or three 

coming down in bunches; and sometimes three or four coming 

down, approaching the waterfalls, and they all need to be 

rescued. 

 

And soon they see that they have to put more and more sentries 

just to keep the people from going over the waterfalls.  

Eventually the leader asks a question. He says, what's going on 

upstream?  What is going on upstream? 

 

Now think about this.  What would you as a leader, what would 

any leader do in Freedom Place?  I think that they would 

determine that there's a need for a change.  I think that they 

would reallocate the resources.  I think that they would go into 

prevention.  They would try to find out what it is that's causing 

people to get lost in the rapids.  They would help people 

assume responsibility for their own well-being and they would 

help them triumph. 

 

Now that's exactly what we're doing in health, Mr. Speaker. 

That's what we're doing in this budget. We're sending people 

upstream. 

 

Let me give you an example of how we're adjusting just one 

portion of our health budget to be fairer and to meet the needs 

of Saskatchewan people.  And I'm going to talk very briefly 

about the changes to the drug plan.  What are the purposes? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would love to be able to give everybody free 

everything if these things grew on trees.  But facing reality, 

adjusting the budget so that we don't achieve bankruptcy in this 

province, we have to find and look for savings. 

 

The changes to the drug plan bring us the savings of $29 

million.  And we've done it in such a way as to emphasize 

sensitivity to those with low incomes, those families with low 

incomes, and also those with very high drug costs. 

 

And I want to emphasize that in this budget there will be no 

extra costs -- no extra costs -- to social assistance recipients; to 

those people who are SAIL beneficiaries, Saskatchewan Aid 

for Independent Living beneficiaries; to palliative care patients 

there will be no extra costs.  There will be no extra costs to 

special, high-cost drug users.  And in addition to that, low 

income working people will have their benefits improved.  

Their cap on the amount of drugs that they pay will be reduced 

from $190 semi-annually to $100 semi-annually, and thereafter 

they will pay 35 per 

cent of the prescription cost. 

 

This new plan is also income sensitive.  It is income sensitive 

to all those people with a family income of $50,000 or less, and 

it's calculated on the basis of a total income of a family, 

subtract $3,500 for any independent child.  And it works out 

something like this:  that those families with a family income 

of $20,000 or less will pay a maximum for drugs of $340.  And 

those families with an income of $30,000 will pay a maximum 

amount for their drugs, of $510.  And those people with a 

family income of $40,000 will pay an increased maximum, a 

greater maximum up to $680 maximum for any six-month 

period.  Mr. Speaker, that's a progressive, that's a progressive 

system.  And I want to state . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- And I want to state when you take 

everything into consideration, that that is the fairest and the 

best option, because it is sensitive first of all to our financial 

strait-jacket; it is sensitive to low incomes; it is sensitive to 

high cost drugs.  And yet at the same time, in addition to this 

increased cost, this program is still better than most other 

people in Canada have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that with this budget, this bold, 

decisive plan that we've put forward of getting the provincial 

debt under control, there is reason for optimism.  Our 

provincial economy, while not booming, is on a steady 

increasing, improving pace.  Because while these people tried 

to bankrupt the province, the people of Saskatchewan were a 

little smarter, and as a whole our general economy is quite 

solid. 

 

We were told just this week, Mr. Speaker, by an official from 

the head office of the Bank of Montreal that Saskatchewan's 

agriculture and wood and potash and uranium prospects are 

good.  They won't boom, but they should not go down and they 

should show a steady decline.  That was his prediction.  We 

know that the people . . . the number of jobs in Saskatchewan 

has been increasing slightly and he projected they will continue 

to increase slightly, at a slow rate. 

 

We know that our inflation rate is low.  We know that our 

unemployment rate is amongst the best in the country.  We 

know that the interest rates -- which really dictate a lot of the 

construction in the province -- are now the lowest in 35 years.  

And more important is we know that the attitude of the people 

of Saskatchewan is such that they want to cooperate, they want 

to work with us.  They want leadership because they want 

financial freedom. 

 

We have a plan, Mr. Speaker.  Our plan is to balance the 

budget in four years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Our plan is to strengthen the 



454 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1993 

economy by creating jobs in small business.  Not megaprojects, 

but small business. 

 

As an incentive to do this, I want to outline, Mr. Speaker, that 

one of the major, one of the major benefits of this particular 

budget is the tax reduction to small business and cooperatives.  

The tax charged on the corporations, small business 

corporations, in 1991, when these guys were still in power, was 

10 per cent.  In '92 we reduced that to 9.5 per cent.  This next 

year it goes down to 9 per cent, followed by eight and a half 

per cent the year after, and by 1995, down from eight and a half 

per cent to 8 per cent.  Mr. Speaker, people in small business 

will look at this and they will say, I've got confidence in 

Saskatchewan and I've got confidence in the NDP government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- We will not be subsidizing megaprojects 

from tax dollars as those people have done.  We welcome big 

companies and we welcome small companies but we say to 

them, follow the rules of business.  And the purpose of 

business is to make a profit, not to take tax dollars to subsidize 

it.  Small business, Mr. Speaker, has a good record and we feel 

that through these incentives we will see expansion of new 

industry, we will see expansion of value added, we will see 

employment opportunities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, over two-thirds of the new jobs in 

Saskatchewan over the last 10 years were made by small 

business.  Compare that to the foofraw that we heard about 

Saskferco, all the money we put into it.  For how many jobs, 

Mr. Speaker?  About a hundred jobs, about a hundred jobs.  

Mr. Speaker, that is what we are doing. 

 

Now what is happening with the Tories?  What are the Tories 

doing?  What are we hearing from the Tories?  What I can see 

is they're over there some place; they're some place over to the 

far right, over there with Preston Manning trying to recruit. 

 

And how are they doing it?  Well they're doing it in a couple of 

ways.  They're doing it in a couple of ways, Mr. Speaker.  

They're first of all trying to align all politicians with what they 

and their leaders over the last 10 years - 

_ people like Maggie Thatcher and Major in Britain, and 

Reagan and Bush in the States, and Preston Manning and 

Mulroney here -- doing exactly what they . . . and following 

them.  They're trying to paint a picture where all politicians are 

like that.  And they're thinking hey, politicians are in disrepute.  

And somehow they're trying to make this link, not realizing 

that the people that are in disrepute are those that caused the 

problems over the last 10 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say what else.  

There's a couple of other things that we have identified that the 

Tories are doing, which way they think we should be heading. 

And I went through Hansard and read out the March 4 

amendment that they made to the throne speech.  In this 

amendment by the member from Kindersley -- and I'd be very 

pleased to send it to anybody who'd want it -- what they did is 

they outlined their policy.  They said that there was some 

policies here that they outlined.  And there's about 15 or 20 

items that they have targeted here, and each one of these 

identifies something that this government has done, some 

positive move that this government has made in order to 

achieve the savings that is going to set up the plan for our 

economic renewal and our financial freedom. 

 

And I'm going to have this costed out.  And the time will come 

when I will read out these costs to those members.  But I'm 

taking a good guess right now, Mr. Speaker, that if I'm going to 

cost this out, that what it would do, that the cost of all of these 

items that they mentioned here would more than double the 

deficit that we're into right now, more than double. 

 

So, have they changed?  Have they learned?  Where are they?  

They are going into the same dustbin that Bush went into and 

that Thatcher went into and that Reagan went into and that 

Mulroney has gone into -- same one.  Mr. Speaker, we know.  

We know what the Tories are trying to do.  They're way over 

there on the right some place. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there's one other question.  I asked myself, 

well where are the Liberals?  Because when I look down the 

centre and down the middle, I see the New Democratic Party.  

When I swing over and look away off to the right, I see the 

rump of the Tories. 

 

And then I look back and forth across the political spectrum 

and I look for Liberals and I say, where are the Liberals?  And I 

say it in English: where are the Liberals?  Nobody responds.  

So I say it in French: où est le Liberal?  Nobody responds.  And 

I got some help with this one.  You can say in German: wo sind 

die Liberals?  And nobody answers.  And I say it in Ukrainian:  

dezh tee Liberaleh?  Well, we can't see them on the political 

landscape because they have no positions -- absolutely no 

positions.  They are nowhere on policy. 

 

What we find though, is there's a couple of curious statements.  

There is a couple of things we can identify them for.  The 

Leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party, when she talks 

about expenses for the legislature and secretarial help, wants 

more.  She wants us to cut the deficit.  She wants us to sell 

SaskTel.  She wants us to sell SaskEnergy.  But she wants, for 

herself, she wants more. 

 

And then there's another thing.  And then there's another thing.  

She also says along with her Liberal friends: those New 

Democrats, they're building up a pot of money some place.  

Well you know, I sure hope she shows me where it is.  I sure 

would like to see it, because there's a lot of things we could 

build with that money. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, and the third thing is that while they're 

doing these things, while she says, I want 



March 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 455 

more, and they are setting up a pot of money -- unable to 

substantiate it, never be able to prove anything like that -- she's 

saying, but I don't want to be a politician.  Well I'll tell you 

something, we don't want her to be a politician either. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, the plan to balance the budget 

is here.  This budget is compassionate.  This budget focuses on 

job creation through small business.  This budget rationalizes 

and improves the services of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to congratulate the Premier and the Minister of 

Finance and the entire cabinet for this bold, decisive action 

which they are presenting before us on this day and this week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to support this budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is indeed with 

great honour that I stand in my place as the representative for 

the Bengough-Milestone constituency, in support of this budget 

-- a budget, although difficult, that will lead us on to the 

journey of renewal; a budget that will give us financial 

freedom; a budget, Mr. Speaker, that secures our future, a 

future that the residents of this great province deserve, a future 

that our children and our grandchildren deserve. 

 

I congratulate the Minister of Finance for her leadership and 

strength in preparing this budget.  I also want to congratulate 

all the members of our caucus for their hard work, 

determination, courage, and compassion in helping to prepare 

and in supporting this budget. 

 

It cannot be denied that this is a difficult budget.  It's possibly 

one of the toughest budgets ever brought down in the history of 

Saskatchewan.  It's a budget that each member of our caucus 

struggled with and at times we found heart-wrenching in 

making difficult choices.  But we all had a say, and we all 

brought our constituents' concerns to this budget.  But through 

this struggle, we are presenting to Saskatchewan a budget 

based on reality, fairness, community, cooperation, and 

compassion. 

 

I agree completely with the Minister of Finance when she said 

Saskatchewan was founded by pioneers who had the vision and 

the courage to make sacrifices to secure a better future for 

themselves and their children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Now we must draw on that decision by 

making difficult choices today to secure a brighter tomorrow.  

Sacrifice is not easy but it is necessary.  When we know our 

sacrifice is for a just cause, I believe the people of 

Saskatchewan are prepared to accept it. 

I have faith in the people of this province, that they will support 

this budget too.  Not because they want to pay higher taxes and 

not because they want less programs, but because they want a 

plan to rebuild this province to secure their future.  Without 

such a plan, we jeopardize all that we do have. 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I say this budget is based on reality, it is.  

And the reality of the financial situation in this province is 

serious, but not insurmountable.  Some would say that this is 

the doom and gloom message.  I argue that this is reality.  And 

when we know what reality is, we can face it, challenge it, and 

move on. 

 

I will never forget, Mr. Speaker, driving down the highway 

after the election of 1982 and feeling like a death had 

happened, and saying to myself, I hope that this will not be as 

bad as I think it will be.  I hope this will not affect my 

children's future in this province.  But the Conservative reign of 

terror over the province from 1982 to 1991 was devastating and 

it did affect my children.  And in fact it affected every man, 

woman, and child in this province. 

 

In only 10 years we saw our province's debt increase from 3.8 

billion to 14.7 billion, a debt that increased as the assets of the 

province were sold off or possibly more accurately, given 

away, a debt that is costing us $847.5 million of interest this 

year. 

 

The interest on this debt is our third-highest expenditure, right 

after health and education in our budget, and if left unchecked, 

would soon surpass what we spend on education.  An interest 

debt that we pay each and every day of over $2 million -- $2 

million being sent out of our province to the banks and bond 

agencies in New York, London, Zürich. 

 

If we could only have that money spent that we're spending on 

interest being spent in Saskatchewan, can you imagine what we 

could do in health, in education, in economic development, in 

agriculture, and social programs.  If we didn't have interest 

payments, our last budget would have had a surplus.  We 

actually took in enough revenue to cover our programs and 

government spending if we didn't have to pay the interest on 

the debt. 

 

But the reality, Mr. Speaker, is that each year, as we continue 

to run deficit budgets, more money will go to serving the debt 

rather than serving the people of this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know what bothers me the most about 

this incredible situation is that the opposition members across 

the way take no responsibility for it -- members who 

irresponsibly drove this province into bankruptcy with no plan 

other than patronage and power. 

 

When a former PC (Progressive Conservative) member brags 

that they would make this province ungovernable, I wonder 

what kind of conscience a 



456 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1993 

person has who has been entrusted with the public office and 

who so blatantly could feel good about destroying a province.  

No wonder people become cynical of politicians. 

 

But I do believe, Mr. Speaker, that unconscionable people form 

unconscionable governments that will do whatever to stay in 

power with no regards to what's in the best interest of this 

province. 

 

As Bob Hughes wrote in the Leader-Post just earlier this week 

on March 15: "Payment for the good times is now due."  He 

tells about a young accountant lamenting over the way of the 

changing world.  He talks about the government which helped 

him out, and I quote: 

 

 "So, you were able to get a nice house at an affordable price 

because of the provincial government, eh?" 

 

 "Oh yeah, it was funny.  The house we bought was bigger 

and better than anything our parents had.  I remember me and 

my mom and dad and four brothers grew up in a bungalow 

that had three bedrooms, was just over 1,000 square feet, and 

had one bathroom." 

 

 "How big was the house you bought?" 

 

 "Well, let's see, it was about 2,000 square feet, had three 

bathrooms, rooms all over the place, a big yard.  There was 

lots of space for just the two of us." 

 

 "Sounds like you were in heaven." 

 

 "Not really.  I mean, we didn't have a fence.  We didn't have 

a swimming pool.  We didn't even have a hot tub, if you can 

believe it." 

 

 "No!  You've got to be kidding." 

 

 "No, it's the truth.  But thank goodness for the government.  

The government really cared for us.  They told us that if we 

wanted to put up a fence, go right ahead and put up that 

fence, and they would pay for half of it.  Or a deck, if we 

needed one, and everybody should have a deck.  And so we 

did.  And if that wasn't good enough, if we wanted to finish 

the basement so we would have even more room, or if we felt 

we really needed a hot tub, or a whirlpool in the bedroom, 

then there were ways the government would help us get 

those, too." 

 

 "How was that?" 

 

 "Well, governments had to be innovative to stay in power.  

So they came up with this neat idea that we could borrow up 

to $10,000 at interest rates so low at the time you were crazy 

not to borrow it, and you could pay it back over a long period 

of time.  Heck, we had a swimming pool put in.  Didn't 

bother us while they were doing the job, either . . . we (were 

off 

in) Phoenix for a few weeks while they were digging up the 

back yard." 

 

 "So, when you got back everything was done?" 

 

 "Oh, yeah, it was great.  (Because) that's what governments 

were for.  And we understood that because we kept voting for 

them.  It's too bad they ran out of money because ordinary 

folk, such as myself, were kinda getting used to them picking 

up the tab for some of the things we all deserve to have just 

because we live in this great country." 

 

 "So, what's your big problem?" 

 

 Well, it sounds like the government is about to do something 

drastic." 

 

 "What's that?" 

 

 "Sounds like they're going to make us pay for the good 

times." 

 

 You're kidding?  You don't mean, they expect you to . . . to 

pay your own way." 

 

 "I think I'm going to faint." 

 

Well that article, after reading it, it made me stop to think.  

And, Mr. Speaker, I am not blaming the individuals for using 

the government's money for those programs.  They were 

offered to them and they were enticed by them. 

 

But to me this was not reality.  This was part of Tory 

wonderland -- or should I say, blunderland? -- as they led us 

into never-never land. 

 

But I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that the electorate of this 

province will never be led into never-never land again.  My 

constituents want to know what reality is and to move on to 

facing the challenges ahead.  And I am confident, Mr. Speaker, 

with this budget we are facing reality, and we have set out a 

long-term plan to secure the future of this province; a plan that 

creates jobs and strengthens our economy; a plan that balances 

within four years; a plan that rationalizes and improves the 

delivery of services; a plan that is committed to compassion.  It 

is a plan of hope and partnership with our communities.  I have 

faith in the ability of Saskatchewan people. 

 

I now would like to use a local example of how Saskatchewan 

people can work together to accomplish great things.  I'd like to 

take this chance to mention a group of very talented people in 

my constituency, the Milestone Prairie Players. 

 

They're a group of local, amateur people who have worked 

hard to put on dinner theatres in our community.  The whole 

community participates in this annual event, which puts on a 

fabulous meal and great entertainment. 

 

The group, I am proud to say, has won several awards 



March 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 457 

in the Saskatchewan Drama Festival over the past few years.  

They have now been asked to represent Canada at an 

international drama festival in Ireland.  Saskatchewan people 

can do it, and I congratulate the Prairie Players on their 

endeavours. 

 

But I also want to congratulate the former premier, former 

leader of the opposition, former professor, former supporter of 

Saskatchewan people for taking a position on the board of a 

company in direct competition with his former pet project, 

Saferco.  I am sure he will give this out-of-province company 

his best, just as he did to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps my implied comparison between the 

Milestone Prairie Players of Saskatchewan and the board 

member of Cominco needs further explanation. 

 

The difference between the two is the difference in miniature 

between the message of hope presented by the government in 

the two speeches opening this session and the legacy of dismal 

failure left by the previous government, left by the board 

member. 

 

The Milestone Prairie Players had a dream.  They pooled their 

talents to move towards that dream.  They worked together, 

setting their goals high by keeping them realistic.  And they 

succeeded beyond their expectations -- the Saskatchewan way. 

 

On the other hand, the former premier and his government 

talked big, planned not at all, trusted not in themselves but in 

anyone so long as he was from elsewhere, and succeeded in 

bringing this province not to its knees but flat on its face. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is nurtured by the spirit that 

inspired the Prairie Players.  And I'm proud to support 

Saskatchewan's return to sanity, responsibility, and vision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Between last year's session and this session I 

held over 17 public meetings in my constituency.  These 

meetings were an opportunity for me to tell my constituents 

about government programs and initiatives, but possibly more 

importantly for me to hear their concerns. 

 

In my constituency farming and small business are an integral 

part of the economy.  My constituents raised concerns about 

agriculture, jobs, and services.  They have been facing difficult 

times.  But I'm proud to say I represent people who are hard 

working, creative, adaptable, and resilient -- people who want 

to cooperate and work with us to meet the challenges head on. 

 

To tackle the budget they realize there are no easy answers.  

We could ignore the situation, which would only jeopardize all 

our programs with massive devastation.  We can cut back on 

expenditures or raise revenue or stimulate the economy.  No 

one answer will work. But through a combination of cuts to 

government expenditures, some raises in revenue, and by 

stimulating the economy, we can begin to live within our 

means.  And, Mr. Speaker, our budget has addressed all these 

areas and addressed it with compassion. 

 

The amazing thing about this budget and its four-year plan to 

eliminate the deficit is that it's so simple, so logical, and so 

correct.  Its theme is securing our future and it forecasts a 

secure future by returning us to common sense.  It is a 

common-sense budget that outlines how we will live within our 

means.  It does not say we should; it says we will spend what 

we take in with a little set aside for a rainy day.  A lot of very 

tough, very complex, very heart-wrenching decisions had to be 

made along the way.  But what this budget is astonishing in is 

its simplicity. 

 

I was glad the Minister of Finance mentioned her children 

yesterday.  I have children, as do most of us in this Assembly.  

I don't expect to leave mine with a fortune, but I don't expect to 

leave them with a millstone.  I want to be remembered for what 

I did for my children, not for what I did to them.  As the 

member from Redberry said, I want them to make their own 

mistakes, not be saddled with mine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agriculture of course plays a central role in my 

constituency, as it does in Saskatchewan's economy.  Some 

may be heard to say that this budget doesn't have a vision, 

doesn't have a vision for agriculture in this province.  I beg to 

differ, Mr. Speaker.  We do have a vision.  We have a 

long-term vision and a long-term commitment to achieve that 

vision. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, may I have leave of the 

Assembly to introduce some guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone, I would like to introduce to you and 

through you to the Assembly, 23 students in grade 7 and 8 from 

the Cardinal Leger School in Saskatoon.  They are here visiting 

the Assembly today, along with their teacher or chaperons, I'm 

not sure which.  But I would like the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 

to welcome our guests from Saskatoon today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 



458 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1993 

Ms. Bradley: -- As I was saying, we do have a vision for 

agriculture in this province.  We do have a vision.  We have a 

long-term vision and a long-term commitment to achieve that 

vision, something the opposition members wouldn't 

understand.  Our farmers in this province would have been 

better off if the former leader of the Tories had left agriculture 

programs alone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- We saw programs signed into that continued to 

allow the federal government to reduce its percentage of 

support while the provincial government gained a larger 

percentage of carrying the costs of support programs.  

Saskatchewan sits in the most vulnerable situation in Canada 

because of this. 

 

With 40 per cent of the agriculture base in Canada and less 

than 4 per cent of the tax base, how can Saskatchewan be 

expected to support the very industry its economy is based on 

when times are difficult?  It's exactly what we've been saying 

over and over again.  It's like asking the person who is bleeding 

to death to give themselves a blood transfusion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from 1988 on, the federal government offloaded 

second line of defence support programs . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. It now being 1 o'clock, this 

House stands adjourned until 2 p.m. on Monday. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 


