




















































Hansard: March 11, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 275 

 March 11, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 5 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 5 -- An Act to 

amend The Planning and Development Act, 1983 be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as I was 

saying before . . . I guess I really wasn't really rudely 

interrupted but we were all . . . decided maybe it was time to 

take a little break and get some nourishment.  Now that we've 

got some nourishment under our belt we're ready and raring to 

go again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, before us today as I mentioned prior to 

adjournment for the supper hour, I mentioned the fact that the 

Bill before us certainly addresses another new area of taxation, 

and that is taxation is a question that is becoming a major 

concern in the province of Saskatchewan today. 

 

It's becoming a concern because it doesn't matter who you are, 

where you are in this province, it doesn't matter whether you're 

a public employee, whether you're a businessman or woman, or 

whether you're a home-owner, whether you're a farmer, Mr. 

Speaker, we find that for the last two years and we anticipate as 

a budget comes forward, that the government has indeed been 

dipping into our pockets. 

 

Taxes have been increased, rates have increased, utility rates 

have increased, and the public in general, Mr. Speaker, is 

getting to the point where they are wondering when is this 

going to end.  Are they going to be able to afford to continue to 

live in this province, and might even be much easier . . . In fact 

I've had people comment about the fact that if they had the 

ability and if they could sever their ties quickly, many of them 

would move to other parts of the country. 

 

One of the big problems we have with this Bill, as I mentioned 

before too, Mr. Speaker, was the fact that again it's another 

avenue of the government offloading and, instead of accepting 

their responsibility, putting that responsibility on the hands of 

local governments. 

 

Then we can see as the ministers stand in this House they will 

always argue the fact that: we didn't make the decision; it was 

the local government, it was the local board, it was the local 

health board or whatever making that decision.  Local 

government may have all it can handle trying to collect enough 

money to run the health care system.  After all, the Minister of 

Health is hoping to offload that cost onto local property taxes. 

 

It seems that the government really doesn't know where it is 

going or what it is doing, and this is something that is 

becoming very obvious to all 

Saskatchewan residents.  The Minister of Health is offloading 

health costs.  This Bill is offloading in the form of a 

development tax, offloading to rural governments, to municipal 

governments, and giving them added ability and onus to tax in 

order to make up the difference of what they're not receiving in 

grants from the provincial government. 

 

And certainly in a week's time we will . . . in a week's time 

we'll find out exactly what is going to be available to municipal 

governments.  And it's obvious that the Minister of Economic 

Development is quite pleased with my speech, just from his 

expressions in the House tonight. 

 

And the Minister of Rural Development is saying the 

government is, and I quote . . . I believe the Minister of Rural 

Development on March 10, the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, said, 

"The government is looking for ways to take education and 

health off property taxes."  And yet this Bill would allow the 

local governments another avenue of tax generation. 

 

So as I said, Mr. Speaker, it appears the government doesn't 

know which direction it is really going.  They seem to be, as 

we've heard from different ministers throughout the course of 

this past spring . . . On one hand one minister will make a 

comment at one meeting.  On the other hand, a day later, 

another minister will make a different comment and a different 

suggestion.  It just appears that the ministers' comments are 

directed to whatever crowd or group they happen to be with at 

the time and whatever would be appropriate.  They are all over 

the map. 

 

And I find, Mr. Speaker, that people in Saskatchewan certainly 

are indicating they have had enough of NDP (New Democratic 

Party) promises that will never be kept, promises that will be 

broken at the government's discretion, and they have had 

enough of NDP taxes. 

 

The minister responsible for Bill 5 claims that this new 

development tax is evidence of the NDP's support for local 

autonomy, and she claims that this Bill demonstrates the NDP's 

confidence in municipal governments.  And I'm sure municipal 

governments would appreciate the ability of being able to 

provide services to their ratepayers, but they're also very 

dependent on the province of Saskatchewan and upon the 

revenue-sharing grants. 

 

If the minister was sincere regarding her confidence in 

municipalities, she would urge her colleagues to take the 

advice of SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association).  She would urge her colleagues to 

repeal The Hospital Revenue Act, repeal the Act your 

government is depending on to fund the Minister of Health's 

wellness model.  Repeal it and we may start believing that the 

NDP government has confidence in municipal governments. 

 

I know a number of my colleagues have had the privilege of 

attending SARM, and SARM delegates 



276 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1993 

have also raised the question of offloading of taxes.  And of 

course the property tax question is a question that has been 

there for a number of years through time, Mr. Speaker.  It's 

interesting that one minister would suggest that we need to 

look at ways of taking the E&H (education and health) tax off 

property, and yet on the other hand, every time we turn around 

the opportunity, in fact the necessity, is going to be there, for 

whether it be municipal governments or regional health boards, 

to go to the local governments, be they municipal, be they 

urban, or rural, municipal governments asking them for 

revenue in order to fund the services they are providing. 

 

And as the Minister of Health indicated, if the municipality 

would suggest, no we're not going to give you the revenue, then 

of course, as a health board, they could say well, really, do you 

want your hospital.  We won't be able to maintain your 

hospital, or maintain your care home unless we have the 

revenue. 

 

So this Bill, Mr. Speaker, we find in many cases just picks up 

where the Health Bill is picking up in a number of areas where 

the government has offloaded many of the responsibilities it 

now has.  And I have to ask the government: when are they are 

going to accept the responsibility then and the trust that was put 

in their hands on October 21, 1991 when they were elected by 

the people of Saskatchewan to form government in this 

province? 

 

So those are some of the areas, Mr. Speaker, that we will 

certainly be bringing to the forefront in this Bill and in other 

Bills as they are brought before this Assembly.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have 

a few comments to make regarding Bill 5, An Act to amend the 

Planning and Development Act, 1983. 

 

I started out looking through this Bill earlier today, Mr. 

Speaker, when my colleague from Kindersley was at the 

SARM convention.  And even though he has returned to his 

seat this evening and would be quite prepared to discuss this, 

because I'd spent too much time sort of trying to study up on 

his homework, I thought it best that I insist that I get a chance 

to discuss it at least for a few minutes.  And he may want to 

take over when I'm finished to correct any of the errors we 

have. 

 

The first thing that struck my mind, Mr. Speaker, is that here 

we have a Bill that refers to urban municipal situations, and we 

also -- I know from past experience having been the reeve of a 

municipality -- we know that there are zoning by-laws in rural 

Saskatchewan.  And my concern immediately started to turn 

towards whether or not this Bill is a master draft of what will 

also be applied to rural municipalities in the future, or if 

perhaps this Bill might be able to be used on rural municipal 

affairs and their zoning by-laws without any further Bills being 

passed or anything like that. 

 

So I'm advising my colleague from Kindersley of that 

and asking him to investigate that for us before we go into this 

Bill in the final days to make sure that we don't get caught up 

in something that expands a lot further than we see on the 

surface. 

 

I noted on the second page of the Bill that we have some 

problems that I envision in here with manipulations possible by 

municipalities, the way this Bill has been drafted.  And I don't 

want to criticize too heavily because I don't really understand 

sometimes how legal people interpret things, but it looks to me 

like under this number (5), it says: 

 

 A bylaw made pursuant to subsection (2) shall provide that 

similar levies be imposed for developments that impose 

similar capital costs to the municipality. 

 

In other words, what it's saying is that you can, pursuant to the 

things that are outlined in number (2), which are sewage, water 

or drainage works, public highways, parks, and recreation 

facilities and those kinds of things, that you can have a 

municipality pass into their zoning by-laws the necessity to 

levy and impose development costs.  Now that immediately 

implies to me that a municipal structure can put on a new form 

of taxation.  And it seems to me that if I were a business 

looking at coming into Saskatchewan and locating in an urban 

centre -- and of course if this applies to rural, then also it would 

apply as well -- that I would be concerned about locating in 

that area, simply because we now have this new ability of 

taxation facing us and our costs of course might go up.  And it 

seems to me that we are looking at a possibility here that a new 

kind of taxation could further scare out any businesses that 

might want to locate. 

 

Now I don't know what word would apply to this, but you have 

the potential when you go down through this to number (7) of 

being able to completely reverse this process because it says in 

here in number (7) now that: 

 

 A bylaw made pursuant to subsection (2) may exempt land 

uses, classes of development, zoning districts or defined areas 

specified in the bylaw from the levies. 

 

Now what that means in my mind, Mr. Speaker, is that here in 

number (5) you've got the ability to levy a new tax against 

businesses coming in, and in (7) you have the ability now to 

remove that as well.  And it seems to me like you could almost 

play favouritism when a law is drawn up like this. 

 

A municipal authority might in fact levy the tax against one 

business that they particularly may not like or they may think 

that they have extra funds. And then if they happen to have a 

friend who has a business, they might decide to exempt him.  

And I find that kind of inconsistency not acceptable. 

 

I believe that we have to be a little more firm in the rules, 

although I have to admit that right out front I think we are ruled 

and regulated to death in this province and it wouldn't hurt my 

feelings if we took 



March 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 277 

half of these Bills and just plain burned them and got rid of 

them all because we've got to the point where we've got such a 

massive structure of rules and regulations that anybody that 

wants to locate a business in our province almost has to hire a 

team of lawyers to find out what they're getting into before they 

ever start.  Because there's all kinds of things that can sneak up 

on you. 

 

Here we go to page 3 in this Bill and we're under 55.3, levies 

after the fact is what we're referring here to.  And my question 

of course would be, how could anybody starting a new business 

possibly budget for the costs to go to a banker perhaps for 

loans and that sort of thing, how could you ever budget for 

those kind of things and satisfy your banker if in fact 

municipalities have the right to tax you or levy fees -- if you 

want to call them that -- for your business after the fact, after 

you've been established. 

 

And this would be fees for things like maybe a road that was 

built and you may have made a deal with the RM (rural 

municipality) or an urban municipality that if you build my 

street, I'll put the business in there. And then a couple of years 

later a council may change their mind and say no, this guy got 

too hot of a deal, he's already established, he can't get away 

now. So retroactively we might deem that he now owes the 

penalty price of paying the levy that covers the total cost of that 

improvement. 

 

Now that can, as we go back to this section number (2), can 

include all kinds of things like sewage, water, drainage works, 

public highways, parks and recreation facilities. 

 

Suppose the jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker, built a park on the next 

lot to this business and said that your employees are now using 

that park, and as a result we're going to charge you with the 

cost of having located that park in that particular area.  There's 

no stopping the imagination here of the kinds of potential costs 

that people might run into.  And I would really think that you'd 

have to have a team of lawyers start sitting down and drawing 

up contracts with the municipal authority because they have 

this retroactive ability to basically levy anything that they want 

for all these improvements after the fact. 

 

And I find that to be the kind of direction that a lot of the 

legislation in the last legislature last summer went in, where we 

seem to have the ability to go back.  The Bill as you will recall, 

Mr. Speaker, concerning the oil and gas industry allowed the 

minister the right to retroactively charge royalties that he 

thought had not been paid in full. 

 

(1915) 

 

This same type of principle seems to be applied in this Bill and 

I find that that kind of a principle in general, long-term things 

within all of these Bills, is objectionable to business and to the 

job creators within our society.  I should say the potential job 

creators, because new businesses that come in and locate under 

these by-laws are the ones that will 

generate the jobs that everybody seems to be talking about we 

have such a great need for these days.  So if we're going to 

discourage the very people that come in, we're not going to 

have those jobs and that kind of legislation seems to me to 

almost surely drive people to Alberta. 

 

On page 5, I made a little note here on the variance.  Now this 

section 73.1, Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, deals with the 

ability to allow a variance in your zoning by-law of the actual 

locations that you had established in the first draft of the 

by-law when you originally wrote it.  Now you have the ability 

in this new legislation to vary by 10 per cent the location that a 

building would have to be, say from the . . . probably the 

outside edge of the frontage curb line or whatever and/or 

maybe you might be able to locate closer to another building 

where a fire regulation would have before caused you to stay 

away say 10 feet or 15 feet.  Now you can have a 10 per cent 

variance in that through this part of the legislation. 

 

I guess what I'd have to say I find wrong with all these kinds of 

rules and regulations, Mr. Speaker, is that we set up all of these 

rules and now we start to set up variances to all of the rules.  In 

other words, now we have rules but we have rules that you can 

bend just a little bit.  And if you're going to allow them to be 

bent just a little bit, why not just allow them to be bent a lot? 

 

And it gets into a maze of possibilities of deals that you could 

make, and some people would be turned down and other people 

would be allowed to do what they like.  And it may come to a 

point where it's more important who you know in local 

government rather than to follow the actual rules that are set 

down in legislation. 

 

And that concerns me considerably, Mr. Speaker, because I 

think our rules should be designed so that there's absolutely no 

way that anybody can . . . could misconstrue what the 

meanings of our rules are, that there isn't that element of 

manipulation, that element of people to be able to sort of, you 

know, maybe bribe somebody or something like that to try and 

get favours to allow them to do different things. 

 

But of course I have to go back to the most reprehensible part 

of the thing, and that being that ability to tax retroactively.  

And that will turn out in my view, of having scanned through 

the Bill today, as being the most objectionable part of it and it 

will probably hurt the province more in the long run than it will 

ever help. 

 

I noted also in the explanations, Mr. Speaker, that we remove, 

in this one section, we go into removing the cap on the charges.  

And the cap as I recall was the $100 cap.  And here again I 

know that the costs of all things in our society are going up.  

Everybody knows that and maybe caps that were set a few 

years back are unrealistic, but reality of life is that if you don't 

put some kind of caps on how much can you charge for certain 

things, then you throw the door wide open for abuses. 



278 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1993 

And I'm suggesting to the government that under section 8 of 

the explanations, on page 7 under the existing provisions . . . 

and it does say here under the explanation that this section is to 

be repealed and the limitation of $100 for application fee or 

assessing advertising costs is removed.  Council will be able to 

determine fees for both applications in accordance with new 

subsections under 72(1)(g.2). 

 

And I'm suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that maybe the amount might 

not be realistic but we should have a cap.  There should be a 

limit to how much people can be charged.  Otherwise, here 

again you have an element where business is going to say: well 

maybe there is no limit for me, maybe it could be $10,000, 

maybe for somebody else it's $50,000.  And it could all depend 

on who you know and who you get along with, or who happens 

to like you, or who happens not to like you, and you could have 

an awful lot of discrimination and that sort of thing. 

 

Even though not directly applied, it could be implied.  And that 

could cause a whole lot of problems and hard feelings and a lot 

of court cases and that sort of thing could end up resulting from 

that sort of approach. 

 

So I've seen some things in here, Mr. Speaker, that I feel are 

definitely needing of some further examination and further 

study and researching, and in order to give my colleague from 

Kindersley some time to be able to do that I'm going to move 

that we adjourn debate on this Bill No. 5. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 8 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 8 -- An Act to 

amend The Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards 

Act and to make Related Amendments to Certain Other 

Acts be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Bill No. 8 

seems to be a rather innocuous Bill when you first consider it, 

but after you read through it, Mr. Speaker, you gain a different 

impression of it.  From all of the name changes in this Bill, 

changes from inspector to building official, changes from chief 

inspector to chief building official, it seems to be this Bill 

should perhaps be named the paper suppliers' beneficial Act 

because it's going to create a large amount of paper shuffling.  

People are going to have to go out and buy an awful lot more 

letterhead than they did before. 

 

An alternate name for this Bill might perhaps be the building 

owners taxation Act, because there's a fair number of areas in 

this Bill that allows the government to place deposits on certain 

requirements by a building owner.  If a building owner wants 

to get a permit or appeal a decision by this new building 

official, he's going to have to supply a deposit. 

In some locations in the Bill it talks about providing a refund 

mechanism by which the person can get his deposit back.  In 

other areas of the Bill it seems to forget that.  The person pays 

a deposit but there's no mechanism by which he can get his 

deposit back.  And I think that's one of the areas, Mr. Speaker, 

where the government is going to have to seriously take a look 

at this Bill and perhaps make some corrections in it. 

 

In other areas, the existing Bill talks about fees.  Now in a fee 

you would assume that there is a fixed structure in place, that 

the person would know beforehand how much he's going to 

have to pay.  In the new Bill they have changed that term "fee" 

to "deposit".  Now in my mind, if you pay a deposit, that could 

be larger than a small fee for a licence but you would expect at 

some point in time to get some of that money back if you meet 

all the requirements.  But in that particular section, where it 

was changed from fee to deposit, there is, as I mentioned 

before, no mechanism in place to have those funds returned. 

 

This Bill talks about enforcement authorities dealing with 

regional and provincial parks.  Well, Mr. Speaker, in rural 

Saskatchewan, provincial parks, rural and regional parks, are 

very important to the local people.  They do a very, very good 

job of looking after those parks. 

 

We have a very excellent park down at Oxbow called beaver 

park, and the town of Oxbow takes great pride in that location.  

They do their best in looking after it and they do an excellent 

job of that.  And yet in this Bill the provincial government is 

now providing some authorities to look after . . . not to look 

after it, but to inspect it. 

 

These parks are very important to the cultural aspects of those 

regions and yet we could have inspectors going in there and 

saying, these buildings, cultural buildings, do not meet their 

official stamp of approval.  And I think we need some sort of 

mechanisms in place there to provide some control. 

 

This Bill was supposed to bring together various Acts 

concerning the buildings under one umbrella.  These Acts 

include The Parks Act, The Urban Municipality Act, and The 

Northern Municipalities Act are being brought under this Act 

dealing with buildings and fire safety. 

 

The government is claiming, in their notes and in their 

speeches, that they have done a significant amount of 

consultation in dealing with this Bill.  They are saying that they 

have consulted with municipalities, with building officials.  

Now I'm not sure if this means the new building officials that 

they're claiming in the Bill, the new titles, or if these are people 

who own and operate buildings, building designers, members 

of the construction industry and building owners, and the 

Saskatchewan Building and Accessibility Standards Appeal 

Board and their provincial staff. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if it's true that they have consulted with all 

these groups, they should be commended for it because that's a 

fairly large undertaking.  But, Mr. 



March 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 279 

Speaker, when we consider how the government has been 

consulting with other groups around this province, it makes one 

wonder whether or not they have actually gone out and talked 

with all of these groups or whether we're hearing their empty 

rhetoric again.  When you consider how well they have listened 

to SARM or to SUMA in regards to property taxes in the 

funding of health care, it makes you wonder whether or not 

they have talked to the municipalities about The Uniform 

Buildings and Accessibility Standards Act or whether they 

haven't.  If they won't talk to them about property taxation, how 

could they also claim that they have talked to them about this 

Act? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we really wonder whether or not the government 

is providing any consultation at all.  The Minister of Health has 

claimed that she has been consulting, and yet when we have 

people coming into this Assembly, sitting in the galleries and 

saying that they as parents of children at the Wascana Rehab 

Centre have not been consulted, that the minister in fact 

avoided meeting with them, we have serious doubts as to 

whether or not the government ministers are meeting with any 

of the groups that they are claiming to. 

 

Not only do we feel they are not consulting with the groups, 

but it seems that they are not returning the letters that they 

received or the phone calls. 

 

Another example of their consultation, or lack thereof, was in 

discussions concerning the changes to the health care in the last 

session.  The Saskatchewan Medical Association says they 

were not consulted with the government dealing with any of 

these changes, particularly with the changes to the chiropractic 

and optometric services, nor did the government consult with 

people when they tripled the prescription drug plan costs.  

Those costs went from $125 to $380 deductible per family in a 

year.  And yet the government is claiming that on this Bill they 

have gone out and consulted.  We just find it with great 

difficulty in believing that the government has indeed provided 

all this consultation that they have talked about. 

 

We have to wonder why the government wants to change the 

names of all the groups . . . not the groups, but the people 

involved in this Act.  What makes it so imperative to change 

the name of a building inspector to a building official?  Does 

that person have a different job because he has a different title?  

Is his function somehow different?  Are his qualifications 

different?  Mr. Speaker, I would suggest they are not but this is 

simply an attempt by the government to put their stamp on a 

piece of legislation rather than saying this Bill was in place 

before. 

 

Also in this Act, Mr. Speaker, the government is taking onto 

itself the power to designate persons as building officials.  

Those persons prior came through the public service and were 

hired and provided a service based on their qualifications.  

They met certain requirements.  But now the government is 

taking that power on themselves to appoint these people. 

They appoint them if they can demonstrate to a designated 

person that they have the qualifications.  Under the existing 

Act, they had to meet certain qualifications and be approved by 

the chief inspector.  But that no longer seems to be the case.  

Some other person, designated person, can fulfil that function. 

 

The deposit issue, I believe, is quite important in this Bill 

because it shows up in a number of places.  If you wish to file 

an appeal on a decision made by a building official, you have 

to pay the government to submit to an appeal process. 

 

(1930) 

 

I'm just wondering if the government is going to put this kind 

of fee in other pieces of legislation.  There are a number of 

pieces of legislation where appeal processes are available 

without a fee.  Yet in this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, the 

government is setting a fee, a deposit for appeal process.  Is 

this a new type of principle that the government is bringing 

forward, that if you wish to utilize the systems and protect 

yourself from an arbitrary ruling by government, you will have 

to pay to do so? 

 

Some of these deposits were fees previously and . . .  Some of 

these fees were . . . Some of these deposits were fees 

previously.  And, Mr. Speaker, they should remain as fees, if 

that's what the government wishes them to be.  If they are to be 

deposits, then the government should provide some sort of a 

mechanism in place for a return of that monies that are being 

asked for. 

 

In other part of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, it would seem that this 

Bill was written by a bureaucrat.  It was my understanding that 

the government was going to try to make Bills understandable, 

that they were going to be written in English that was easily 

understood.  In some parts of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, that is 

obviously not happening. 

 

Also in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, if a building owner was not to 

follow through with an order given to him by a building 

official, the building official and the local authority board has 

the power to go onto the property and to make whatever 

changes, rectify any problems they perceive on their own 

volition. 

 

I think the government needs to set out in here some form of 

mechanism by which the owner of the building is somehow 

protected.  If the official has a brother-in-law who is a 

carpenter he can designate that person, under this Act, to go in 

and make the repairs, the repairs of which the building owner 

has to pay.  This should be changed, Mr. Speaker, to allow 

tendering on this process.  These building officials with their 

orders should have to submit tenders, call for tenders to do the 

repair work and then be compelled to take the lowest bid rather 

than simply designating someone to fulfil that function. 

 

Another section of this Bill deals with taking a person to court 

because the building officials feel they are not 



280 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1993 

going to follow through with an order -- not because they 

haven't followed through with an order but because they feel 

they are not going to follow through with an order.  And I find 

it very difficult to believe that a court can find a person at fault 

because somebody else thought they were going to do 

something wrong before they have actually committed the 

grievous error.  That's another area I believe, Mr. Speaker, 

where the government needs to take another look at this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when an order is issued, the government is taking 

the power on to themselves to deem that the person who is sent 

an order has received that order when it is sent by registered 

mail.  The person may indeed never have received it.  He may 

not have been to his mail within the five-day period by which 

he is supposed to respond, and yet he is deemed to have 

received it and therefore is in violation of that order.  Again, 

Mr. Speaker, that's another area where the government should 

take a very serious look at this Bill. 

 

Because of these -- what I consider to be -- errors, Mr. Speaker, 

in this Bill, I believe the government needs time to take a look 

at it.  We need time to consider the implications of these issues.  

So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I move we adjourn debate on Bill 

8. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 9 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that  Bill No. 9 -- An Act to 

amend The Emergency Planning Act  be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 9 

has in our opinion a number of major problems, and we'd like 

to address them and make mention of them to the government 

members this evening.  

 

The technical portions of this Bill pose no problems in 

principle.  But, Mr. Speaker, the heart of this Bill, the disaster 

assistance provisions, give rise to serious concerns, Mr. 

Speaker.  What this Bill does, Mr. Speaker, is give the cabinet 

the power to establish an entire program of disaster assistance 

simply by cabinet order.  It confers sweeping power by the 

cabinet, Mr. Speaker, and of course I think the people of 

Saskatchewan would be concerned about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We believe however that the original intent of this Bill was 

good, and we commend the government for bringing a Bill like 

this forward.  We acknowledge that a better legal basis for 

emergency assistance needs to be put in place, and we believe 

this Bill was designed and drafted with that sincere intent. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when we see the Bill and go through the 

provisions of the Bill, the government has gone a long way 

overboard, we believe, in its desire to make sure that whatever 

it does will be covered off by sweeping cabinet powers.  Major 

programs of disaster 

assistance should be subject to some kind of scrutiny in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker.  We believe that's one of the 

fundamental principles of this Assembly . . . is that the MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) collectively have the 

opportunity to review and decide and look at things of this 

nature and see whether we believe that what's happening is 

indeed the correct position. 

 

At the same time, some such programs by their nature require 

immediate response and cannot wait for debate in the 

legislature, and we recognize that, Mr. Speaker.  Emergency 

measures, obviously when there's a disaster, they have to be 

implemented and implemented quickly. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we don't believe that the government's 

knee-jerk reaction to simply increase the wide and near total 

power of the cabinet . . . What is needed is some creative ideas 

to see how we can balance these competing needs, Mr. 

Speaker.  And there are the need for legislative accountability 

and indeed input, along with the need for immediate response 

in genuine emergencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, both principles, we believe, can be upheld, but 

I'm afraid that the principles of this Bill are such that it is 

almost impossible . . . almost beyond the possibility of 

amending it to any kind of reasonable form, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It appears on first examination of this whole Bill it will have to 

be thrown out and a new one introduced -- so serious are the 

deficiencies we believe are in this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we think there were choices that the government 

could have made about this rather than the choice that they did 

make, and the Bill does not address those kinds of choices that 

were available to the government.  And I wish the government 

would start considering these kinds of new approaches and new 

ideas instead of claiming they have no choice and resorting to 

secret cabinet power at all times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for example the principle of this Bill could 

include . . . could indeed recognize the balance of needs if it 

were to explicitly provide different categories of disaster.  And 

what I'm speaking about, Mr. Speaker, is a natural disaster 

involving tornadoes, fires.  Things of that nature require 

immediate action, and we don't dispute that whatsoever.  When 

something like that happens, the government has to act and act 

quick to stop any further damage that may result from 

something like that. 

 

And we think that that could be defined in the Bill -- things of 

that kind of disaster.  A natural type disaster could be 

addressed in the Bill in one category and require immediate 

action that the cabinet could take, and everyone would uphold, 

I'm sure, that principle of government. 

 

Another category could be defined into the law to support the 

principle of a balance.  A category that defining disasters of a 

protracted nature but which pose no immediate or imminent 

danger to people or 



March 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 281 

property.  And programs covering this . . . that category or 

disaster could be . . . require approval by motion in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker.  The principles could be upheld even 

by more type of this innovative type of thinking. 

 

For example, it is completely practical to say that a cabinet 

order establishing a disaster program does not come into effect 

until after consideration by a standing committee of this 

Assembly.  This Bill could even include pre-emptive 

provisions to assure rapid consideration by such a committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can envision a provision that says, unless 

otherwise directed by a committee of the legislature, the 

cabinet order will take effect five days after the order has been 

submitted to the committee.  And there are all kinds of other 

possibilities that could have been looked at by the government, 

Mr. Speaker, that I think have been overlooked. 

 

My point is simply that we should not meekly allow this 

government to take on ever increasing powers by itself.  We 

should simply not sit back and take for granted that the Premier 

had no other choices, because we believe -- and we think that a 

lot other people believe -- that there were other choices that 

could have been looked at.  He has plenty . . . the Premier has 

plenty of choices and I don't believe he looked at them.  Nor do 

I believe that he consulted with very many people about this. 

 

This Bill is based on the principle that the cabinet which meets 

in secret, debates in secret, supposedly consults, Mr. Speaker, 

but we've seen through the legislature here in the past year and 

a half that they don't consult on very many things whatsoever.  

They go in simply and say to whomever they're speaking with, 

this is the way it's going to be, and then they consider that 

consultation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The cabinet makes its decision in secret.  But the secret cabinet 

is always the best and the only choice to address the needs of 

the Saskatchewan people. That is the principle of this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, and we don't believe that that's a correct principle.  

We think it is a wrong-headed principle that the government 

should address. The people of Saskatchewan, I don't believe, 

would support this type of thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This Assembly has within it, skill, creativity and the 

get-up-and-go to get the job done, and that means representing 

the people that they were elected to represent.  We, in this 

Assembly, not only have the necessary talents to be a check on 

the secret cabinet, we also have a constitutional duty to contain 

the cabinet. 

 

It's a little strange when you think about it, Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier has a huge majority in this Assembly, a massive 

unstoppable majority, Mr. Speaker, yet it is clear, it is clear, 

Mr. Speaker, that he does not even trust his own back-benchers 

to use their own judgement and skills and knowledge and to 

serve as an effective role in this system of government.  Even 

with all of the NDP members, Mr. Speaker, he still 

continues to sap power from this legislature and concentrates it 

in the hands of cabinet -- an ever-expanding cabinet, I might 

add, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well I will surprise you, Mr. Speaker, by saying that I trust the 

member from Yorkton or the member from Nipawin to sit on a 

committee of this Assembly and pass judgement on a disaster 

assistance program, for example, for the livestock industry 

during a drought.  I support them in that.  I trust them in that.  I 

trust the members more than I trust the Premier however. 

 

I trust the member, Mr. Speaker, from Regina Victoria to sit 

and responsibly consider a program of disaster assistance 

should the city of Regina be engulfed in a massive spruce bud 

worm infestation.  I trust that member to do that, Mr. Speaker, 

but the Premier of Saskatchewan obviously does not trust him. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill goes way too far in removing 

the rights, duties, and constitutional role of the members of this 

legislature even if it did start out with the best of intentions.  

Can the member from Eastview-Haultain be trusted to quickly 

come to a decision regarding disaster assistance, Mr. Speaker?  

Well I think he can.  I think he can, but unfortunately the 

Premier of the province does not think so.  He wants to have all 

of these types of disaster-type provisions only seen by cabinet, 

only decided upon cabinet. And yet he has members with not a 

whole lot to do that I think should be sitting on committees of 

this nature, a special committee on disasters. 

 

Can the member from Albert South be trusted to provide 

valuable advice and input on basic decisions regarding such 

urgent matters?  Well I think he can, Mr. Speaker.  I think he 

can be trusted to do that.  Mr. Speaker, I would think that the 

huge number of members on the government side would get a 

little frustrated at the fact that their own leader has so little faith 

in them that he must continually put more and more power into 

the hands of cabinet and never think twice about the beneficial 

work that the MLAs themselves might be able to do. 

 

The Bill expresses that attitude, Mr. Speaker, in spades.  This 

Bill does.  I ask the government to withdraw this Bill for those 

very positive reasons.  I ask that the Bill be withdrawn so that 

we can devise a new Bill which will respect this Assembly and 

its purposes.  I ask that the Bill be withdrawn, Mr. Speaker, in 

the name of all MLAs. 

 

(1945) 

 

This government and the Premier talks a great deal about 

reform and about commitment to the parliamentary process.  

The Premier talks and talks about reform and commitment, Mr. 

Speaker, but what he does is centralize power, erode the role of 

this Assembly, and in fact move in a direction exactly opposite 

that was expressed so high mindedly in his words. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask this government to withdraw this Bill and 

avail itself to the great opportunity to actually 



282 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1993 

put into practice what comes out of the mouth of the Premier.  

Mr. Speaker, in order to give the government some opportunity 

to take into consideration the arguments we've presented here 

tonight, I would like to move that we adjourn debate on this 

Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Indeed, 

I would like to introduce my officials.  Behind me and to my 

right is Paul Robinson, the executive director of the Wascana 

Centre Authority.  And immediately to my right is assistant 

director . . . John Edwards, assistant director of financial 

assistance services and policy division, Department of 

Community Services. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, we 

don't have a lot of questions on this Bill, however we do have a 

couple we would like to bring to the minister's attention. 

 

First of all -- and I'll give the minister a couple of questions -- 

we're just wondering, number one, the elements of this Bill, has 

the Wascana Authority been consulted regarding the Bill?  And 

is the Wascana Authority in agreement with regards to the 

details of the Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, as I indicated in my remarks, 

the Wascana Authority has been consulted.  Two of the 

amendments are actually at the initiation of the Authority and 

the Wascana Authority has, at a meeting of the board, approved 

and agreed to proceed with these amendments. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, a group has been trying to put a statue into Wascana 

Park dealing with the World War I or World War II veterans.  

In this Act you are changing some of the requirements from 

construction to reconstruction.  Would this be part of that 

attempt? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No.  In response to the question, 

Mr. Chairman, this legislation would have no impact on that at 

all.  But I am informed that that project has already been 

approved by the Authority so, Bill or not, that's on the way. 

And it's only a matter of the principals raising some money that 

they need to raise in order to be able to put it into place. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.  I'd just like to 

thank the minister and his officials for taking the 

time to come and address the two questions.  I know they were 

simple and short and straightforward, but when a minister 

brings a Bill that's fairly straightforward it certainly makes it a 

lot easier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I also 

want to thank the officials and thank members of the 

opposition for their interest.  And I don't think the questions 

were simple at all.  They were significant and important. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill should 

be read a third time now and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 7:55 p.m. 

 


