


















































Hansard: May 20, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1845 

 May 20, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 

Clerk Assistant: -- Mr. Solomon, chair of the Standing 

Committee on Crown Corporations, presents the third report of 

the committee as follows: 

 

Pursuant to an order of the Assembly dated May 4, 1993, 

your committee reports Bill No. 42, An Act respecting the 

Creation and Supervision of certain Crown Corporations, 

with amendment. 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At the end of my 

remarks I'll be moving the following: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

Corporations be now concurred in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

has completed clause-by-clause review of Bill 42, An Act 

respecting the Creation and Supervision of certain Crown 

Corporations.  Referral of Bills by the legislature to our 

committee has only happened once or twice in our committee's 

48-year history, so this has been somewhat of an historical 

event in the committee's history. 

 

Our committee, Mr. Speaker, operated in process close to the 

process and procedures of the Committee of the Whole, with 

one distinction, and that distinction is that witnesses were 

invited by our committee to provide legal, financial, and 

technical information for our committee to consider during its 

deliberations of Bill 42. 

 

Our deliberations focused on the Bill, its principles, its 

objectives, its content, and on other matters pertaining to the 

Crown sector and the government.  Our committee encouraged 

and allowed any and all questions put by members and 

witnesses while trying to avoid as much as possible debates 

between non-elected witnesses.  This procedure seemed to 

work well. 

 

Our committee considered 26 different amendments and 

incorporated 13 of them into changes in Bill 42.  We 

deliberated for about seven hours over a four-day period of 

meetings. 

 

On behalf of my committee I'd like to extend our appreciation 

to the minister and his Crown Investments Corporation officials 

and our appreciation to the Provincial Auditor and his officials 

for their cooperation and input, also a personal thank you to the 

Clerk, Mr. Putz, the Law Clerk, Mr. Cosman, and to members 

of the committee for their cooperation and input. 

I move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 

Idylwyld, that the third report of the Standing Committee on 

Crown Corporations be now concurred in. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, in your gallery there are a 

group of six students I'd like to introduce to you and through 

you to the members.  They are members of the social studies 

class at Balfour Collegiate in Regina.  They are accompanied 

here today by Mrs. Pauline MacDonald, their teacher.  I 

understand that after the question period that they will be 

touring the building, and it will be my privilege to join them 

afterwards for a visit. 

 

I would ask all the members to join with me to welcome them 

here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In the west 

gallery we have 37 grade 6 and 7 students from St. Mark 

School in my constituency in Saskatoon.  They are 

accompanied today by their teachers, Mr. Hudy and Mr. 

Schurman.  My colleague, the member from Saskatoon 

Idylwyld, will be meeting with the students after question 

period to answer their questions and to have a photograph 

taken.  But I would like the members of the legislature to 

welcome these students from St. Mark School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, a class of 41 grade 5 students seated in the west 

gallery from the Langenburg High School, which is a school 

out of the Potashville School Division -- one of the best 

divisions in the province, I might add.  The students have come 

in this morning to make several visits in Regina, this being one 

of their stops. 

 

I will be meeting with them for photos and for drinks following 

the question period, and to also answer some questions for 

them, hopefully.  I would also particularly like to welcome 

their teachers, Mrs. Okrainetz and Mr. Haczkewicz, who are 

here, and also their bus driver, Mr. Severin, who is here with 

them. 

 

I'd like you to welcome them and wish them a safe trip home 

after their journey to Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would 

like to introduce to you and through you, approximately 26 

grade 8 students from Argyle School in Regina who are seated 

in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and who will be touring the 

building later on 



1846 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1993 

today and having their picture taken and some drinks. 

 

They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Wayne Wilson, 

and I would ask the members of the legislature to join me in 

welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly, 

representatives of the Saskatoon Fire Fighters Union Local 80 

of the International Association of Fire Fighters.  They've been 

here for a provincial fire-fighters' convention which concluded 

today. 

 

They are Dave Rumpel, the president; Andy Sharpe, the 

vice-president; Dick Hildebrandt the trustee; and Leo Barrett, 

the secretary.  And I've had the pleasure to work with these 

gentlemen over the course of the last 10 years on a number of 

concerns.  And I want to say that their members provide us 

with protection of our lives and property on a daily basis. 

 

And I know all members will want to join with me in 

welcoming them and wishing them a good journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Economic Summit 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is to the Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, a couple of weeks ago, the Saskatchewan business 

community expressed some concerns with the direction your 

government has taken in regards to economic development and 

job creation.  And even though they have felt that you've taken 

some wrong turns, they were quite willing to sit down and offer 

some proposals on how to get the Saskatchewan economy back 

on track. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Premier, at the time you simply stood in 

your place and said that they didn't represent the business 

community in the province and you brushed them off.  Well, 

Mr. Premier, that brush-off has resulted in the Saskatchewan 

business coalition having no choice but to start a public 

campaign today to express their views to the public because 

you would not listen to them. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, would you now consider sitting down and 

having a public meeting with the people of the business 

community of this province who are very concerned about the 

direction your province is taking?  Would you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 

to the hon. member opposite that we're always willing to sit 

down with business.  I had the 

opportunity on Tuesday night of this week to have dinner for a 

couple of hours with the new president of the chamber of 

commerce, Mr. Mel Watson, and it was an excellent meeting -- 

positive -- which, when we left each other, along with my 

deputy minister, there was agreement to work together and 

cooperate.  And so at every opportunity we meet with business 

people, as well a government should. 

 

I want to say to the members opposite though that while they 

continue to preach gloom and doom, Price Club, a national 

company, has announced the construction of a new facility here 

in Regina, which will employ 150 new employees.  And I mean 

you can take the worst case scenario or you can work with the 

business community in trying to create a better atmosphere.  

But your continuous attempts to undermine partnership and 

cooperation, leads me only to believe that your questions are 

politically motivated as opposed to the best interest of the 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm going to 

address my question to the Premier again because what the 

business people of the province are saying is that they aren't 

having much success talking to the ministers of this 

government.  What they want to talk to is the head man, the 

guy in charge, the guy that campaigned for the job, the Premier 

of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Premier, the business coalition is saying that your 

government needs to act on the stated commitment to create a 

positive regulatory and taxation environment which will create 

jobs.  And they're afraid that your seemingly new agenda, this 

preoccupation with your labour agenda, in fact is chasing jobs 

and investment away from the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Premier, they cite the workmens' compensation 

legislation, the occupational health and safety legislation, your 

union preference in government contracting, increases to 

government employees, and other initiatives by your 

government, Mr. Premier, that are chasing jobs away. 

 

And I think that is a very good question that they're asking you, 

Mr. Premier.  How do any of these initiatives create jobs in the 

province of Saskatchewan?  How do they do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to make 

it clear to the member opposite that the removal of the 

provincial sales tax on 1-800 numbers was the very reason that 

Sears Canada moved to Saskatchewan with 900 jobs.  And with 

that removal, other companies are looking at the province as a 

good place to do business. 

 

I say clearly to the members opposite, in working with the 

business community on legislation before the House, we have 

had many opportunities to meet with 



May 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1847 

them.  And one of the main reasons for meeting with the new 

president of the chamber of commerce was to discuss with him 

potential amendments that they would want to look at or 

propose to the government or to the opposition. 

 

And we're willing to sit down and talk to them at any time, as 

we always do.  The Premier and other ministers meet often 

with business people in Regina, Saskatoon, around the 

province, and we will intend to continue those kind of 

dialogues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- You see, Mr. Premier, it's your minister's 

attitude of don't worry, be happy, everything's fine, is the 

reason that people in the business community want to talk to 

you, sir. 

 

Mr. Premier, from April 1, 1991 to April 1, 1993 we've lost 

11,000 jobs in the province of Saskatchewan.  Mr. Premier, that 

is equivalent to the entire population of Estevan that your 

government has put out of work. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, before any new measures take place, the 

business coalition is saying that we've got a problem here, a 

problem that has to be addressed.  We've got to get some jobs 

created.  We've got to stop driving jobs away, and that we have 

to have a true consultative process here, Mr. Premier.  And 

they're saying you appear to be the only one that can drive that 

consultative process.  Mr. Premier, won't you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that the job numbers in Saskatchewan 

actually increased the number of people working -- increased 

by 5,000 between March and April of this year -- and he should 

be a little bit more careful in getting his numbers accurate. 

 

But I want to say to you that in terms of working with business 

people, I say that the very reason that they were reduced to a 

rump of a political party in opposition was because business 

people were sick and tired of the huge deals, the megaprojects 

where hundreds of millions of dollars were pumped into special 

deals made with special friends.  And that's the very reason you 

sit on the other side, is because business ganged up on you 

before the last election and turfed you out for your antics in 

dealing with business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's that very 

answer that has the business community in this province upset, 

Mr. Premier.  Your minister just quoted a number that simply is 

erroneous.  I have the very same sheet here, the labour force 

statistics.  What he's talking about is the labour force size.  

Labour force includes both employed and unemployed. 

 

What it says, Mr. Premier, is that there are 2,000 more 

people unemployed than a year ago.  Those are included in the 

numbers.  Your minister is mixing and matching.  That is why 

the business community are saying to you, before you impose 

changes, Mr. Premier, that will amount to $200 million 

possibly in a payroll tax, that you will jeopardize the best 

workmens' comp system in Canada; that you need to sit down 

and talk to some people who want to create more jobs in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Premier, stand and tell me how an increase, a payroll tax 

that could go as high as $200 million, tell me how that can 

increase the number of jobs in the province of Saskatchewan.  

Would you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

-- if it weren't so sad it would be funny -- in his use of statistics, 

I want to say to the member opposite that the only province 

near Saskatchewan that has a payroll tax is good old Tory 

Manitoba.  And you know that full well. 

 

And I want to say to you that obviously the reduction in the 

small business tax from 10 per cent announced to be down to 8 

per cent next year, has increased the number of people looking 

at Saskatchewan as a good place to do business.  In fact when 

Sears was making the decision as to whether to move to 

Winnipeg or to Regina, it was the tax structure and the work 

ethic and the lack of a payroll tax in Saskatchewan that enticed 

them to move to Saskatchewan. 

 

So I want to make it clear to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the 

members opposite, that with housing starts up considerably in 

the province, with consumer spending up over last year, with 

the number of people working in the agricultural sector up by 

5,000 this spring over last, there are many things to be 

optimistic about. 

 

But if members opposite want to be consumed by gloom and 

doom, then they will be doomed to spending the rest of their 

lives on the benches of the opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Premier, 

I wonder if Sears asked this question.  They're wondering how 

a sweeping, arbitrary and excessive regulatory power you're 

creating under Occupational Health & Safety that is going to 

create one of the most powerful bureaucracies in the history of 

this province, a bureaucracy with greater powers of search and 

seizure than the police force have, a bureaucracy with the 

power to arbitrarily shut down entire work sites, a bureaucracy 

that the business coalition says will not reduce accidents, will 

only promote confrontation . . . Did you tell Sears, Mr. Premier, 

that you were going to create that bureaucracy when they were 

going to move to the province of Saskatchewan -- a 

bureaucracy that won't create any more jobs and won't improve 

safety on the job -- did you tell them that, Mr. Premier? 



1848 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1993 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that if he believes that sacrificing the safety 

of workers is their strategy for job creation in this province, 

then it is no wonder that the people reject that party when it 

comes to looking at what will make people come to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The simple fact is, to the hon. 

member, that when people are looking at Saskatchewan as a 

place to build a company, the workers' safety is one of the big 

advantages that they see in Saskatchewan because it has been 

properly funded over the years. 

 

So I say to you, Mr. Member, if you expect our government to 

base its economic development and new jobs on reducing 

safety levels for employees, that is not the way we're going to 

be moving in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wonder if the 

Premier also told them that there would be a new, union-only 

tendering policy for all government contracts over $150,000.  

Did you also tell them, Mr. Premier, in this time of fiscal 

restraint, how this new government policy is going to help the 

government maintain the bottom line? 

 

I wonder, Mr. Premier, could you give us the figure that this 

additional cost to taxpayers is going to have on the entire cost 

of government for the next year?  Could you tell us what this 

policy of government tendering over $150,000 to union-only 

contracting, what is the extra cost to the Government of 

Saskatchewan?  And you could maybe tell that to the business 

coalition while you're at it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, we are now back to 

where the member for Kindersley left off, and I'm not sure why 

the shuffle from the back bench to the front bench, but 

obviously trying to elevate an issue that was fading yesterday. 

 

But I want to say that when all else fails in their questioning, 

they go back to: has your government got a union-only policy?  

I just say to you one more time: no, we don't.  And in the last 

month SaskPower has awarded contracts in excess of $4 

million to non-union contractors. 

 

So obviously we have a policy that is mixed, the same as your 

government had, the same as the government in the 1970s, that 

of course we are going to have union contractors doing 

business in the province.  Is it your policy that you would have 

no unions and no union contracts?  Of course not. 

 

And so clearly to the member opposite, our policy is is that 

there will be a mix, some non-union, some union, 

and that is no change from what has gone on in the province in 

the past. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

we now have a choice.  We have a choice here in the province 

of Saskatchewan.  The figures put forward by the chamber of 

commerce, the construction association, the home builders' 

association, the Retail Council of Canada, the implement 

manufacturers association, CFIB (Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business), and the association of petroleum 

producers says this could increase cost by at least 35 per cent. 

 

Now can we believe all of the aforementioned folks, or do we 

just simply believe the captain of industry from Saskatoon 

Riversdale and his Minister of  Economic Development.  I'm 

afraid most people in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, would defer to the aforementioned list of individuals 

who've had a long practice at bidding government contracts, 

and not the two ministers who like to tell us one thing, but do 

another. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, please tell the House the total value of 

government contracts that will be awarded under a union-only 

policy so we can calculate for ourselves how much extra this 

policy is going to cost Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, we will certainly be able to 

tell you in Public Accounts how tenders were awarded, but to 

tell you today how we're going to award over the next 12 

months and what the total will be, union and non-union, is 

ridiculous as the member well knows.  That's not how it's done. 

 

Obviously we will be working with contractors to see that the 

mix that we have had in Saskatchewan under your 

administration, under our previous administration, is continued 

and strengthened in the best interest of contractors, workers, 

and the taxpayers of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well before the last 

election when the Premier, the member from Riversdale, was 

opposition leader and he was having breakfast in Saskatoon on 

a regular basis with people in the business community, he said 

that -- and this was the stated position of the member then -- 

tendered government contracts should go to the lowest 

qualified bidder. 

 

That seems like a fairly sound position, I guess, Mr. Speaker, 

when you're having breakfast with business people in 

Saskatoon on a regular basis.  And I'm wondering, given that 

80 per cent of the construction industry in this province is made 

up of small, non-union firms, that why all of a sudden now -- 

and I pose this question to the Premier -- why now that the 



May 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1849 

majority of these firms should be excluded from government 

contracts simply because they've made the decision not to 

unionize? 

 

That's the question, Mr. Premier, that the business community 

that you courted so long and hard a short two years ago wants 

to know.  Saskatchewan taxpayers want to know.  Why are you 

changing that policy now, Mr. Premier, now that you are in 

government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to indicate to the hon. 

member opposite that there has been no change.  We have a 

policy that allows for union contractors to bid and non-union 

contractors to bid.  Some will go to union contractors as they 

did under your administration.  And I don't know how many 

times we're going to go over this, but obviously the real issues 

in Saskatchewan, like agriculture and some of the other issues 

that are obviously on the top of minds of people, simply fly by 

these people. 

 

But I'll keep answering.  Our policy is one that will allow for 

union contractors to work in the province, non-union 

contractors to work in the province.  We believe that's best for 

working people, best for contractors, and best for the taxpayers 

in the long run. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The reason we keep 

coming back to it, Mr. Speaker, is because people all around 

the province and the taxpayers of this province are asking us to.  

They're tired of the contradiction which we hear from the 

government all the time.  When the Premier was asked the 

other day to explain this policy, he said that non-union 

contractors are not capable of doing the work on most large 

construction contracts.  Well, Mr. Premier, the president of the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association says that's simply not 

true.  That's why we have to ask these questions in here, sir. 

 

So before you make sweeping statements like that, why don't 

you ask somebody that actually works in the industry before 

you make those statements.  That's why once again I say to 

you, Mr. Premier, people in the business community are 

looking to have a meeting with you to sit down face to face to 

explain some of these situations that seem to be contradictions 

in every sense of the word. 

 

Mr. Premier, once again: why don't you take the opportunity to 

sit down with people as you did in opposition and have a 

face-to-face meeting and discuss these issues to get our 

economy back on track?  Do that, Mr. Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 

to the hon. member opposite that the Premier has never turned 

down an offer to meet and has actually encouraged meetings.  I 

say to the members 

opposite though when it comes to union, non-union 

contracting, I don't know of any province in Saskatchewan . . . 

any province whether it's Conservative, Liberal, New 

Democrat, any province in Canada where they have a policy 

that excludes union contracting.  I don't know of any province 

in Canada. 

 

And if this is what you're advocating, then stand and say it.  It 

certainly wasn't your policy when you were in government.  If 

you've changed your mind on that, I challenge you, sir, to stand 

in the House and say the policy of the Conservative Party and 

caucus is to have only non-union doing contracts in the 

province.  If that's the new policy, then let's spit it out and get 

on with it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Premier, the policy for all political parties 

in this province should be that on government tendered 

contracts the lowest tender, the tender that is most acceptable to 

the taxpayer, should be the one that's accepted.  That's the 

policy.  That's the policy, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I think the members 

ought to give the Leader of the Opposition the courtesy to ask 

his question. 

 

Order, order.  I'll ask the Premier to please come to order.  

Order. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, why 

don't you save the membership of nine business organizations 

thousands of money . . . thousands of dollars which they would 

rather put into job creation, hiring new employees, building 

new businesses, creating new wealth in this province, rather 

than having to take public advertisements out against your 

government, Mr. Premier.  Why don't you simply save their 

membership, their employees, this money, and sit down in a 

face-to-face meeting and start to straighten our economy out 

instead of being always, always so high-handed, Mr. Premier. 

 

I give you one last chance today, Mr. Premier, say it.  Say it.  

Will you sit down face to face with these people and have a 

meaningful meeting, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- We see, Mr. Speaker . . . I want to 

say to the member opposite that the last chance at the OK 

corral which didn't work when the member from Kindersley 

threw it out, is now being offered up by the member from 

Thunder Creek. 

 

I want to say to the member opposite that clearly, clearly the 

biggest single problem facing economic development in this 

province is the $15 billion debt that was left by the previous 

government . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They don't believe you any 



1850 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1993 

more. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well they do.  Jeff Simpson from 

The Globe and Mail referred to your government as the worst 

government in the history of Canada.  That's how they referred 

to your government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Now we are trying to manage our 

way out of that mess.  It is not perfect; I can agree with you on 

that.  But what I can say is that we are doing what is in the best 

interest of working people, business, and the taxpayers, and of 

that I am absolutely sure. 

 

And for you to say that you are going to do a better job or 

somehow you have a licence that says you know how to do 

economic development flies in the face of all of the evidence 

that everyone now in Canada knows.  And I would if I were 

you back off of this issue and maybe go back to some of the 

more important issues that people are asking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ministerial Assistants' Salaries 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, since elected you've raised every 

tax, every rate and fee that exists in this province.  In some 

instance you've even done it two or three times . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, he's already arrogant and I 

haven't even asked the question yet. 

 

Each and every time you impose these increased costs on 

Saskatchewan people you state that we all have to tighten our 

belts.  You say that we all have to make sacrifices.  And we 

agree, Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier.  And you'd never fail to 

mention that the province is broke and that now is the time for 

restraint. 

 

If this is the case, Mr. Premier, why are the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) hacks receiving huge salary increases?  How 

do you justify this double standard?  Why should 

Saskatchewan people be asked to pay more taxes and receive 

less services just so that you can give big raises to your 

political hacks? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd be pleased to 

respond to the member opposite who seems to be following in 

the same footsteps as the member from Kindersley and the 

member from Thunder Creek, and that is to misstate what the 

real facts are. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the facts are this:  that there have been no 

increases to any of the ministerial assistants in ministers' 

offices in existing positions.  The only places in which 

ministerial assistants have received any increases in pay is if 

they have changed their responsibilities or moved into different 

positions from where they were before. 

Now that is far different, Mr. Speaker, that is far different than 

what existed under the policies of the former government, 

where they did not have a system where people who worked in 

ministers' offices or the government worked in different 

classifications and therefore everybody understood where they 

were and where they should be paid from. 

 

So for the member opposite to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that 

somehow there have been increases in salaries for people who 

worked for ministers and the Government of Saskatchewan is 

absolutely erroneous.  Their only increase is if a person has 

moved into a new position, a position of higher pay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, another question to the 

Premier.  It is evident that belt-tightening does not apply to 

members of many of your ministers' staff, and they are 

receiving pay raises.  For example, as a matter of fact your 

hacks have received a sizeable increase and one of them is 

under the Minister of Education.  Michele Wilde received a 

2,000 hike in her salary. 

 

And the other one -- there's going to be a double question, Mr. 

Speaker, if I have your permission -- and the other one is the 

Minister of Environment. Joanne Buhr, she received an OC 

(order in council) that give her another $561 on her pay cheque.  

Some people only get $500 total salary, total pay cheque in this 

province. 

 

And the third one actually is Gail Russell under the minister 

responsible for Municipal Government.  She's had a 46 per cent 

raise -- $12,000 a year.  How do you get these double 

standards? 

 

Don't sit there and be sanctimonious to us and then say, Mr. 

Minister, that . . . Mr. Speaker, don't say to us, Mr. Deputy 

Premier, that it's all right to cut back on everything that you 

promised you wouldn't do -- right from the farmers to the 

hospitals to the nurses, everybody -- and then have your double 

standards. 

 

Can you do something about this and roll back these salaries, 

Mr. Deputy Premier, or Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, let me respond to the 

member from Arm River.  Once again, I will use the example 

of one person who he has mentioned, Joanne Buhr, and it 

applies in the same way to each of the other individuals. 

 

Here is an individual who is unable to defend herself, because 

she is not a member of this legislature, who the member tries to 

malign in the way that he does.  What happened to Ms. Buhr, 

Ms. Buhr, is that she was promoted from a junior to an 

intermediate MA (ministerial assistant) because that position 

became vacant.  So she was moved to a different position of 

employment. 

 

But the point that also needs to be made, Mr. Speaker, 



May 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1851 

is that all of this is disclosed and is open and is made public 

and is put on the public record so that the public can know, far 

different than what happened under the former administration.  

For example, the member from Morse, who used to be a 

cabinet minister, Agricultural Credit Corporation, who the 

Provincial Auditor has reported in this special report, paid four 

people $28,000 but did not know the services that these 

employees provided for the corporations. 

 

Another example from the member from Morse: payments 

made to the people not working for their organizations, 

Department of Agriculture and Food, nine people, $537,888.  

Now that is the difference between open and accountable 

government and what used to exist here prior to 1991. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I would 

like to ask permission to correct something in Hansard.  Mr. 

Speaker, with leave I believe or with your permission or both, I 

would like to correct something I said during the presenting 

reports by standing, select and special committees -- just a 

correction for Hansard, one very brief correction if I may. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

BEFORE ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you very much, members, and Mr. 

Speaker.  I had moved my motion, seconded by the member 

from Idylwyld.  I meant to say the member from Wildwood.  

So I want that correction for Hansard if possible. 

 

So my motion was moved, and seconded by the member from 

Wildwood.  Thank you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 79 -- An Act to Provide for the Division of 

Saskatchewan into Constituencies for the Election of 

Members of the Legislative Assembly 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 

move second reading of The Constituency Boundaries Act, 

1993. 

 

During our period in office, Mr. Speaker, since the election in 

1991, which is a period of slightly more than one and a half 

years, all of our ministers and members have heard over and 

over again from the Saskatchewan people that our government 

here in Saskatchewan is too large.  They tell us that 66 

members are too many considering the size of the province.  

We've heard this everywhere, from 

individuals and groups representing every point on the political 

and economic spectrum of the province.  We have all heard this 

point of view stated repeatedly, and the argument is made all 

the more compelling by the difficult fiscal situation in which 

we find ourselves. 

 

The government has decided that it must respond and does so 

by presenting this Bill for the consideration of this Assembly. 

 

We take this step now even though only one election has been 

held on the current electoral map.  We believe, however, that 

we cannot wait before acting on the public's view that this 

province has too much government. 

 

And it has, Mr. Speaker.  Compared to other provinces, this 

Legislative Assembly is too large.  There are now 66 of us 

representing 666,000 voters, an average constituency size of 

just in excess of 10,000.  Just next door in Manitoba, with a 

population larger than ours, there are 57 members.  They 

represent an average of 12,500 voters.  Our other neighbour, 

Alberta, has 83 members who represent 1.55 million voters.  

Alberta's average constituency size is 18,685.  And if you look 

further afield, Mr. Speaker, you find British Columbia with 75 

members, each representing an average of 25,500 voters, while 

Ontario, with 130 members, each represent an average of 

48,584 members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these numbers very eloquently support the 

argument made by Saskatchewan people that the Saskatchewan 

government is too big.  And we have responded in this Bill that 

is before the Assembly today by reducing the size of this 

Assembly from 66 members to 58 members. 

 

This is a significant reduction, Mr. Speaker.  In percentage 

terms it is a reduction of 12 per cent.  The cost savings to the 

government will be over $1 million per year, each and every 

year, and that will be ongoing. 

 

This reduction in the number of seats will increase the average 

size that we members represent from 9,975 to approximately 

11,400, which is still a comfortable number for the members of 

this Assembly to effectively represent and which compares 

very favourably to the numbers represented by our colleagues 

in the other provinces that I mentioned. 

 

It's interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that this is the first time 

since the Great Depression that the number of seats in the 

Legislative Assembly has been reduced and will result in the 

lowest number of members in this Assembly since 1964. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we are to reduce the number of seats as we are 

proposing to do, we obviously must have new boundaries.  The 

drawing of new boundaries has always been an controversial 

subject.  Historically it has been surrounded by a good deal of 

suspicion, suspicion that the government of the day may take 

advantage of its position as government to draw a map that will 

favour its chances of re-election. 



1852 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1993 

Over 20 years ago the government of then Premier Allan 

Blakeney, in order to overcome this suspicion, introduced into 

this province the idea of an independent commission whose 

task it would be to produce a new electoral map. 

 

To a greater or lesser degree, this idea has been followed in 

subsequent  redistributions.  That is very much the case with 

this Bill.  The government has carefully considered all of the 

models that have been used in this province and elsewhere in 

this country, and in this Bill we propose a commission which 

will be truly independent of political influence and beyond 

reproach. 

 

The boundaries commission will consist of three members.  

The chairperson will be nominated by the Chief Justice of 

Saskatchewan.  The person he nominates may be a judge of the 

Court of Queen's Bench, a judge of the Court of Appeal, or if 

he wishes another resident of Saskatchewan. 

 

Two additional members of the commission will be appointed 

following consultation between the government, the Leader of 

the Opposition, and the Leader of the Liberal Party. 

 

I have already spoken with and written to the Leader of the 

Opposition and to the member from Saskatoon Greystone and 

asked them to submit potential nominees to the commission.  

And I am confident that we will be able to agree on these 

remaining two members, hopefully before this Bill has passed 

this legislature. 

 

The first commission is to be struck within 30 days upon the 

proclamation of the Act.  Thereafter, future commissions will 

be struck within 30 days following the receipt by the Clerk of 

the Executive Council of the official results of the five-year 

census.  It is the duty of the commission to prepare both an 

interim and final report making recommendations respecting 

the province's constituency boundaries. 

 

(1445) 

 

The commission has been given the express legislative freedom 

to make its own rules to regulate its proceedings and conduct 

its business.  This includes an ability to hold hearings at such 

times and places that the commission considers appropriate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the commission, once struck, will have three 

months after it has been established to prepare an interim 

report.  This interim report will be filed with the Clerk of the 

Executive Council and published in the Gazette and one or 

more newspapers to ensure public input into the work of the 

commission. 

 

Once again, the commission may hold such hearings as it 

deems necessary to hear presentations with respect to its 

interim report.  Once hearings and representations with respect 

to the interim report have taken place, the commission shall, 

within a further three-month period, complete its final report 

and present that report to the Speaker, to you, Mr. Speaker, 

for the adoption by this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through a process whereby the commission is left 

to operate with a minimum of obstruction, this legislation will 

allow it to establish constituency boundaries in a manner which 

will deserve the full confidence of all the Saskatchewan people. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, this Act has removed all legislative 

reference to a predetermined number of rural or urban 

constituencies.  This government believes, Mr. Speaker, that 

Saskatchewan is a single community of interests.  Nothing is to 

be gained from making the distinction between rural and urban 

constituencies. 

 

I believe it is true that the majority of Saskatchewan citizens 

come from a rural background where they or their parents were 

either born or raised on a farm or in a small town.  Looking at 

our own caucus in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, 41 out of the 

55 members on the government side of this Assembly come 

from rural and small-town backgrounds.  I myself, Mr. 

Speaker, represent an urban constituency of Saskatoon 

Fairview but my roots are in a farm at Sturgis where I was born 

and raised.  And so it is with many of our so-called urban 

members. 

 

Rural and urban people share the same interests in this 

province, Mr. Speaker.  We must all work together with a 

singularity of purpose.  That is the Saskatchewan way.  As I 

have said many times before, in these difficult times we're all in 

the same boat; we will sail together or we will sink together.  

This is no time to try to perpetuate the myth that there are 

fundamental issues dividing us, dividing rural from urban 

Saskatchewan.  It has never been true in the past, and it is not 

true now. 

 

The boundaries commission established by this Act will set 

boundaries based on the democratic principles of effective and 

equal representation.  The acceptable variation from the 

constituency population quotient will be reduced to plus or 

minus five per cent from the last Act . . . compared to the last 

Act where the differential could be as much as plus or minus 25 

per cent. 

 

Any departure from the principle of equality may only occur 

due to special geographic considerations, such as the 

accessibility of the region, the size and shape of the region, or 

physical features within the region.  However, the population of 

the constituency may vary no more than plus or minus five per 

cent from the constituency population quotient. 

 

Over the past 20 years, Mr. Speaker, the concept of one person, 

one vote has suffered in Saskatchewan.  In 1971, 69 per cent of 

the seats in the Assembly fell within the five per cent 

population variance that I've been talking about.  However by 

1987, only 24 per cent of the seats fell within the 5 per cent 

population variance. 

 

It's interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that the 5 per cent 

population variance has been achieved in 



May 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1853 

Saskatchewan with respect to our 14 federal seats.  Many 

federal ridings in Saskatchewan also contain a mixture of rural 

and urban voters.  For example, Saskatoon Humboldt 

encompasses a portion of the city of Saskatoon and a 

significant rural area north and east of Saskatoon.  There are 

many such seats -- three in Regina, three in Saskatoon.  And 

these mixed rural-urban seats seem to be working well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It's also interesting to note the situation in Manitoba, which as I 

mentioned has 57 seats.  The population variance allowed 

under their legislation is plus or minus 10 per cent.  Now 

they're not a lot different than Saskatchewan, with the large city 

of Winnipeg and the large city of Brandon, and a large rural 

area.  With their guideline of plus or minus 10 per cent they 

were still able to achieve in their distribution an average 

variance of plus or minus 2 per cent.  So we're confident that 

the 5 per cent figure can work in Saskatchewan and work well. 

 

The Bill, Mr. Speaker, recognizes the special problems 

encountered in representing the vast northern constituencies -- 

the constituencies of Athabasca and Cumberland.  And the Bill 

proposes that we maintain the existing boundaries of these two 

constituencies.  The voting population in these constituencies is 

smaller than in the rest of the province, but it's obvious that the 

North is a very special case.  The population is thinly dispersed 

over a vast territory, containing in the two constituencies 

approximately half the land mass of the province.  The majority 

of these communities are remote and they are difficult to reach.  

Transportation and communications are not as sophisticated as 

in the south of the province.  Some of these communities can 

only be reached by air. 

 

There's a limit, Mr. Speaker.  There is a practical limit to what 

we can ask of the two members of this Legislative Assembly 

that represent these two constituents in terms of representing 

the people who live there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's no question this Act will move the 

province closer to the principle of one person, one vote.  And 

it's very important that we as a government and as a province, 

strive for voter equality. 

 

One person, one vote is a fundamental principle of any 

democracy, Mr. Speaker.  Why should a vote in one 

constituency be worth almost twice as much as the vote in 

another constituency.  It's simply not fair, nor is it democratic. 

 

It's instructive to look back through the history of the British 

parliamentary system upon which our system is based, to see 

how this principle of one person, one vote developed.  The 

British, over a long history, over a very long history with the 

concept of democracy, have long wrestled with this concept. 

 

Members will be familiar with the rotten boroughs that existed 

in England before the passage of the Reform Bill in 1832.  The 

practice of creating boroughs 

of insignificant voting strength in order to ensure the election 

of members who would support the policies of the Crown, 

appear to have arisen as far back as the reign of Edward VI in 

1537, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In 1793, 250 years later, it was estimated that 51 boroughs with 

a combined population of less than 1,500 electors were 

returning 100 members to the Commons at a time when there 

were 340 seats in the Commons -- almost 30 per cent of the 

British House of Commons being elected by 1,500 electors in 

Britain. 

 

And in the notorious borough of Old Sarum, made popular in 

the British novel Sarum, the classic rotten borough was found 

where two members of parliament were returned by seven 

voters.  The constituency consisted of open fields, Mr. Speaker, 

and elections were held in these open fields because the 

constituency couldn't even provide a barn to shelter the 

returning officer. 

 

The Reform Bill of 1832 was a milestone in British 

parliamentary history.  It redistributed seats on a more 

equitable basis, increased county representation, extended the 

franchise, and reduced election expenses.  But what it most 

obviously did, Mr. Speaker, was to place us, to place us who 

believe in democracy, on a process of reform which has led us 

slowly and inexorably to the point where voter equality -- one 

person, one vote -- will be the guiding and fundamental 

principle of a democracy. 

 

Obviously, Mr. Speaker, we continue to make progress.  True 

representation and true democracy is an evolving principle.  

And this Bill before the Assembly today takes us another step 

further down this road. 

 

I will conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, by reminding 

members of the necessity for us to do what we are proposing in 

this Bill.  We must reduce the size of this Assembly.  In so 

doing, we will be making an important statement to the people 

of Saskatchewan that in the light of the fiscal situation in this 

province, we here are doing all we can to save money.  We do 

this by cutting our numbers by 12 per cent, which is a 

significant saving indeed. 

 

To accomplish this we will need new boundaries.  This Bill sets 

up a mechanism to do this.  It is a mechanism which is fair and 

a mechanism which is impartial. 

 

May I say in closing, Mr. Speaker, that the principles 

underlying this Bill are consistent with the fundamental 

principles underlying the whole concept of democratic 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to Provide for 

the Division of Saskatchewan into Constituencies for the 

Election of Members of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I  



1854 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1993 

think this Bill certainly demands some attention and demands 

that we take some time to address a number of the issues that 

have been raised by the minister responsible who's introduced 

the Bill. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, over the past number of months the 

government have talked about fairness, have talked about 

accountability.  They have talked about deficit reduction.  And 

a number of these issues, I believe the minister raised in his 

introductory speech to this Bill before us this afternoon. 

 

However I would suggest that in some ways some of the 

comments don't quite address all of those facts.  And when you 

look at fairness we tried to . . . a number of areas that will be 

addressed as we get into some of the debate is, is it fair that you 

have large rural ridings where members have extreme difficulty 

trying to touch base with all of their constituents versus the 

urban ridings? 

 

We are going to be asking, Mr. Speaker, are we indeed going to 

achieve the effectiveness, the efficiency, and certainly is it 

going to be less costly, by some of the suggestions that the 

minister has raised today.  Now you take a look at, the minister 

has suggested that by cutting down to 58 members from the 66, 

a reduction of 8 seats, Mr. Speaker, that there's going to be a 

cost effectiveness.  And yet in a number of areas the only cost 

reduction will be in the salaries of members. 

 

The fact is the travel of the rural members will increase as the 

boundaries are extended.  And the communication, there is 

areas that some of those funds will become even greater, Mr. 

Speaker.  So we have to question whether or not there will be 

that significant a decrease. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, the fact that there has been a reduction 

of members and the minister knows we've had a discussion in 

this area, there isn't anyone in the province, even on the 

opposition side, who hasn't suggested that a reduction in 

members in this province isn't appropriate.  And there won't be 

an elector, a voter in Saskatchewan who will not indicate that 

as well. 

 

It would seem to me that another area that one has to question 

whether it is going to be cost-efficient is the fact that we're 

going to have this commission now meet every five years 

rather than the 10 years.  And that in itself is going to become 

costly to ask a commission to meet and to review the 

boundaries and look at the boundaries and the constituents of 

the constituencies across the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I adjourn debate I just want to make one 

comment about a number of suggestions put forward by my 

colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, yesterday when he 

suggested that we ask the minister -- and I trust the minister 

will take some consideration and give some consideration to 

these proposals -- that we look at the parameters of the federal 

ridings, and for a couple reasons, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Number one, by redrawing the provincial boundaries 

on the basis of the federal boundary changes, Mr. Speaker, after 

every 10-year census we will be tying into a program that's 

already in place and actually is probably saving the taxpayers 

some money by not getting into a further review and our own 

review, a separate review. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, my colleague suggested that we take a 

serious look at having four Saskatchewan MLAs (Member of 

the Legislative Assembly) for every federal riding.  And what 

that does, Mr. Speaker, is allows four provincial MLAs to be 

dealing in the same electoral boundary of the federal riding. 

That allows for a greater and easier access and the debate to 

take place between federal and rural members, so that it's easier 

for the local electorate or the provincial electorate to kind of 

determine where the boundaries are and who they're talking to. 

 

(1500) 

 

Another thing, Mr. Speaker, by doing that as well we further 

reduce the number of seats from 58 to 56.  I think as we see in 

the paper today, and I believe all three papers . . . or the number 

of articles that were raised mention the fact that the proposals 

put forward by my colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, 

indeed look to be fair and they look to be less political and less 

costly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I've indicated earlier, I trust that if indeed 

we're going to look at fairness, if we're going to look at trying 

to take the political motivation out of this, I trust the 

government will take a serious look at some of the suggestions 

that we've put forward so that at the end of the day there is a 

process that we can all agree with that would just be ongoing 

that takes it out of the political realms. 

 

There are a number of other areas that I could get into, but at 

this time, Mr. Speaker, I think that we should take a little more 

time to review the statements and review the Bill.  Therefore I 

move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 87 -- An Act to amend The Mental Health Services 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to give second reading of The Mental 

Health Services Amendment Act, 1993.  Mr. Speaker, the 

current Mental Health Services Act has served our province 

very well to date, providing a sound legislative framework for 

the delivery of effective services to people who experience 

mental disorder and distress.  The current Act, Mr. Speaker, in 

fact has served as a model in other parts of Canada and 

internationally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the current Mental Health Services Act provides 

for people to receive mental health services on their own 

request and upon their own consent.  Most services thus are 

provided on a voluntary basis. 



May 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1855 

However, certain severe forms of mental disorder affect 

people's judgement, with the result that they may not be aware 

of their need for treatment.  They may in fact be harming 

themselves or others, or be at risk of harm. 

 

The current Mental Health Services Act, therefore, contains a 

number of provisions that make it possible for such persons to 

be examined and admitted to psychiatric in-patient facilities 

without their consent.  Much of the Act, the current Act, is 

concerned with setting out the special circumstances that need 

to exist before this can be done. 

 

The Act also establishes various safeguards for individuals 

deprived of some of their rights including a patient advocacy 

system, a system of appeals to an independent review panel, 

and further rights of appeal to the Court of Queen's Bench.  

However, Mr. Speaker, several developments have taken place 

since 1986 that now make it necessary to amend the legislation 

at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in May of 1991 the Supreme Court of Canada 

struck down a provision in the Criminal Code that allowed 

those found unfit to stand trial or not guilty by reason of 

insanity, to be detained indefinitely.  The Criminal Code was 

subsequently amended, and provisions for indefinite detention 

were eliminated. 

 

Some people who no longer can be held under the provisions of 

the Criminal Code may still pose a danger to themselves or to 

others, requiring treatment or care and supervision.  Therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, some of the amendments before the House now 

deal with this issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, further, a small group of people with long-term, 

disabling mental disorders fail in the community only because 

they refuse to follow prescribed treatment.  They suffer 

needlessly, causing their families and other care-givers 

considerable grief.  Often they are in conflict with the law and 

frequently have to be rehospitalized and usually on an 

involuntary basis.  And so, Mr. Speaker, they end up in what is 

described as a revolving door. 

 

We are therefore proposing in this legislation to introduce 

community treatment orders in an effort to make it possible to 

maintain more people for longer periods in community settings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to ensure that mental health is accorded 

an important place in health reform.  And therefore we are 

seeking also to create a more integrated health system that will 

see district boards take responsibility for a broad range of 

services, including some mental health services currently being 

provided by the department.  And so again, there are 

amendments in this Bill to facilitate this change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to the foregoing, there are some minor 

problems in the administration and interpretation of the 

legislation that have been identified in the last few years, and 

these also are 

being addressed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in preparing these amendments we have been 

guided by three major considerations.  Point no. 1: the dignity, 

rights, and freedoms of all citizens should be protected and 

should not be limited solely because of mental disorder.  

Programs should promote equality of opportunity, assist people 

to exercise their autonomy and rights, and empower and assist 

people who are victimized or vulnerable under the power and 

control of others.  Any curtailment of rights and freedoms 

which is necessary to provide care and treatment, must be 

governed by strict legal requirements and subject to stringent 

standards. 

 

Point no. 2: the rights and interests of others also need to be 

promoted and protected.  Family members, personal friends, 

co-workers, care-givers, and others who are involved with 

persons whose behaviour is unpredictable because of a mental 

disorder have also a right: a right to be assisted, supported, and 

protected from harm. 

 

And point no. 3, Mr. Speaker: professionals who are 

professionals who are called upon to provide services should 

have the authority and means to exercise their responsibilities 

effectively.  At the same time, any exercise of special powers 

needs to be within strict legal limits and subject to effective 

controls. 

 

It is therefore, Mr. Speaker, of the utmost importance that our 

mental health legislation strike an appropriate balance among 

three competing interests -- the rights of the individual, the 

protection of society, and the provision of mental health 

services.  Mr. Speaker, I believe that the amendments we are 

proposing here today will maintain and in fact improve the 

existing balance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in preparing these amendments we have consulted 

with some 35 different organizations that have an interest in 

mental health including those representing consumers, family 

members, professional service providers, other interested 

public groups, governmental and non-governmental service 

agencies.  Playing a key role in the consultation process were 

the Schizophrenia Society of Saskatchewan and the Canadian 

Mental Health Association and mental health professionals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to report that in most matters 

consensus was achieved.  While there was not unanimous 

agreement, there was nevertheless an acceptance of the 

proposals as a reasonable compromise that achieves an 

acceptable balance between competing interests. 

 

These changes will permit the mental health system to make 

the most efficient use of existing resources where community 

treatment is provided in place of hospitalization.  They will 

permit individuals to receive services in the least restrictive 

setting.  And they will ensure that individual rights are 

respected in circumstances where it becomes necessary for a 

time to limit these rights in the best interests of the individual 

and in the interests of others in society. 



1856 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1993 

And so, Mr. Speaker, in summary, I am confident that these 

amendments will keep Saskatchewan in the forefront as far as 

mental health legislation in Canada is concerned.  And more 

importantly, they will enable us to maintain an appropriate 

balance between competing interests while better addressing 

the needs of persons with mental disorders and those of the 

larger community.  The amendments, Mr. Speaker, are 

consistent with and will contribute to the overall goals of health 

reform. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading 

of The Mental Health Services Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it would 

sound to me that there are a number of technical areas in this 

Bill that we certainly should take a bit of time to review. 

 

One of the major concerns that we would have -- and the 

minister endeavoured to relieve some of the fears we may have 

-- and that's regarding the rights of individuals and the fact that 

a member could be . . . or an individual could be sent to a 

psychiatric ward without his or her consent. 

 

And I think I can understand where the minister is coming from 

in addressing some of the concerns we have.  And in view of 

the factors that our society faces at times and some of the stress 

levels that individuals face and the fact that the safety of 

individuals that it comes into view, and it would appear to me 

that there are a few things we should be very careful that in 

trying to protect society that we're not infringing on or taking 

away individual rights and freedoms. 

 

And I hear the minister and I heard him responding, making 

some of the comments, trying to alleviate some of the fears we 

may have here, but I think we should take a little more time to 

review the Bill, exactly where we're going.  And therefore at 

this time I move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 20 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 20 -- An Act 

to amend The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 

Superannuation Act be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 81 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 81 -- An Act 

to amend The Alcohol Control Act and to make certain 

Consequential amendments to certain Acts as a result of the 

enactment of this Act be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 85 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 85 -- An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act be now 

read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 86 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 86 -- An Act to 

amend Certain Health Statutes and to repeal Certain Other 

Health Statutes be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 83 -- An Act respecting Registered Psychiatric 

Nurses 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I will recognize the Associate Minister of 

Health and ask him to introduce his officials to the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

With me today from the Department of Health, Maureen 

Yeske, to my right, who is executive director of health planning 

and policy development; and to my left, Drew Johnston, senior 

health professions analyst. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, just a 

few, straightforward questions, I believe.  I think some of the 

concerns were addressed in my colleague's comments in second 

reading.  But question number one, who was consulted in 

preparing this Bill? 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, in answer to the member's 

question, of course the psychiatric nurses were consulted since 

it has a direct application to their work and profession. 



May 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1857 

In addition, the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses Association, 

the SRNA, was consulted; mental health services branch of 

Saskatchewan Health was consulted; the Public Service 

Commission was involved in consultations, Saskatchewan 

Justice was involved in the consultation, and the nursing 

assistants association were also consulted. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I take it 

that each and every one of these groups are quite in favour of 

the changes being brought forward and proposed by the Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, all of the mentioned 

are supportive of the provisions of the Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, to the minister, in clause 8 of the 

printed Bill it is written that the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council may appoint persons to the association's council.  Will 

these individuals appointed be departmental people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- No, Mr. Chairman, the answer in this 

regard is that they would be members of the general public, 

appointed from the general public, not employees of the 

department. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- And, Mr. Minister, why is it necessary for 

appointments to be made to the council?  What's the purpose 

and reasoning for this council to be set up? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Essentially the goal, Mr. Chairman, is to 

in fact involve some public input and some openness and 

public accountability to the operations.  And there would also 

therefore be public input in terms of the disciplinary procedures 

and so on.  So it's an effort to bring more public input into the 

operation of the profession, and this is being asked for and 

being welcomed by the psychiatric nurses. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Also, Mr. Chairman, to the minister, clause 14 of 

the printed Bill deals with the association's by-laws and my 

question is, are all the by-laws to be approved by the minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, only those by-laws which 

would have potential impact on the public, and this is 

consistent with some other professional legislation.  Ministerial 

approval would only be needed for by-laws that have potential 

impact on the public generally. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- And in response to that question, what by-laws 

would you consider to have impact on the general public? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, if the member has a copy of 

the Act in front of him, he would refer to sections 15(1) and 

15(2).  Those would be the by-laws; those described there 

would be the by-laws that we see as having potential impact on 

the public.  So that would be the by-laws which would need . . . 

for change, would need ministerial approval. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

Clauses 2 to 52 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I would simply like to extend my thanks 

to the member of the opposition who posed the questions 

today, and also to the two officials from the Department of 

Health, Maureen Yeske and Drew Johnston, for their help in 

our committee proceedings. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I, too, would like to thank the 

officials for taking the time to come in to address the concerns 

raised this afternoon, and to the minister for his promptness in 

responding with answers.  Thank you. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 83 -- An Act respecting Registered Psychiatric 

Nurses 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 

 

The Chair: -- I will recognize the Minister of Justice and ask 

him to introduce his officials who are with us in the committee 

today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Seated beside 

me is Shiela Bailey who is the chair of the Public Service 

Commission.  Behind Ms. Bailey is Ron Wight who is the 

executive director of staffing and development.  And behind 

me is Mr. Hank Dorsch who is the assistant to the chair. 

 

Item 1 

 

The Chair: -- The question before the committee is item no. 1, 

administration.  Is that agreed?  Carried.  Oh I'm sorry, I didn't . 

. . I thought that was a bit odd.  I didn't see the member for Arm 

River. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'm glad you 

noticed me.  I know I'm a small little fellow and I can hide 

behind somebody quite easily. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I guess you thought 

you were getting away pretty easy there.  I thought I was going 

to have to stand up in the chair here and wave. 

 

Mr. Minister, a year ago when we started this here business of 

giving . . . questions handed to us prior to the estimates, that 

happened with the minister that I was dealing with last year, the 

minister that had Public Service Commission, and we got off to 

kind of a bad 



1858 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1993 

start because he didn't have all of these things.  And we're the 

ones that made the agreement.  And then we asked, to speed 

things up, we asked all ministers to bring this information prior 

-- the global estimate, staff, and what not, from your 

departments. 

 

And I'd just like to suggest to you that I suggested to the 

Minister of Social Services the other night, that perhaps it 

would be better if we got these even a day or two ahead of 

time, whenever they're prepared.  It's too late now for this one, 

Mr. Minister, but maybe you could advise your other ministers 

that as soon as it's prepared, to have it sent to the critic.  

Because there's no way I can go through this information.  It 

leaves me in kind of a bad situation. 

 

So what I'm going to do is have this . . . while I'm asking other 

questions, I'm going to have it taken back to my office and 

have the researcher just go through to make sure that 

everything's all right.  I just want to . . . you can comment on 

that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I must say that thought had crossed 

my mind too.  I was simply told what the process was, and I 

must say I had nothing to do with negotiating the arrangements 

or anything like that, but I think the member makes a good 

point. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, thank you.  I had the page take 

them, deliver them to my office so they can scan through it just 

in case there's questions we want to ask arising from that 

report. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you provide me some answers regarding 

employees terminated from the Public Service Commission in 

1992, and I'll break it down -- the questions that we want.  

First, the number and names of employees let go; and the 

salaries and titles held with PSC (Public Service Commission); 

and c) severance details, names of replacement employees as 

well as what the vote and salaries of the replacement 

employees falls under. 

 

Now maybe I give too much there at once; maybe we should 

just start out with the first one, and that's to pick it up.  The first 

is the number and names of employees let go in 1992. 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, there 

were no . . . None of the people employed by the Public Service 

Commission were terminated in '92-93, as far as the 

commission itself is concerned.  And I assume that's what the 

member's asking about. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, my question 

was 1992. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well that was the answer, Mr. 

Chairman.  There have been nobody terminated from the Public 

Service Commission in that period. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, is that . . . 

would just be in the commission itself, Public 

Service Commission, not in the entire government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's right.  None of the commission 

staff were terminated. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now do you have a list of all the people in 

the entire government that's under the Public Service 

Commission that were let go in 1992?  You should have that 

without any problem. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We don't have that kind of global 

information.  I think that that question has been asked and 

answered with respect to each individual department, but we've 

never sat down and added them up, so I don't have that 

information.  We're here today to discuss the budget of the 

commission and we never anticipated a question about the 

whole of government to emerge from that.  And I just am not 

able to answer the member's question today. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, that's a question that you 

should have expected we'd be asking.  The Public Service 

Commission hires the biggest bulk of the people that work for 

government.  You should know that we want that.  I asked it 

last year under estimates, and we only got the answer up to the 

year end, and we didn't get it for totally of '92.  So it must be a 

question that can . . . that for sure you must be able to answer 

that question, and you should have, I believe, had that 

information here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker and to the hon. member, 

our understanding of the arrangement was that each department 

was going to report on its own situation, so we made no effort 

to gather all this information together.  So it's coming to you in 

different packages sent across the House, as I've sent across the 

information with respect to the Public Service Commission.  

But I have to tell the member we've made no effort to bring all 

that information together into one summary report which is 

what you're asking for.  And I regret we just don't have it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, that's the main 

objective of the Public Service Commission is interviewing 

people and hiring them, so it must be information that you can, 

somebody could, before we're through this estimates, that could 

lay their hands on and get me that figure because I want to 

know maybe well . . . How long would it take you to get that 

information?  Somebody should know the . . . have a list of all 

that.  I mean those are the kind of questions you used to ask us 

when you were over here, and if we didn't have it, you were 

very upset. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It's not a big job to get the information.  

You have to take all of the information from each of the 

departments which we can do -- and with respect, which your 

staff could also do because it's the same information we'd be 

working from -- and we could get that information without any 

appreciable delay at all.  It would just be a matter of making 

some phone calls, and we could collect it all and give it to you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, 



May 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1859 

why I want it, because when the Public Service Commission is 

hiring and firing people, or whatever, and they all work through 

the Public Service Commission, you go and ask the 

departments and they just throw it back to the Public Service 

Commission.  If they're responsible, if the Public Service 

Commission is responsible for hiring X amount of people and 

interviewing them, and then I think we're entitled to have that 

question from the Public Service Commission. 

 

So while we're going on to other questions, could you have one 

of your people put that together, or would it take longer than 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It would take longer than that because 

we don't carry that information around with us.  We would 

have to work it on the telephone.  We could get it in probably a 

couple of days and we could . . . glad to send it to you; it's no 

problem. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right, Mr. Minister, that'll be fine then.  

If you haven't got it, you haven't got it; we're not going to delay 

things for that. 

 

So I'll give you the three items that we want so you can . . . 

because if you haven't got that, you won't have the answers to 

my next two questions.  So it'll be on Hansard for them to see 

tomorrow, and as long as you send it to us when you have it, I'll 

be satisfied with that. 

 

The first -- that was the number and names of employees let go; 

then the salaries and titles held within PSC; and then severance 

details, names of replacement employees as well as what vote 

the salaries of the replacement employees falls under.  So if 

you didn't quite get that from me, you'll be able to get it out of 

Hansard tomorrow, if that's . . . You can do it that way, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, as I understand the member's 

question, Mr. Chairman, what we will do is to . . . We can get 

copies of the individual departments' reports which include the 

information that the member refers to.  And you want us to 

collate it all and give a total number for the entire operations of 

government, the entire departments and agencies that are 

included in the Estimates, and give you the information that 

you ask for grouped together from all of these departments and 

agencies.  We can do that within a couple of days. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, as long as we got it very clear 

that it don't just come back with numbers.  Because if we're 

going to move off this, I want it . . . I'd like you to repeat what 

I'm asking here.  I want to do the first one, so we don't have no 

mistakes about it.  I want the number of . . . number and names 

of employees let go. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, all of that 

information is included in the packages from the individual 

departments.  And we'll get that together and we'll respond to 

the member's question in the terms that he asked it. 

Mr. Muirhead: -- And then the next was the salaries and titles 

held within PSC -- you'll be able to read this out of Hansard -- 

severance details, names of replacement employees, as well as 

what vote the salaries of the replacement employees falls 

under. 

 

So we can get off that if you will commit that all those three 

items I've asked for, that that's what I'll get. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Right. No problem.  And the member 

must understand that so far as the Public Service Commission 

is concerned, the answer is zero.  But I think he knows that.  

He's asking a broader question. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, we'll move on to another 

question.  With regard to the conflict of interest policy of the 

government -- we're even going to have a new Bill, conflict of 

interest, and you've always said that you'd be very careful here 

-- and I want to ask you a question.  It's not a question we'd like 

to ask but you used to do that to us. 

 

I know . . . I understand that your brother was working for the 

Environment department for a while after the NDP formed 

government.  Is this true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No. Not that I'm aware of. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- You're saying, Mr. Minister, that you never 

had or have now, since October 1981 you never had a brother 

working for government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, Mr. Speaker.  I have one brother 

whose name is Derek who lives in Saskatoon.  And he has 

never been employed by the Government of Saskatchewan at 

any time.  And I'm certain I'd be aware of it if that was the case.  

I just can't imagine it, so I would . . . that I would not know it.  

So I think I can be unequivocal about it.  My brother does not 

and has never worked for the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I accept that.  

Naturally you'd know.  And it's a good thing to correct 

something like that, if that rumour floats around Saskatchewan.  

And that's why I wanted to correct it.  And I thank you for your 

honesty and I believe you. 

 

But we'll go on a little further.  I'd like to know if you presently 

or over the past year and a half since '91 had any relatives of 

yours employed by the government or any of its agencies or 

Crown corporations.  Any relatives of yours working for 

government, period -- for a Crown corporation, agency, or 

department of government -- any relative of yours? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker.  My daughter 

Shannon has a temporary contract with the Department of 

Environment.  I think the member knows that I was not aware 

of that until some days after it had happened, when my 

daughter called at my home and informed me of this fact.  But I 

was not aware of it in advance; it took me by surprise and I 

actually know practically nothing about the hiring 



1860 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1993 

except it is in the Department of Environment. 

 

I also have a sister who is . . . similarly got a temporary 

contract with the New Careers Corporation.  Her name is Judy, 

and again that was a hiring that I was not aware of and had 

nothing to do with.  I was informed about it after it had 

happened. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, that's 

very easy for a minister to stand up and say that a person that 

believes in no political patronage -- you've said that since 

before the election, after the election, you've made it here many 

times -- no political patronage, and any time that you have a 

daughter and a sister hired after 1991, she didn't . . . apparently 

wasn't able to get a job before '91, or before October, '91.  How 

come she's conveniently . . . can get one afterwards?  It has to 

be political patronage because her father and her brother, in 

both cases, would be the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well no, of course the member knows 

very well it doesn't have to be political patronage.  I mean, I 

just have no idea of the circumstances surrounding my sister's 

hiring.  The member will know that my sister is a qualified 

social worker with her bachelor's degree in social work and I 

believe the member knows that.  She is also a . . . has been for 

many, many years a real estate person, a licensed real estate -- 

whatever they call those people -- brokers, yes. 

 

And you know, the patronage involved would be if I had 

anything at all to do with the employment of my sister Judy, or 

my daughter Shannon, both of whom are adult people, all 

grown up, who have lives and careers of their own.  And I . . . 

and the member knows I do not lie.  I had absolutely nothing to 

do with the hiring of either of those people.  I would not do 

such a thing.  I think the member also knows that.  I never will. 

 

But they are adult people with careers and they move about.  

My sister Judy has been in the real estate business for many 

years; away back after her graduation from university she was a 

social worker with the government of Saskatchewan.  She has 

lived for some years in Alberta, I think three or four years, and 

returned to Saskatchewan -- I'm reaching here -- I think in 

1992, came to Regina and apparently got this job with the New 

Careers Corporation.  But I repeat again -- and the member 

knows I do not lie -- I had absolutely nothing to do with either 

of those engagements and I was not even aware of them until 

after the fact. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, of course I 

believe the minister.  I didn't say that you had anything to do 

with getting them the job.  But it's a sure thing that it's political 

patronage.  You can't stand up and say that somebody else in 

your government didn't hire them.  I mean you can't get up and 

smoke and mirrors that way, Mr. Minister. 

I do believe you, and I believe you wouldn't lie.  I mean you 

don't need to even insinuate to me, Mr. Minister, while we're 

having this debate here that I would think you would.  But don't 

try to get the pretty people out there to believe that the minister 

would have nothing to do with hiring her daughter in 

government and nothing to do with the sister. 

 

The fact is they are working for government and you're an NDP 

and whoever does the hiring and firing would make sure that 

your daughter and your sister got a job.  So don't try to say that 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you can stand up here and 

say that.  We don't need any . . . we don't, Mr. Chairman, we 

don't need any insults from the member from Humboldt.  

Because I had to sit over here and listen to your stuff all the 

time when you . . . and this is nothing wrong with this at all. 

 

Because, Mr. Minister, the reason why I bring this to your 

attention, why did your government then, if you can hire your 

people . . . I'm going to get into many more of your colleagues 

that have hired their own relatives to work.  I'm not saying 

there's anything wrong with it.  I'm not saying it's wrong, but 

you said you wouldn't do it.  You said you would never do it. 

 

But why did in . . . I'll take you back to 1982, Mr. Minister, 

when we formed government.  Allan Blakeney's daughter was 

working for government.  We never said goodbye.  The 

Speaker of this legislature's daughter was working for 

government, and his daughter was working in a summer camp 

at North Battleford.  And the student's job . . . they were going 

to place one of my students up in North Battleford camp.  

When I heard that she had to be gone to get my student, I 

stopped it.  Because I would have nothing to do with that kind 

of stuff. 

 

Politics should never affect children, should never affect distant 

families and what not . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. 

Chairman, it would be a lot nicer for me to talk if the member 

from Humboldt would just keep his mouth shut.  It would be a 

lot easier.  He's got a big mouth and he knows how to use it.  

And if he wants to talk, he can get up and ask questions.  I'm 

doing the talking. 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order.  I'll ask the members of the 

Assembly to come to order.  I'll ask members to allow the hon. 

member for Arm River to put his question.  And I'll ask as well 

that the hon. member for Arm River direct his question through 

the Chair. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The reason why 

I bring this to your attention, that this government fired Graham 

Taylor, all right?  And he knew would, he likely knew he 

would be fired.  He lost his position.  He was an MLA and a 

cabinet minister for years and he had an appointment out of 

country, and he knew he would. 

 

But the question I asked is that why did this government, your 

government, in almost the same 



May 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1861 

week that they fired him, see that his daughter lost a job, his 

daughter-in-law, who was working for government long before 

she ever met the Taylors, they lost their jobs.  What's wrong 

with you that you . . . this government would do such a thing 

when we didn't do it to you?  I mean, if you want to take it out 

on Graham Taylor, don't go after his family.  Now if you want 

to know a hurt family, is going to Wolseley and talk to the 

Taylors.  Take it out on them, but not their family. 

 

You may not know anything about this, Mr. Minister, but if 

you would I'd like you to check into the particulars, and if I'm 

wrong on exact members of the family . . . I know one was 

working for Environment -- just where your daughter is 

working for Environment now -- and worked for Sask Housing 

for a while; they moved around in government.  And they're up 

and just fired.  And I don't think this is right. 

 

I got another individual that lives in my son's home, no relation 

to us whatsoever.  He has no parents, or he hasn't got his father 

and his mother's not well.  And we've always said, this is home 

for you when you got no place else to go.  I don't even know 

the boy's politics.  He worked for SaskTel for years, year after 

year, and soon as you formed government, his bosses said, you 

live in the Muirhead home, goodbye. 

 

So you can understand, the member from Humboldt wanted to 

know about my frustration . . . (inaudible) . . . these things have 

to happen. 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order.  I'll remind the hon. 

member for Humboldt that the rules of Assembly do not allow 

us to refer to other members or ourselves by our proper names, 

and I don't think he did that intentionally.  I just bring that to 

your attention. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not even understanding 

your ruling what I said was wrong.  Could you explain that 

again, what I said was wrong? 

 

The Chair: -- You referred to yourself by your proper name 

and I just bring that to your attention. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, I never mentioned my home.  

I mentioned my son's home, Ken Muirhead -- if I did mention 

Ken Muirhead.  It's not in my own home.  It was my son's 

home, and that's where this boy has made his . . . his name is 

Kevin Williams.  And I'm very, very disappointed that this boy 

cannot find a job and he loses his job because his boss in 

SaskTel said, I'm sorry, they've told me from above, goodbye 

because you're on that Muirhead home. 

 

And I want to make it very clear that it wasn't his . . . it was his 

boss that when he was fired told him that, but the orders came 

from above.  And I'd like that checked into because whether it's 

through the Public Service Commission or whatever, I just 

don't think it . . . I think we should be above and beyond these 

kind of things, that the Taylor children and somebody in my 

home that's just living there and worked for several years -- 

five or six years -- for SaskTel, did good work and was coming 

into . . . did summer work, usually eight to ten months.  

Sometime he would be through in January. 

And I think it's very unfair that he's sitting there with nothing to 

do and can't find a job, and he was trained for his position. 

 

So I just ask you, Mr. Minister, if you would check into the 

Taylor family.  I'll give you the proper names at a different 

time and see why these people were just out coldly blank fired.  

Mr. Taylor says, that's fine; fire me.  Mr. Andrew, says fire me 

or whatever.  But we don't want that to happen to children of 

children of any of our families.  I wouldn't do it to you, and you 

wouldn't do it to mine. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member, I have no 

knowledge at all of any of the cases that you've mentioned, but 

we will look into them and see what we can learn.  In the case 

of SaskTel, I'll ask the minister for a report on the situation that 

you mention, and we'll try and find out what that was all about. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, yes I 

appreciate that because I know you quite well, and I know that . 

. . I don't know anybody over there that would personally want 

to do this to . . . and the person that lives in my son's home, his 

name was Kevin Williams; he was an employee of SaskTel for 

a long time.  I just appreciate that is . . . because I don't think 

that this ever . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister, I'll have to get you those names.  I'll see that you get 

those names this evening, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now the last question I have to ask you on this, Mr. Minister, 

and I don't like to have to do these things, but I think it's good 

that we're getting some of these straightened out.  Have you got 

it straightened out about your brother because it's not right that 

we have to hear it on the street.  I have heard it, and we've 

heard it floating around.  Does your brother work for 

government?  And for your sake and for everybody's sake . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I'm glad to hear it because I didn't 

think you would do such a thing. 

 

The other question I have, do you have any other relatives 

acting as an agent for a third party doing business with 

government or any of its agencies or Crown corporations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, not that I can think of.  No. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- That's fine; I accept that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Do you have any relatives supplying any goods or service to 

the government or any of its agencies or Crown corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you.  Now this is a question that it 

would be impossible for you to answer and I'll just wait for 

your response on it.  I'm just asking that you can put the 

information together. 

 

The question I'd like answered, and it's relatives of government 

MLAs working for any department, 



1862 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1993 

Crown, or agency of government.  But when I term the word 

relatives, we better use like they do in the Board of Internal 

Economy, what you call close relatives, like mother, father, 

brother, sister, spouses, and children and things like that.  

When you get down the line we shouldn't even get into that at 

all. 

 

And I'm not saying it's even wrong.  I just want to know the 

number.  Because we were always told that this would never 

happen under this here government.  And maybe these things 

aren't true.  Maybe what's floating around Saskatchewan that 

this government is doing the same thing as we did when we 

were over there, hire some of our families and what not, and 

people don't . . . they seem to call it a conflict.  And okay, if 

you're going to be clean, let's see how clean you are.  Can you 

undertake to do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, we'll wait for 

Hansard to come for the exact information that the member 

wants and do our best to provide it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'd like to deal 

now with reclassifications.  What are the terms in which an 

employee, and specifically a ministerial assistant, are given a 

reclassification? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, the Public Service 

Commission doesn't have anything to do with the order in 

council appointments and the classifications of the people who 

are appointed to ministers' offices.  That is done I think in 

Executive Council, but it is not done by the Public Service 

Commission. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Okay then, Mr. Minister, we'll just go to your 

particular office then for the Public Service Commission.  I 

guess it'll be in the information that I have down in my office 

now being looked at.  What staff do you have in your office 

that has any connection with Public Service Commission or 

paid by Public Service Commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think I have the right information. I 

have a staff of three assistants and three secretaries for all of 

the things that I do -- Justice, Indian and Metis Affairs, Public 

Service Commission, and all of the other assignments that I 

have that have been published in . . . wherever these things are 

published, anyway the order in council. 

 

It would seem from the information I have here that three of the 

staff are carried on the Public Service Commission payroll.  

And did the member want their names?  No?  There's one 

assistant and two secretaries.  I can send this across if you like . 

. . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, yes. 

 

One of my assistants, Marian Morrison, and two of my 

secretaries.  There are actually three secretary names here, but 

one of them was working and is away on maternity leave and 

has been replaced by a temporary employee and both their 

names are on here.  So one assistant and two secretaries are 

carried on the commission's budget. 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, that 

information is probably . . . those names and what not would be 

in the package I've already got so we don't need it. 

 

But did I understand you straight, Mr. Minister, when you said 

that three of your staff was paid for by the Public Service 

Commission?  Did I understand that right or did I hear you 

right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, three.  One of my secretaries and 

two . . . pardon me, one of my assistants and two of my 

secretaries. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay.  When I asked you before, when I 

said I'd like to deal with the reclassification, what are the terms 

in which an employee and specifically ministerial assistants are 

given a reclassification.  And you got up and you answered me 

that Public Service Commission has nothing whatsoever to do 

with Executive Council or OCs.  Well then you turn around and 

you say, well three of my staff are paid from the Public Service 

Commission. 

 

I think, Mr. Minister, that if you go to every department in 

government . . . I mean, every minister's office, they probably 

have somebody being paid from the department that's hired by 

the Public Service Commission. 

 

Can you give me a breakdown on who's hired directly, where a 

minister brings someone in and bypasses the Public Service 

Commission. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The staff is not hired by the Public 

Service Commission.  They're hired by Executive Council or 

hired through Executive Council.  The order in council is raised 

by Executive Council and it's just the Public Service 

Commission has the privilege of paying the bill, of paying the 

wages.  But these are not jobs within the classification system 

administered by the Public Service Commission. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I thought that's what you'd 

come back and say.  I knew you were going to get that straight 

pretty soon. 

 

Have you anyone else in your department or in your office, Mr. 

Minister, that is paid from any other department . . . I mean, 

with a connection to the Public Service Commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- None with a connection to the Public 

Service Commission.  I have two other assistants and a 

secretary and they're paid by one of the other agencies.  As I 

stand here I don't know which ones, but none that have a 

connection to the Public Service Commission. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, whether 

there's any of your colleagues that are ministers or anyone in 

Executive Council that are being paid by a department, not the 

Public Service 



May 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1863 

Commission but a department -- they would probably be hired 

by the Public Service Commission and not the department -- 

and seconded to the minister's office?  Do you have a list of 

those? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, we don't know of 

anybody working in any minister's office that is there seconded 

from another department or there as a result of any action by 

the Public Service Commission.  I think they're probably all 

order in council appointments, at least as far as I know. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, would you 

undertake -- you said, as far as you knew -- so would you 

undertake to get me that answer, exactly the facts, whether 

there is anybody seconded.  And I better clarify that, Mr. 

Minister -- someone that was hired by the Public Service 

Commission working for any department, Crown corporation, 

or agency of government and then been seconded to any 

minister's office.  Can you get me that information? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes we can check that out.  We'll check 

that out and let the member know. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- In your own, Mr. Minister, in your own 

office you have the three employees that are paid by Public 

Service Commission.  Just so I've got this straight.  Who 

decides, the Public Service Commission or Executive Council, 

what their salary is to be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It's Executive Council. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay, they're being paid by the Public 

Service Commission.  Executive Council decides what their 

salaries are going to be.  Somebody must make the decision on 

reclassification then.  Who decides if they're going to be 

reclassified? 

 

Like what I talked about in question period today, we had . . . 

All you've got to do is move . . . in this government you just 

move from office to office and you can get reclassified.  You 

go from Environment to Municipal, you get classified with 

more wages.  And somebody moves back and up goes their 

money. 

 

Now if you can just comment on that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- All those decisions are made in 

Executive Council and an order in council is passed that brings 

them into effect.  The commission is asked to comment on the 

ranges to see that they're not inappropriate, having regard to the 

structure of wages generally.  But we play no part in the 

decision, nor are we asked to make any judgement or offer any 

advice with respect to the system other than in the limited way 

that I've indicated. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So what you're saying, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister, what you're saying is that any staff working for any 

minister, there could be many more paid by the Public Service 

Commission.  Is it just your department that have three staff?  

No other ministers are paid by the Public Service Commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That is right.  And it only 

happens to me because I'm the minister responsible for the 

Public Service Commission and there's a fair work flow in 

connection with that.  But no other ministers would have 

anyone working in their office whose salary is paid by the 

Public Service Commission. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- But, Mr. Minister, you're not saying that 

there isn't . . . You're not saying, Mr. Minister, for sure that 

somebody hired by the Public Service Commission, working 

for a department -- because we're not sure of that -- and 

seconded to a department, that they're being paid by . . . You 

have to find out; you're not real sure of that, are you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We are not aware of any such situations.  

I think it's fair to say we'd be surprised if there were any.  But 

I've undertaken to the minister that we will check that out and 

inform you of the results of our check. 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  I'll ask members on both sides of 

the House to allow the hon. member for Arm River to . . . to 

allow the hon. member for Arm River to put his questions. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you.  Mr. Minister, it's 

a little difficult . . . I want to run this by you anyway, whether 

it's under the Public Service Commission or not, what I was 

talking about in question period today because you're minister . 

. . and how this can happen. 

 

As you know in question period, I run out of time, and I had a 

full three questions together there.  But I want to just bring 

them to your attention, and you can comment on them or not.  

The one question I was asking was going to be to the Minister 

of Education, and it was one of her employees had received a 

sizeable increase.  Michelle Wilde, she received a $2,000 hike 

in her salary. 

 

And then there was the Minister of Environment; Joanne Buhr, 

she received 20 per cent increase, $561 a month in a pay 

cheque.  And there was the minister responsible for Municipal 

Government; a Gail Russell was initially hired as a political 

assistant to the Minister of Environment.  And we haven't got a 

problem with that, Mr. Minister, but we feel . . . However in 

October of '92 Ms. Russell was moved to the Municipal 

Government office and then got this 46 per cent increase, and I 

don't know who's responsible for this.  I mean these are 

outrageous for a time of restraint. 

 

I don't know whether it was the Public Service Commission or 

the cabinet or whatever, but you're a high-profile minister, and 

I think somebody should be answering why we have to have 52 

hospitals cut back.  We have to have several hundred nurses 

that have lost their jobs in the last short, few weeks.  We've had 

cut-backs to . . . there's very hardly any assistance to farmers. 

 

We met with some truckers this morning, and they are very 

upset about a Bill in this here legislature, the 



1864 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1993 

labour Bill that's going to affect them and break them and move 

them out of province probably.  We suggested to them that they 

come and meet with the minister and the Premier and get their 

frustration . . . They've been writing to all of you.  You've all 

had a letter; every minister has had a letter.  Because they . . . 

we were told this morning the letter that was sent to every 

minister, and some of them have answered.  But they're 

frustrated people.  Then when they see these here increases . . . 

so we talk about restraint and we have . . . every utility is 

increased and increased.  And we're in terrible problems out 

there.  And I don't know who's to blame here. 

 

This Public Service Commission is hiring people and paying 

too much, or increasing them, or whether it's the cabinet and 

OCs.  And if is OCs and cabinet that's worse yet.  Because why 

would you be the ones, the ones that are increasing these here 

salaries here.  It just don't sound right to me, Mr. Minister, that 

you've been preaching restraint every day out there.  The 

Premier preaches restraint.  And here we have these here large 

increases. 

 

I mean we did that when we were in government.  I know that 

some people jumped fairly quickly as your call for 

qualifications, they moved in, and they were qualified and they 

moved in.  But you people say we're in restraint and we're not 

going to allow that.  So the people that have no job at all today 

-- somebody listening here right now that has no job 

whatsoever -- doesn't want to see somebody else get $1,000 a 

month increase.  It's just not right. 

 

So whether it's the Public Service Commission involved in this 

or not, or it's your cabinet or whatever, I'd like your comment 

on it, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The first thing I'd like to say is that the 

Public Service Commission doesn't have anything to do with 

the matters that the member has raised, so I can't pretend to 

answer. 

 

I heard the exchange in question period.  And my 

understanding of the Deputy Premier's answer was that these 

were people who had moved from one position to another.  So 

it was not a question of a person in a position receiving a raise 

in that position, but a matter of them moving from one position 

to another position with greater responsibilities to which a 

different price tag or salary schedule applied.  Now that's all I 

heard in question period.  And I must say beyond that I don't 

have any knowledge. 

 

But the member would have a chance I think to ask those 

questions of the minister responsible for Executive Council, the 

Premier, when his estimates come to the floor. 

 

But I should not pretend to be able to answer for the details of 

that at all. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  With 

permission to introduce guests. 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly 

here this afternoon, a constituent and the secretary of the Metis 

Society of Saskatchewan, Bernice Hammersmith.  And I'd like 

to ask all members to give her a welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

the budget came out, there was approximately 4 or 500 people 

just blankly fired and they're going to be heavily involved with 

the Public Service Commission.  Maybe all of them were. 

 

Could you tell me how many of those were involved with the 

Public Service Commission?  Of all the firings, the mass firing 

that you had at budget time when they had all those pink slips 

given out, how many of those people were under the Public 

Service Commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- With respect to the Public Service 

Commission itself as an organization, there were no lay-offs 

such as the member refers to.  Is that what the member was 

asking, or did you want me to report on a broader basis than 

simply the commission itself? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, let's ask 

the question this way.  In 1993, and that's going to take in up 

till today, there's X amount of people have had a pink slip and 

how many of those numbers -- I don't need names -- I just want 

to know what the numbers are that were involved under the 

Public Service Commission? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm happy to be able to 

tell the member that I can answer this question.  When all the 

dust had settled, there were 289 employees who were affected 

by job abolition, who were in jobs that were abolished; and 

there were 89 positions that were vacant that were abolished.  

So that total figure is 378, as I add those two numbers together 

-- 289 plus 89. 

 

Now I've got a breakdown of that between the out-of-scope 

employees and the in-scope employees, if that's of any interest 

to the member.  On the out-of-scope side, there were -- we're 

talking about classified and unclassified out-of-scope, but I'll 

lump those together because it's a technical matter that isn't 



May 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1865 

involved in your question -- the vacant out-of-scope positions 

that were eliminated total 36 and the out-of-scope employees 

who were in jobs that were abolished was 132. 

 

In the in-scope categories, there were 51 vacancies where the 

position was abolished -- there was nobody working in those 

jobs -- and there were 126 encumbered positions that were 

abolished in the in-scope side.  In addition there were in what 

we call the labour service area, there were two vacancies 

abolished and 31 encumbered positions abolished.  And that 

gives the total that I gave earlier to the member, 89 vacancies 

and 289 people. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Have you got a copy of that or do we just 

get that out of . . . can I have that sent over, please, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

You're saying, Mr. Minister, that when all the smoke cleared 

there was 289 people without jobs.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That is a very complex question and I'll 

begin the answer, but feel free to stop me at any point.  Because 

the in-scope people have bumping rights under the agreement 

and they get sorted out in various categories as they go along.  

And with the out-of-scope people, some of those could bump . . 

. were eligible to bump back into the bargaining unit.  So here 

we go. 

 

I'll start with the out-of-scope positions.  Of the out-of-scope 

job abolitions that I mentioned to the member, 24 elected what 

we call restricted retirement; 7 elected regular retirement; 14 

elected to bump back into the bargaining unit.  Now I'll just 

spare the member the detail after that because some of those 

bumps worked out and some didn't, but there were 14 anyway 

who went that route.  Sixteen resigned and received severance; 

nine employees were redeployed within their own department 

under reorganizations; eight were employed or redeployed in 

other departments other than the ones that they were in before 

the abolitions; one successfully competed for an advertised 

position in the public service; and 46 employees still had to 

make a decision. 

 

As of my reporting date, which is last Friday -- I haven't 

updated it since last Friday -- but as of last Friday that was the 

situation with them.  So that's the out-of-scope side. 

 

Now on the in-scope side it really gets complex.  The number 

86 that I gave to the member, 24 of those elected restricted 

retirement; one elected regular retirement; three were on a 

leave of absence -- they continue on the leave of absence -- two 

were on initial probation and had no bumping rights under the 

agreement; and 56 elected to bump. 

 

Now of those 56 who elected to bump, I get into too much 

detail then.  There's all kinds of possibilities.  And that process 

is still going on, still working itself out. 

I'm advised that the bumping process should be done by the 

middle of June.  There really is a lot of detail about that but I'd 

be glad to give it to the hon. member if you wish.  But it gets 

into probably areas where the member's question was not 

intended to go. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well when I first asked the question, Mr. 

Minister, I asked how many were . . . when the smoke cleared 

how many was out of jobs, period.  And you said 289.  Is that 

still the figure that . . . there are 289 less positions?  But don't 

count the ones that you just didn't . . . that were vacant.  I just 

want to know . . . my question is really how many positions 

that are gone and didn't get fulfilled? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, those positions are gone.  They're 

finished.  The people that are in them have gone various routes 

and we think . . . I was just advised that by the middle of June I 

think we will discover that none of the permanent employees, 

in-scope employees, are actually out of a job.  Some may have 

retired and that sort of thing, but they'll still be employed.  But 

the member is right.  Those are jobs, those are positions that are 

abolished and gone. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right, thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'd just 

like to ask a question about to understand the bumping rights.  I 

have talked to several, and I know, I'm thinking of one 

individual.  They were in a class 3 classification and he got 

bumped about a month after the main pink slips went out.  And 

then he bumped somebody else and went into a class 2 with the 

same wages, but has got a job.  Can they be bumped again?  

How does this bumping . . . I don't understand this.  But if the 

Public Service Commission are involved in this . . . can you, 

how many times can you be bumped before it all settles down 

and you know you're secure? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The bumping is done on the basis of 

seniority with the senior employees having a right to bump 

junior employees. And if you as a senior employee have 

exercised your bumping rights into a position, we don't expect 

there would ever be anybody behind you with bumping rights 

who would bump you in that same transaction.  You could do 

the bumping and move into that position secure that no one 

would be bumping you. 

 

Now you know, the bumping language is all contained in the 

collective agreement.  And I suppose that no scenario is 

impossible.  But on a practical basis, in the kind of exercise 

we've just come through, then the person you're talking about 

could be secure knowing that there would be nobody bumping 

them from this pool of people who were affected by the job 

abolitions. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, if I understand it right then, 

you're saying that it's not likely, if you get bumped once, you're 

not likely to get a phone call that you've been bumped again.  

That's not liable to happen.  I understand that right, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes that's correct, not within that 

bumping exercise.  Now you know, next year if there are more 

abolitions, the situation may get into 



1866 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1993 

turmoil again; nothing's for ever.  But for this round, it would 

work as the member said. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well I don't expect that to happen, Mr. 

Minister.  This government's making such moves to get 

everything going on the right track, I'm sure that by next spring 

they'll be hiring people back, and this here province will just be 

booming.  I don't think anybody has to worry about losing their 

job, for sure.  I am so confident, but I say that with a forked 

tongue, Mr. Minister. 

 

Okay another question I'd like to ask you.  You said there was 

16 people that resigned and took a severance package.  Can you 

supply those names and what the severance package was? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We can get that information.  These are 

people from across the whole service.  But there are only 16 of 

them, so we'll be able to answer the member's question.  I'll just 

write you a letter setting it out, if I may. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Could tell me, 

after the smoke's all cleared, somebody must have figured out 

in Finance, there had to be . . . over the restraints of why we 

had to do this and lay people off.  That's what you said.  So 

how much money was saved by handing out these here 289 

pink slips or whatever the figure?  How much money was 

saved to this government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I just simply can't answer that question.  

The Public Service Commission had some responsibilities in 

connection with this, like the oversight of the bumping process 

and that kind of thing.  But I don't have the numbers the 

member is asking for.  Other ministers would; I suppose the 

Minister of Finance or whatever.  But I certainly don't. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now, Mr. Minister, if there's 289 employees 

less hired by the Public Service Commission, one of your 

officials here should be able to just tell you instantly how much 

money, or why go through the process?  If you laid off 289 

people, individuals without jobs, and you don't know how 

many dollars and cents it costs, why did you do it?  I'm sure 

that your officials should be able to give you approximate 

dollars and cents saving. 

 

I see you're talking to your officials so I'll let you go ahead. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We have people involved here all the 

way from assistant deputy ministers down to the lowest rank in 

the clerical staff.  So those numbers would vary wildly, or 

greatly I should say -- greatly.  And I don't know how we'd 

even hazard a guess.  You know, you can pick a number as an 

average salary, and I don't know what that is, and then multiply 

by 289 and you'd get a number.  But we can't guesstimate the 

average salary. 

 

We do know though that there were some very highly ranked 

jobs that were abolished and some relatively low paid jobs that 

were abolished.  And each 

department would know that and the Treasury Board would 

know it in a global sense.  But none of that information was 

shared with Public Service Commission, so we just don't know 

how to answer your question here today as we sit here. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, 289 people or 290 people, 

whatever, lose their job for restraint, and the Public Service 

Commission doesn't know what salary they were all getting?  

You don't have that on a computer?  Why wouldn't they know?  

Because they would be hiring those people.  They're maybe 

working for a department or whatever, but they're responsible.  

They fired them; they must have known when they were laid 

off, got the pink slip, they must have known exactly what 

wages they were getting. 

 

So I think we're just getting away too easy here, Mr. Minister.  

So I think we're going to have to stop right here until you can 

answer that question. Because we're going to have 289 people 

in this province lose their jobs, and the government cannot tell 

me, the Public Service Commission cannot tell me, or you, Mr. 

Minister, what the cost saving to this province was. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, my officials tell me that 

they could figure that out.  We can gather the information 

together and answer that question.  We can't do it here as we 

sit; we'd just be guessing.  But it's capable, as the member 

suggests, of being figured out and the question can be 

answered. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, when would I 

get that information?  How long will it take?  When you say 

figuring it out, does that mean they're going to figure it out 

while we're sitting here or is it going to take some time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, we can't do it that quickly because 

it's a complex question.  But we can chase down these 289 jobs, 

find out what salary is attached to the jobs, and total them up.  

And it would take us probably two or three working days.  We 

could have it early next week for the member. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay, Mr. Minister.  We'll take your word 

for that.  As long as you can give us that information. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, we're talking about these 289 positions 

that's gone.  Was there more pink slips given out than that and 

then some rehired to come down to 289, or was it 289 when the 

smoke cleared?  Is that the final?  Was there more pink slips 

given out than the 289? 

 

Because I understand talking to many of these people that got 

the pink slips, talking about people in their department, they've 

seen people around them, they lost their jobs, went home 

crying, and then in a few days they're back working again in 

some other job or some . . . And some of them even lost their 

jobs and they've got contracts with government now.  In one 



May 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1867 

department -- for the sake of this individual, I'm not even going 

to mention the department -- but it's happening. 

 

And the Public Service Commission should know if there's 

more than one or not.  When an individual bumps somebody 

else . . . this individual I was talking about before bumped from 

a 3 down to a 2, and then the person that he very reluctantly 

had to bump to have a job just went to a contract that's still 

working there for, I understand, it's six months to a year. 

 

How many times is this happening, that these people got other 

jobs?  The Public Service Commission should know about that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The member has I think a clear grasp of 

what happened here.  There were 289 positions abolished.  

When you translate that into individuals, true, many of them 

are still around.  As I said earlier, we don't expect any 

permanent employees to be put out on the street, because with 

the bumping rights and other avenues they might take, 

hopefully they're still around.  That pleases us that there are no 

. . . these permanent employees out on the street.  So I'm not 

surprised that there are circumstances where employees who 

have been bumped show up somewhere else. 

 

I don't know about the contracts.  I would look into any 

situation that I learned about where things didn't seem to be 

proper but certainly there have been . . . There's a lot of turmoil 

in some of these workplaces where there've been significant job 

abolitions and nobody knows who's . . . where they're at or 

who's bumping who or whether they'll be bumped or what their 

options are. 

 

And as I indicated, 46 out 129 people still haven't made a 

decision about what option they're going to take, as of last 

Friday.  So there's still a good deal of turmoil and the situation 

won't really settle down until the middle of June. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes I know all about the turmoil.  There's 

been so much turmoil I'm sure this government wishes they 

hadn't of made that move because it causes you a lot of 

problems and a lot of enemies out there. 

 

There has to be a better way, Mr. Minister, than laying off 

people.  I think the policy of the past government was much 

better.  We cut it down by thousands of people in nine years; 

just didn't replace . . . went for early retirement and then didn't 

replace when somebody retired on their own.  And here you've 

gone out with mass firings.  And I know what you're doing, 

you're trying to save money and I see the NDP are doing it all 

over.  They did it . . . talking about 50,000 in Ontario this 

morning.  I mean it's not the way to go.  When you have 

somebody going to be eventually on unemployment insurance 

is not the way to create wealth in a province. 

 

I'm just saying you've gone the wrong way and you're going to 

regret it some day because I'm old enough to 

know what happened . . . I can remember my parents talk about 

it at the end of the '30s, what the governments did in those 

days, and that was a Liberal government then, and a 

progressive . . . they called the progressives.  Decided to not 

spend any more money, and they fired everybody, and 

everybody quit spending money, and they had a recession.  I 

think the recession we're in in Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, 

right now is the same as pretty well all over North America.  

But you're going to add to it by cutting down on jobs. 

 

People got to have jobs.  They got to work, so I'm sure that the 

orders you give the . . . the cabinet gave to the Public Service 

Commission to pick out the people they could lay off.  My 

question now, Mr. Minister, is: how many new jobs were 

created?  You said 289 jobs were left vacant.  How many new 

jobs were created? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- There have been no creation of new jobs 

in any real sense.  Generally the downsizing has been pretty 

general right across the piece and there have been some 

mergers in reorganization that have resulted in lay offs or the 

reduction in the number of jobs. 

 

In the Department of Justice I'm aware of a situation where 

there were quite a large number of corrections workers working 

on a temporary basis and we converted a lot of those to 

permanent positions.  But they're just job for job and there's no 

net gain.  It's just a question of rather than being a temporary 

employee, the employee assumes a permanent position.  They 

were working full time anyway so it was a natural change and 

you would not classify that as a new job, as you've just defined 

it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, my notes had down here: I 

didn't understand your answer when I asked if there were more 

people, or why this individual that got bumped from a class 2 

and out and then all of sudden was back to work the next day 

with a six-months or a year contract.  How many more of those 

and why did that happen? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member, we are 

aware of one situation in the government, and I suspect it's the 

one that the member is referring to, although he hasn't given me 

a name or a department.  He may not want to.  Fair enough.  Or 

he may want to do it privately.  Fair enough.  We do not know 

what that contract is all about or why the situation is as the 

member has described, why this situation is as it is. 

 

But it's the only one that we're aware of in the government.  But 

I think the member said earlier he's reluctant to give the name 

so he may not want to discuss it further or he may want to do it 

in private.  I'll leave it up to him. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, no.  It's not necessary to 

further it because I'm happy the man's got a job.  I'm not trying 

. . . I just wondered.  If there's only one, there must be some 

reason for it.  And I'm not worried about it then.  The 

individual that bumped this person is so happy that the guy is 

working again because nobody 



1868 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1993 

feels good about bumping anybody.  No, I wouldn't want to 

bring the name or the department for the sake of the individuals 

involved.  And if there's only one, we won't further that. 

 

Where does Crop Insurance . . . any employees of Crop 

Insurance, they got pink slips the same day.  Do the employees 

of Crop Insurance come under the Public Service Commission 

too? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, Mr. Chairman.  Crop Insurance is a 

Crown, a Crown corporation and they do their own thing.  And 

we're just not aware of what's happening there. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I was quite sure that's the way 

it would be with all the Crowns.  And I expect that . . . this one 

here I don't know, and I don't know why I don't know.  I know 

nurses are paid out of the Department of Health, and they're 

hired in their local communities and all around.  Is the Public 

Service got anything to do with nurses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We have nurses employed in the 

Department of Health -- public health nurses -- and they're 

appointed by the Public Service Commission, or pursuant to 

that process.  There are also nurses in the hospitals at North 

Battleford and Moose Jaw.  So there are nurses employed in the 

public service.  I think that's the extent of your question. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, thank you, Mr. Minister.  So did some 

of the nurses that were on staff . . . nurses and staff laid off at 

Weyburn at the hospital there and in Saskatoon, and some in 

Regina, just lately -- were any of them involved with the Public 

Service Commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, they were not.  They were not 

employed by the government. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The member from 

Morse is going to ask a question. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

have a number of questions that I think deserve an answer.  I 

raised a question or two in regard to some of the ads that I've 

seen in . . . I'll give you examples.  And one was the student 

employment '93 which said the individuals who were 

aboriginal or disabled would get preferential treatment. 

 

The second one that caught my eye was for one of the 

departments that you're responsible for -- Indian and Metis 

Affairs.  And it said there, only an aboriginal woman need 

apply.  Now, Mr. Minister, at the bottom of one of your other 

ads:  we are committed to employment equity. 

 

Now what has defining who you're going to hire got to do with 

employment equity?  Employment equity means that equal 

opportunity for male, female, black, white, red, yellow, 

whatever colour, whatever ethnic 

origin.  And I find that very, very disturbing that the Minister 

of Justice, responsible for the Public Service Commission, 

responsible even for some Bills that we're discussing in this 

Assembly, would have the lack of foresight of putting that kind 

of advertising in the paper. 

 

Now you can decide on the basis of a decision-making process 

that you want employment equity as it relates to various races 

in the province.  What you fail to understand, Mr. Minister, we 

probably have less Chinese and Japanese and Vietnamese 

people in the province of Saskatchewan working than Indians, 

if you want to use them as an example.  And we need to have 

employment equity because they're a minority. 

 

And then we go the whole gamut.  Why not allow an 

opportunity for individuals to be taken into the public service 

on the basis of their capacity to deliver a service to the 

community that is, number one, the best that you can get; and 

number two, for the lowest price you can get?  And that, Mr. 

Minister, should be some of the fundamentals that you deal 

with. 

 

And I think it's disgusting.  I had a gentleman who applied for a 

grant under the student employment and wrote a letter in The 

Southwest Booster.  And I read it in the Assembly as a part of 

the discussion in my throne speech address.  And I really 

believe, Mr. Minister, that that's wrong. 

 

That doesn't have . . . In a Canadian society where we have free 

opportunities for individuals and you put that sort of thing 

down, I think it's disgusting.  And I don't believe it has a place 

coming from a Public Service Commission, coming from an 

area of justice.  You're supposed to represent people equally 

and fairly, and I don't see where that does that. 

 

And I am speaking on behalf of other minorities who are just as 

important to this province as the ones that you single out.  And 

I don't think that that's fair, Mr. Minister, and I don't think it's 

right.  And that is not because I'm white, that's because there 

are other people who are of Chinese ancestry and Japanese 

ancestry, and what you are doing is you're discriminating 

against them.  And I don't believe that that's right and I don't 

believe that that's fair. 

 

I think people should have the dignity of having the respect of 

themselves as individuals in relation to their race, their colour, 

their ethnic origin, their sex. It doesn't matter, Mr. Minister.  

And I say that what you have done is you have tarnished your 

responsibility as a Minister of Justice in determining the value 

and the contribution you make to society.  And that, sir, is 

wrong, and I believe it's wrong. 

 

And I think the people of the province of Saskatchewan would 

agree with me that it's wrong.  Equal opportunity on the basis 

of employment equity means equal opportunity, not a bias one 

way or the other.  And I think that you misrepresented the 

opportunities that you presented.  And I would say that that is 

entirely wrong, sir. 



May 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1869 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, that is an extraordinary 

question, and the answer to which the member is just not going 

to like at all.  And here is the answer, Mr. Member.  All of the 

things that you mention, the advertising and the various 

qualifications, and all of the things that you mentioned, were 

done.  They were done pursuant to an affirmative action plan 

that had been filed by the Government of Saskatchewan for 

approval with the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission 

and approved by -- just listen to me -- and approved by the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission.  And that action 

plan was filed and approved in 1986.  And everything that we 

did that the member has referred to has been done pursuant to 

that plan. 

 

Now as of April 1, 1993 -- the member shakes his head but this 

is a fact -- as of April 1, 1993, visible minorities have been 

added to the three categories that the previous government had 

included in the affirmative action plan.  The categories covered 

in the 1986 plan were aboriginal people, women, and persons 

suffering from disability. 

 

So that's why I find your question to be so extraordinary -- so 

extraordinary.  Even without the affirmative action program of 

the previous government, it would be an extraordinary 

question.  But in light of the fact that it's your plan that we're 

operating under, I find the question to be, as I said, 

extraordinary. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'd like to have you point 

out to the Assembly one time where the government where I 

was involved with did what you did in providing that aboriginal 

women need only apply.  I'd like you to prove that to me that 

we did that.  And I'll bet you that you couldn't do that. 

 

Number two, in the policy of opportunities delivered to 

individuals, that is equal across Canada, and I will stand for 

that on the basis of anywhere.  If I, sir, did what you did, I 

would be held before the Human Rights Commission and I 

would be charged.  Yes, Mr. Minister, I would.  And you tell 

me when we ever did that -- you tell me.  And I'll bet you, you 

can't. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it was the previous 

government that proposed an affirmative action program for 

hiring to the public service of Saskatchewan.  All that has been 

done by your government during the period from 1986 to 1991 

and by our government since the late fall of 1991 having to do 

with special hiring arrangements for aboriginals, for women, 

and for disabled, have been done under the umbrella of and in 

accordance with the terms of the affirmative action plan. 

 

Now what are we getting cranky about here?  I mean you 

thought it was a good idea; we think it's a good idea; the whole 

world -- at least all of Canada -- thinks it's a good idea.  Let's 

keep doing it. 

 

Now we don't have enough aboriginals employed in the 

Government of Saskatchewan, by any test you 

want to use, whether as a percentage of the population, whether 

as a . . . you know, choose your yardstick.  It's not enough.  We 

don't have enough women in management positions in the 

government.  This is a position that your government had; it's a 

position that our government has.  It is the correct position. 

 

If we combine those two together and say in this particular 

senior position in the Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat we 

want an aboriginal woman, that falls precisely within the 

definition of the affirmative action plan and is a good idea.  It 

solves two problems at once -- representation of Indian people 

and representation of women in senior management positions.  

What's the problem? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, you didn't answer the question 

that I asked you.  Would you show to this Assembly and to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan one instance where we 

advertised for the public that only certain individuals need 

apply for the qualification of that job.  I don't believe you can. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, and I didn't say that.  But I do say 

that what we did in that case of that ADM and what we're 

doing falls exactly within the four corners of the approved 

affirmative action plan.  Now maybe it's the wrong plan.  I 

mean if that's what you're saying and we go back and take a 

look at it and say, did those Tories know what they were doing 

in 1986 when they made that application for approval of an 

affirmative action plan. 

 

But we like the plan.  We think we've improved upon it by 

dealing with visible minorities, and you mentioned a couple of 

nationalities where that would probably qualify under the 

heading "visible minorities."  But we're satisfied with the way it 

works. 

 

Now if you think it's not fair and want us to go back and take a 

look at your plan, we'll do that.  But I say with respect to the 

member, I don't think that you really want us to do that.  I think 

that you were serious when you proposed the plan in the first 

place and I think it was a good plan, and you're to be 

commended for it.  And you shouldn't cut the ground out from 

underneath your own government with what everybody thinks 

is a good idea. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I believe it's wrong to 

advertise for those kinds of positions in that kind of a context.  

I believe it's wrong.  In fact I've spoken with individuals who 

are handicapped, physically handicapped, and they would agree 

with me, that they don't want to be treated different than any 

other individual.  They have dignity within themselves, and that 

is what they want to have. 

 

And that, sir, causes me equal concern to what you're just 

stating.  And if you go to the point of having in various kinds 

of ways . . . It disqualifies certain individuals and especially 

teenagers who are looking for work in student employment; it 

is disturbing to young men and women, and I'll use the word 

loosely as white people in the province of Saskatchewan.  It is 



1870 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1993 

disturbing to children who are teenagers who want to have a 

job and who are disqualified from an opportunity within the 

framework of this government because you say that there are 

two qualifications, two qualifications, and they are irritated by 

it.  And I know they are because they have told me that. 

 

And that sir, is why I raise it today because people don't believe 

that that is fair.  In all of the constitutional debate, Mr. 

Minister, there is one thing that struck me over and over and 

over again, is the people -- and I voted for the constitution as it 

was presented, sir -- people who said they did not believe that 

there should be special privileges for certain groups and 

individuals across this country.  I believe that is the 

undercurrent and belief that individuals had. 

 

Now I think this equally flies in the face of that, and I think it's 

disturbing to say the least.  And I say don't put it in.  What you 

have in the bottom line of this one -- we are committed to 

employment equity, period -- says a lot more to me about the 

dignity of the human being than to say so-and-so need not 

apply, so-and-so need not apply because that, sir, is 

discrimination.  And discrimination in my book has always 

been wrong, and so I just want to make you aware of that 

because I don't think it's the right thing to do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- In light of the time, I won't launch into a 

spirited defence of affirmative action programs, but the 

member will know that they are called into existence because 

of a generally accepted belief that there are groups in our 

society that are under-represented, chronically 

under-represented in employment.  And the whole idea of an 

affirmative action plan is to speed up the situation so that they 

will become properly represented, so that there will be an 

equity in the sense that the working population in a plant . . . 

And it may be your plant.  You as an employer can apply for an 

approved affirmative action program with the Human Rights 

Commission.  It's not just restricted to government.  Anybody 

can do it. 

 

And you would then have to commit yourself.  The whole idea 

would be that you would want to commit yourself towards 

changing the mix of your employees so that these chronically 

under-represented groups could be properly represented in your 

workforce.  And that's the whole idea. 

 

Now I don't want to get into a spirited defence about it.  The 

member has made his position clear and I hope I in a short way 

made mine clear. 

 

Item 2 agreed to. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


