


















































Hansard: May 14, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1705 

 May 14, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return 

showing: 

 

Regarding the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission: (1) has 

any minister of the Crown read the security report 

investigating GTECH and VLC; (2) is it the position of the 

government that the principle of ministerial responsibility 

does not apply to the legal, proper, and appropriate conduct 

of gaming in Saskatchewan; (3) in context of the publicly 

stated position of the government relating to the 

responsibility for the Gaming Commission, what are the 

duties of the Minister of Gaming, and what is the purpose of 

having such a minister? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to 

you, sir, and to the members of the Legislative Assembly two 

very distinguished guests who are visiting our Assembly today.  

They're in your gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce His Excellency Prem 

Budhwar, the High Commissioner of India to Canada -- Mr. 

Ambassador, Excellency -- and his wife Madame Kusum 

Budhwar who's here as well -- Madame.  I'd ask all members to 

give them a very, very warm welcome to the province of 

Saskatchewan as they visit us today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the ambassador is 

engaged in a very busy round of meetings with government 

officials and non-government people.  I had the pleasure of a 

very delightful and informative conversation with him this 

morning on a number of matters ranging from international 

concerns to the question of economic prospects for 

Saskatchewan and for India. 

 

He'll be meeting with the Minister of Economic Development 

at a luncheon today hosted by my colleague, has met with other 

ministers.  This afternoon's agenda also involves meetings with 

SaskTel International -- I'm glad to see that, Excellency, 

because as I was mentioning to you in our private conversation, 

we're very proud of SaskTel and communications, and maybe 

something can be developed there of mutual benefit; the 

editorial board of the Regina Leader-Post as well, and 

tomorrow with University of Regina officials. 

Mr. Speaker, India is a very important country in the world, 

one which is of emerging strength and importance.  It's a 

democratic nation, a strong nation.  We have many Indian 

people in Canada, as Canadians of Indian background. 

 

We welcome very much the High Commissioner and his wife 

and his delegation to Saskatchewan, and hope that the good 

relationships in the past continue and improve between our 

province and your country.  Thank you very much, sir. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to join 

the Premier on behalf of Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition, to 

welcome His Excellency and his lovely wife here today to our 

Assembly to watch our proceedings. 

 

And I'm sure Your Excellency will enjoy his round of visits in 

Saskatchewan.  We like to think that we view the world as our 

partners.  And we certainly hope that you have a very fruitful 

stay in our province.  So once again, on behalf of Her Majesty's 

opposition, we welcome you to the Assembly today, sir. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's my 

pleasure today to introduce to you, sir, and through you to the 

rest of the Assembly 13 grade 7 students in the east gallery.  

Mr. Speaker, they are grade 7, and they come from St. George 

School in Wilkie. 

 

Now the reason I say it's a pleasure is because we're so far 

away from the capital, we don't get a lot of visits from our 

schools so it's a pleasure and a honour for me to introduce you 

to the Assembly. 

 

Their teacher is accompanying them, Mr. Speaker, Bev Barth, 

and the chaperons is Bob Barth and Sarah Jensen and Rose 

Reiniger.  I will be meeting with this group after question 

period, Mr. Speaker.  We'll enjoy some refreshments and 

maybe some question and answers from the students and 

indeed from the adults there, too. 

 

So I'm looking forward to this, and I'd ask the Assembly to 

help me welcome these students in a very warm manner, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure for me to 

introduce to you in the west gallery 29 students from the Carrot 

River High School.  As the former member said, it's not very 

often that I get students coming down all the way from home, 

and it's a pleasure when they do come, an extreme pleasure. 

 

They are accompanied today, these 29 students from Carrot 

River, by their teachers: Diane Higgins, Beth Ferguson, Trudy 

Skibinsky, Pat Rawlick, Mike 



1706 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1993 

Weisgerber, and Chuck Low is the bus driver.  I'll be meeting 

with them after question period for photos, and I ask you and 

members opposite to greet them here this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my privilege and 

pleasure to introduce to you and to members of the Assembly a 

group of, I believe, grade 6, 7, and 8's from McNab School 

who are with us and are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I mentioned, they are from McNab School and they are with 

us here today with their teachers Bill Parr, Darby Wild, and 

Gerrie Propp.  And I want to welcome them here today and 

look forward to meeting with them in the Speaker's boardroom 

shortly after question period.  Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly 

26 grade 4 students from Montmartre Elementary School. 

 

The students are accompanied by teacher Sandi Brown and 

visiting teacher Penny from Australia.  Chaperons with the 

group include Carol Baumgartner, Delphine Lepage, Betty 

Ferraton, Patty Weichel, Gwen Ferraton, and Elanor Lepage. 

 

I look forward to meeting with the group following question 

period and I ask members to join in welcoming this group here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to you and through you 

to members of the Assembly three people in your gallery, sir -- 

Tim and Lynn Eremondi and their son Stephen. 

 

They're constituents of mine and they're down to Regina 

visiting with relatives on holidays, their annual vacation.  And I 

hope that you have a good rest and a good visit and a safe trip 

back. 

 

I'd ask all members to join me, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Rural Hospital Closures 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Health.  Madam Minister, as you 

are well aware it's a month ago since you . . . or a month has 

passed since you brought down your death sentence on 52 

hospitals throughout the province of Saskatchewan.  At that 

time, Madam Minister, you gave all kinds of assurances that 

everything would be fine, that people's concerns 

would be addressed, and people's questions would be 

answered. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, one month has passed and still there 

aren't any answers.  There's only concern, there's confusion, 

and there's fear in 52 communities across this province. 

 

Madam Minister, will you give us some of those answers 

today?  How many of those 52 facilities will be closed entirely 

and how much further will people in those areas have to travel 

to receive emergency care. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite know 

full well if they are having any discussions -- legitimate 

discussions rather than inflamed rhetoric -- with people in their 

constituencies and who are working in the area of health care, 

they know full well that hospital boards in conjunction with 

planning groups are looking at options. 

 

They're developing management plans, for example, that will 

determine where people . . . they are developing management 

plans that will determine where people will be relocated if 

they're long-term patients in acute care beds; that the hospital 

boards and the planning groups are working towards what is 

going to happen in the future, and the Department of Health 

officials will be meeting with them in the next short time in 

order to go over their management plans and see what is going 

to happen and how we can help in any way or another and 

make an assessment as to how that's coming along. 

 

As to which facility . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, people's lives are at stake and 

you tell us that you're developing plans.  In a whole month, we 

still are looking for some of the answers; hospital boards are 

looking for answers; they're trying to develop answers; and yet 

you have no answers for these boards, for the individual 

care-givers throughout the province. 

 

Madam Minister, what you're telling us is not good enough for 

the people of Ponteix, Vanguard, Invermay, and the 49 other 

communities who fear for the future of their health care 

services. 

 

Madam Minister, the doctor in Invermay said that she does not 

expect that any doctor will be willing to practice in that 

community after October 1.  Madam Minister, will you tell us 

how many of the other 51 communities now expect to lose their 

physician after October 1? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1707 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I was just finishing answering the 

question, Mr. Speaker, and I'll finish the former question now. 

 

With respect to conversion of these facilities, we are looking at 

the conversion of all of those facilities or most of them, 

depending on what the communities want in conjunction with 

their consultations with the district boards.  Some communities 

are expressing to us that they may not want to convert the 

hospital because the facility is old and they may want to use 

another facility in their community.  So that . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I think the members, if they ask a 

question should at least have the courtesy to listen to the 

answer; you can't have these constant interruptions. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- So that option is open and we want the 

communities to explore these options.  And they are doing it.  

And I must say that many of them are doing it with a very 

positive attitude and looking to the opportunities within the 

change, unlike the members opposite who of course are 

engaged in inflamed rhetoric and attempting to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, over the past number of years many 

communities and many individuals have put forward ideas and 

put forward suggestions.  And what we're bringing forward 

today is the fact that in this past month and over the past year 

while communities have been looking for answers, the 

government really hasn't been coming forward with any. 

 

Madam Minister, you promised that there will be enhanced 

ambulance services in those areas to make up for the closure of 

hospitals.  The people I've talked to in these communities see 

no evidence of this taking place so far.  When is this going to 

start happening, and why has there been no progress to date? 

 

And what do you say to people who have serious concerns 

about a farming accident such as we heard about yesterday or a 

heart attack which may lead them too far away from 

emergency services they need when every minute may mean 

the difference between life and death? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll continue to finish 

answering the other question and the question with respect to 

doctors.  A doctor's income on average with respect to 

in-patient acute care is about 6 per cent of the total income.  I 

hardly think that doctors are going to leave their communities 

because of the 6 per cent aspect of their income.  I hardly 

believe that. 

 

Now with respect to emergency services, I have indicated that 

we are looking at enhanced emergency services.  The 

government is now looking at 

possibilities, for example, of a province-wide 911.  We're 

looking at first-responder systems.  There are other things 

being looked into.  And in conjunction with district boards we 

will be looking at enhanced emergency services where it's 

necessary. 

 

People with respect to cardiac problems will be in the same 

situation they were before.  They will go in to their facility 

whether it's the hospital or if they choose to use another facility 

in the town, they will be stabilized, and they will be sent on in 

to the city which is what happens in most of these cases today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, and to the Minister.  Madam 

Minister, one month has passed and now it is painfully obvious 

that you still do not have any answers . . . any more answers 

than you had a month ago when you brought down the death 

sentence on 52 hospitals or health facilities across this 

province. 

 

You haven't informed us which ones may remain open or 

which ones will close.  You don't know which communities 

will retain their doctors and which ones will leave, and you can 

talk to the doctor in Whitewood.  You don't know what type of 

emergency services will be available, or how far people will 

have to travel to retain these services.  You don't even know if 

ambulance services will be upgraded.  You don't know how 

many jobs will be lost and when you will have a transition 

strategy in place for those who lose their jobs. 

 

Frankly, Madam Minister, you don't have any answers to any 

of these questions yet you expect people in these communities 

to believe you have everything under control. 

 

Madam Minister, why can't you simply admit that this isn't as 

well thought out as it should have been?  Why can't you admit 

that you need more time?  Will you set back the August 17 

deadline?  Will you set back the October deadline and allow 

proper consultation to take place before the implementation of 

all your strategies?  Will you do that, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

talking as though everything has been closed down in the last 

month.  It's not true.  There is funding for the . . . If the 

members opposite will listen -- there is funding for hospital 

boards up . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  If members simply want 

to take up their time by interrupting, that's fine, I will interrupt 

then. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- . . . funding for hospital boards until 

October 1.  We have indicated we wanted a management plan 

put together by May 31; however some communities have 

asked for an extension, and we have accommodated.  We will 

be meeting with these communities and helping them to put 

together their management plan.  It is not the Department of 



1708 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1993 

Health moving in and saying, you're going to have this service, 

and you're going to do this with your facility.  We are asking 

the district boards and the communities, in conjunction with the 

Department of Health, to work through those issues, and there 

is until October 1 to do it. 

 

So there is lots of time in order for communities to develop 

some of the alternative services that will be available.  The 

management plan is not due yet for a couple weeks, in some 

cases longer.  So everything is going along according to plan, 

and communities will be working in conjunction with . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Does the member opposite want to 

hear my answer or not? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  If the minister just kept on 

answering her question, maybe we could get through it.  I'll 

give the minister a few seconds to finish her answer. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Communities and boards will be working 

together, Mr. Speaker.  They'll be working with the Department 

of Health, and we will work very hard to get everything in 

place as quickly as possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Health.  Madam Minister, with the closure of 

hospitals comes decreased access to health care, the loss of 

jobs, the loss of economic security, and a loss of people in 

those communities.  People are going to leave; there's no 

question about that.  And when they do, they're going to take 

their children with them. 

 

I'd like to quote from the Star-Phoenix of April 15:  "If (the) 

hospital is shut, can the school be far behind?" 

 

The article states that the town of Dodsland's biggest employer 

is the hospital.  One town resident says, and I quote: 

 

If they shut it down, it will take eight families.  That's a big 

(problem) of Dodsland.  We're going to lose our school next. 

 

Madam Minister, you are shutting down over a dozen schools 

already.  How many more are you expected to shut down as a 

result of your government's attack on rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to hospitals 

and economic development, I want to say this.  This 

government was left with a legacy of a $15 billion debt -- a $15 

billion debt.  If we are going to continue to preserve medicare 

for future generations we have to get a handle on the deficit.  

That means there will be reductions in expenditures in health.  

When we are faced with a limited health budget, dollars must 

be targeted to real health needs, to real needs, not to economic 

development in communities.  The health dollars has to be 

targeted to health needs. 

Now when we focus on real health needs, when we focus . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- How can health care givers be 

considered economic development?  Get a grip. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I think the member from Thunder Creek 

should get a grip.  When we focus on real health needs, on real 

health needs, we can deliver a high quality of health care 

services, preserve medicare for future generations, and get a 

handle on the deficit as well -- much more than you were able 

to do in your nine years that you created this debt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rural School Closures 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health 

doesn't seem prepared to answer our question so I'll direct the 

next one to the Minister of Education. 

 

Madam Minister, even the Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association recognizes how unfair your attack is on rural 

Saskatchewan.  They have said you are creating two classes of 

education: one for the cities and one for the rural areas.  And 

they're asking, why should taxpayers in small cities, towns, and 

villages receive an inferior quality of education for their 

children? 

 

Madam Minister, it's your government's divide-and-destroy 

policies that are behind this.  Isn't it your total disregard for the 

people of rural Saskatchewan the reason why groups like the 

SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) must come 

out and publicly condemn your government's actions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 

that question, and for the opportunity to say that we work very 

closely with the SSTA and the other education partners in our 

province.  They are not condemning us; they are working with 

us. 

 

I'd like to also say that the highest year that the most number of 

schools that closed in any year since 1980 was in the last year 

of your administration when 20 schools closed.  Last year the 

number was nine. 

 

And with respect to opportunities for education for rural 

children and two classes of education, the cornerstones of our 

system are equality of opportunity for every student no matter 

where they live.  And we have stood behind that in our budget 

of this year by dedicating $10.7 million, a substantial increase, 

to distance education.  We do care about the opportunities that 

rural students have to be on a level playing-field when they 

access post-secondary education, and we're doing something 

about it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1709 

Farm Income Problems 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  You were elected, Mr. Premier, on the basis of 

promises to protect rural Saskatchewan, provide better 

insurance programs through GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program).  You were elected for all of the reasons that we have 

isolated and suggested to the Minister of Health: more money 

for health, more money for education. 

 

But since getting elected, every policy you've brought in has 

been designed to tear down rural communities, Mr. Premier.  

You destroyed GRIP, and then you took away the farmers' right 

to even challenge you in court.  Net farm income in 1993 will 

be less than $5,000 per farm -- the lowest level since 1930, Mr. 

Premier -- thanks to your destruction of rural Saskatchewan 

safety nets.  Mr. Premier, why have you abandoned your 

commitment to farm families?  And why are you so intent on 

destroying the rural part of the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again the members 

opposite finally get around to the question of GRIP, and then 

they address it to the Premier rather than to the Minister of 

Agriculture.  I think -- yes, day 55 -- again I think the farmers 

in this province know that this was a flawed program.  The 

other provinces in this country now know that this was a 

flawed program.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, the shortfall in 

income is because of a lack of third-line defence which again I 

remind the members opposite that they voted against; they did 

not support our farmers in going to Ottawa to get third-line 

defence which we have been unable to do up to this point.  

They do not support the farmers in their fight for keeping the 

Wheat Board or in keeping the Crow rate.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

it's no wonder that they wait to day 55 to raise agriculture in the 

House after their record on this area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, you took away the 

rural service centres.  You took away the GRIP.  You took 

away the farmers' rights to go to the court.  You're taking away 

the hospitals.  You're taking away the schools.  In fact in 

Vanguard they are expecting that they are going to have to lay 

off three teachers next year in order to have the same school . . 

. teacher-pupil ratio.  You did that, Mr. Premier. 

 

Farm incomes are going to be less than 5,000, Mr. Premier, 

5,000; that's lower than they were in the 1930s, Mr. Premier.  

Why the vicious attack on the farmers in this province?  Why 

don't you do what you were elected to do and help rural people 

for a change instead of constantly planning on what you can 

take away from them next, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again the 

members opposite only get to agriculture questions when they 

run out of other questions, it seems.  I remind the . . . Mr. 

Speaker, we do not subscribe to the rural/urban split that the 

members opposite perpetuated for 10 years in this province. 

 

The rural people in this province are also a part of this 

province; they are also taxpayers; they are also suffering as 

everybody in this province is suffering, from the deficit that 

was left to us.  They are putting their shoulder to the wheel 

with the urban people and with the other people in this 

province, with the workers and with the business people, as we 

try to get a handle on this deficit and get a better future for all 

of the province.  And I think that we will get that if the 

members opposite will cooperate as well as the rural people 

have done in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rural Job Creation 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- My question is to the Minister of Economic 

Development.  Mr. Minister, while your colleagues are driving 

people out of rural Saskatchewan, you sit and watch and don't 

lift a finger.  Your colleagues have pulled the drain plug on 

rural Saskatchewan and you've shut the tap off as well, to rural 

Saskatchewan.  The only job you have created for a rural 

resident was for your buddy, Jack Messer, the lord of the flies. 

 

Mr. Minister, the only thing that you have developed for rural 

Saskatchewan is despair and resignation.  Instead why don't 

you suggest something positive for job creation in 

Saskatchewan.  Tell us you've done something other than 

printing glossy brochures full of rosy platitudes.  Mr. Minister, 

will you do that for us? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

respond to the hon. member's question by pointing out to him 

that during the period from 1986 to 1991, the last term of that 

government opposite when they were in government, led to the 

out-migration of 60,000 people in that term of office -- 60,000 

people -- at the same time as they were running up the deficit, 

$15 billion, to the total of $15 billion.  This was their economic 

development strategy.  That was their policy.  Borrow $15 

billion, throw it at projects by the hundreds of millions of 

dollars, and during that period 60,000 people left the province 

looking for work. 

 

Now for you to stand here and lecture us on how to do 

economic development flies in the face of reality and your 

record.  Are there problems?  Are there problems?  I want to 

say that obviously there are problems with the economy right 

across Canada and North America. 

 

But I'll tell you in meeting with the new president of the 

chamber of commerce yesterday in Swift Current, Mr. Mel 

Watson, we've agreed to continue to work together, obviously 

in a spirit of partnership and cooperation. 



1710 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1993 

That's something different than what I see from the members 

opposite, that is, gloom and doom and more destruction -- as 

they did during the 1980s. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Boundaries Legislation 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, what you've heard this morning 

from the members of the opposition is that you have taken 

away the hope of so many people in Saskatchewan.  Less than 

two years ago, Mr. Premier, you promised so much -- health, 

education, agriculture, jobs -- and you were going to do it all 

on less, sir. 

 

As the folks in Swift Current told your ministers yesterday, 

people are voting with their feet, says the chamber president.  

They're abandoning rural Saskatchewan because of the lack of 

hope, Mr. Premier, that your government gives them. 

 

And today the final nail in the coffin of rural Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Premier, you're going to introduce a Bill that takes away 

the ability of rural people to have representation in this 

legislature.  After you devastate everything else out there, Mr. 

Premier, you now bring in a Bill to take away their political 

representation. 

 

Mr. Premier, are you telling rural people that they have no 

value in our society?  Is that what this attack is all about, Mr. 

Premier, they have no value in society?  Answer that for me, 

sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the short answer to the 

question is exactly no.  In fact it's the exact opposite.  What 

we're saying to the people of rural Saskatchewan, as we're 

saying to all the people of Saskatchewan, is that it is our lot in 

life to have been elected in a set of circumstances where we 

have inherited a fiscal and social and economic shambles as a 

result of nine and one-half years of the government opposite.  

You don't have to accept my word for this.  In today's Globe 

and Mail, Jeffrey Simpson writes, amongst other things, quote: 

 

In Saskatchewan, NDP Premier Roy Romanow has no good 

cheer . . . as the province wrestles with a staggering deficit 

bequeathed by one of the worst provincial governments in 

recent Canadian history, the Conservatives under former 

premier Grant Devine. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- That's the fact.  It's not the Premier 

saying this; this is what outsiders are saying.  And you have the 

audacity, sir, to get up and to say that in our attempt to try to 

redefine and to rebuild and to give hope and to turn the corner 

and to manage the deficit the way we do it, that that doesn't suit 

you? 

 

Well I say to you, sir, with the greatest of respect, the 

people of Saskatchewan have absolutely no confidence or 

respect in your judgement after nine and a half years of 

bringing us to the brink of destruction.  I say to you, 

acknowledge that and join us, as everybody in this province is, 

as we start on this great mission of rebuilding and providing 

hope as we have begun doing so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, a question to the 

Premier.  It's interesting, Mr. Premier, that you always have to 

find someone like your buddy Eric Malling from Toronto or 

Mr. Simpson.  Somebody from Toronto, Mr. Premier . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Will the members 

please come to order and let the Leader of the Opposition ask 

his question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's obvious that the 

government members don't like to hear, but I can't, for the life 

of me, Mr. Premier, find a person in this whole great province 

of ours that's been able to give you a pat on the back for 

months and months and months . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Oh, really. 

 

Well, Mr. Premier, the simple fact is that your process of rural 

cleansing has been going on for 18 months and there isn't a 

person in rural Saskatchewan, sir, that believes you any more. 

 

Now the question is, why would you want to take away their 

rural representation, when the excuse you used that you're 

going to save the taxpayers money, when we all know that the 

cost of four or five MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) is the equivalent of one cabinet minister.  You give 

your Deputy Premier an extra $800,000 in the budget to run the 

federal election for the NDP. 

 

Instead of saying to the people of this province who happen to 

live in an area that you don't like, I'll take away your political 

representation, why don't you just cut the cabinet by two or 

three and save the taxpayers that amount of money? 

 

Mr. Premier, why don't you tell rural Saskatchewan the real 

reason that you want to take away their political 

representation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to answer 

specifically, as I always try to do, the specific question of the 

Leader of the Opposition.  He prefaces his question by saying, 

why do we want to take away the representation of rural 

Saskatchewan?  Of course that is a gross misrepresentation of 

the Bill. 

 

This is not taking away.  The proportion of representation, I'm 

sure after the independent commission sits down and does its 

job, will be very favourable and unchanged. 

 

Remember that Manitoba has 58 MLAs -- Manitoba, 



May 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1711 

an agricultural-based province too.  Remember that 

Newfoundland has 54.  Remember at a time when we're asking 

everybody in Saskatchewan to do with a little bit less and to do 

better with a little bit less, it's only understandable that the 

people of this province would expect us, as MLAs, to do as 

good with less. 

 

That doesn't mean that the voice of rural Saskatchewan is going 

to be stifled.  Far from it.  I believe the voice of rural 

Saskatchewan is going to be made more effective and the voice 

of rural Saskatchewan is being heard as they're joining this 

government in dealing with "a staggering deficit bequeathed by 

one of the worst provincial governments in recent Canadian 

history".  People know that. 

 

And I'll say in conclusion to the Leader of the Opposition, he 

may not believe me, but I want to tell him this morning I 

actually got a pat on the back in a coffee shop.  I had two 

youngsters from Swift Current who said: Mr. Premier, keep up 

the good work; you were left with a mess.  You're on the right 

course; we know it's a tough job.  We're with you as the young 

people, and they are.  You join us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 79 -- An Act to Provide for the Division of 

Saskatchewan into Constituencies for the Election of 

Members of the Legislative Assembly 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

Provide for the Division of Saskatchewan into Constituencies 

for the Election of Members of the Legislative Assembly be 

now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 80 -- An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act and to 

make certain Consequential Amendments resulting from 

the enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Tobacco Tax Act and to make certain 

Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment of 

this Act be now introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 81 -- An Act to amend The Alcohol Control Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that The 

Alcohol Control Amendment Act be introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth: -- With a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's your point of order? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I just want to bring to the attention 

of the Assembly the fact that I believe the Minister of Health 

and her responses today cast an aspersion towards the 

institution of this Assembly and the Chair.  And on two 

occasions when the Minister of Health was brought to order, 

the Minister of Health indicated in her response that she was 

going to go back and answer the question that had been given 

previously. 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that it was a challenge 

towards the Chair and it was not befitting of a minister of the 

Crown in light of the institutions of this Assembly.  I would ask 

that you, Mr. Speaker, review the matter and indeed stand up 

for the institutions of this Assembly and ask that ministers 

show respect to the Chair. 

 

The Speaker: -- I will take the member's advice and review the 

matter. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Rulings on Points of Order 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I have four 

statements that I wish to make this morning in regards to points 

of order that have been raised during this session.  So I ask the 

members to bear with me this morning. 

 

The first one is the Opposition House Leader on Wednesday 

raised a point of order relating to the accuracy of the Votes and 

Proceedings in its record of the Speaker's ruling on an 

amendment made to resolution no. 7 on May 11.  I concur that 

in my ruling I did not actually use the words used in the Votes 

and Proceedings, but for reasons I stated in response to the 

point of order when it was raised, I do not find the point of 

order well taken. 

 

While addressing this subject, I do want to point out to all 

members that the only purpose of recording points of order in 

the Votes and Proceedings is to summarize a point of order or a 

Speaker's ruling which might have a bearing on proceedings.  It 

is for this reason that not every point of order is recorded in the 

Votes and Proceedings.  All points of orders are of course 

published in their entirety in Hansard report.  Hansard being a 

verbatim, there is no interpretation or summary of events. 

 

In reviewing this matter, I have found that in certain 

jurisdictions, points of orders are not noted in the Journals.  In 

some cases, neither are Speaker's rulings unless the Speaker 

makes a statement from a prepared text.  A ruling is just as 

much a precedent when 



1712 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1993 

recorded in Hansard as it is when recorded in the Votes. 

 

To avoid the prospect of misinterpretation in the future, I have 

instructed the Clerks at the Table not to record in the Votes and 

Proceedings points of order and to record Speaker's rulings 

only when the Speaker makes a statement from a prepared text.  

I hope this will in future avoid the necessity of raising a point 

of order like that raised by the Opposition House Leader. 

 

The second statement.  My second ruling deals with another 

point of order raised on Wednesday by the Opposition House 

Leader concerning resolution no. 7 and the amendment to it on 

which I ruled on May 11.  Given that the amendment to 

resolution no. 7 was ruled out of order because it contained 

words in the nature of a preamble, the member asked that the 

main motion be modified by Mr. Speaker for the same reason.  

I have again reviewed the wording of the resolution and find it 

to be within our practice. 

 

However, the member again raises an issue which is of some 

concern to the Speaker.  On occasion during this and the last 

session I have ruled on the inadmissible form of amendments 

proposed from both sides of the House.  The difficulty of this 

issue is the loose practice that has developed over many years 

regarding the technical acceptability of certain private 

members' motions and especially the amendments made 

thereto. 

 

While the Speaker has attempted to be diligent, this is again 

another issue where the Speaker must make a judgement where 

to draw the line.  It is apparent that when the Speaker has acted, 

it has been to the dissatisfaction of certain members from both 

sides of the House.  On the other hand I have found that other 

members feel the Speaker has not been strict enough.  Given 

the problematic nature of this matter, this is perhaps an issue 

which should be addressed by the Rules and Procedures 

Committee so that the general will of the Assembly can be 

determined. 

 

(1045) 

 

Statement number three.  The Opposition House Leader raised 

a point of order yesterday relating to the proceedings of 

Wednesday regarding how points of order should be 

recognized by the Chair.  On reflection after the heat of the 

moment has passed, I agreed that points of order should be 

heard when they arrive and therefore the point of order is well 

taken.  The member's suggestion that the disorder should have 

been dealt with by other means is also well taken.  I thank the 

member for his advice and it is my intention to use those means 

when appropriate. 

 

The last statement.  At this time I also want to deal with a point 

of order raised some time ago by the Government House 

Leader. 

 

On April 15, 1993 a point of order was raised regarding the 

repeated use of adjournment motions which, in the view of the 

Government House Leader, amounted to obstruction of the 

Assembly.  The use of 

motions to adjourn the House to delay the Assembly from 

proceeding to controversial business is not a new occurrence.  

The aspect that is new is the 10-minute limit on the division 

bells on the vote on such a motion, and hence the move to 

repeated adjournment motions. 

 

This is also not the first time that the Speaker has been asked to 

intervene to stop this form of obstruction from succeeding.  I 

refer members to the Journals of the Legislative Assembly for 

June 12, 1991 where Speaker Tusa responded to a similar point 

of order respecting the use of adjournment motions to obstruct 

the House.  At that time the Chair pointed out that there were 

serious inconsistencies in our practice between the use of 

adjournment motions and other superseding motions during 

routine proceedings. 

 

Speaker Tusa recommended that the House seek a solution to 

the problem of obstructive use of adjournment motions through 

the usual channels of a Rules Committee review.  Indeed the 

most common way for changes in rules and practices to be 

made in this Assembly is through review and report by the 

Committee on Rules and Procedure.  There options can be 

studied, the pros and cons weighed, the effects of one change 

on the broader picture of all the rules as a whole can be 

debated, and most importantly, essential compromise can be 

made and a balance found.  And this process respects the 

important principle that the rules are made by the members 

themselves and the House as a whole. 

 

If it is the view of the Government House Leader that the use 

of adjournment motions is still a problem and should be 

addressed, then I submit that the Rules Committee is the most 

appropriate place to do so. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Referral of  Estimates and Supplementary Estimates to the 

Standing Committee on Estimates 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I intend to move a 

routine motion by leave of the Assembly.  The motion being 

moved by myself and seconded by the member for Churchill 

Downs that by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That the Estimates and Supplementary Estimates for the 

Legislative Assembly, being subvotes LG01 to LG06 of vote 

21, and for the Provincial Auditor, being vote 28, be 

withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred to 

the Standing Committee on Estimates. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 



May 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1713 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 70 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 

Act, 1984 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

move second reading of Bill No. 70, An Act to amend The 

Urban Municipality Act, 1984. 

 

This Bill responds to requests from the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association as well as individual municipalities 

for amendments to the legislation.  These amendments will 

assist in keeping the legislation on the powers and duties of 

urban municipalities up to date and provide for more effective 

functioning of our urban centres.  They provide urban 

municipalities with the authority to act independently but also 

foster intermunicipal cooperation. 

 

Key amendments in this Bill deal with petitions for binding 

by-law votes, provide orders to enforce fire prevention 

by-laws, integration provision of the fire and emergency 

response services, and intermunicipal agreements.  There are 

also several other amendments that are administrative in nature. 

 

The amendments respecting petitions will change the number 

of signatures required to force a binding vote on an issue in an 

urban municipality.  The amendment will parallel the number 

of signatures required in The Referendum and Plebiscite Act 

that was passed prior to the 1991 provincial election. 

 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 

requested that this issue be examined as it can be very costly if 

votes are required on issues on a regular basis.  Frequent votes 

may undermine the decision-making responsibility of 

municipal councils.  Concerns have been expressed that under 

the current Act it is too easy to collect the required signatures 

in a few days by canvassing people in malls.  Petitions for 

binding by-law votes will continue to be allowed on a matter 

within the jurisdiction of any council. 

 

Other amendments are necessary to complete the passage of the 

new Fire Prevention Act, 1992.  They are designed to work in 

conjunction with this new Act.  These amendments will 

provide authority for municipalities to issue orders to enforce 

municipal fire prevention by-laws.  They also broaden the 

authority of municipalities to enter into intermunicipal fire 

service agreements. 

 

These provisions will ensure that fire departments have 

authority to provide services at any kind of emergency.  Fire 

departments are increasingly involved in emergency response 

services at the site of an emergency, using special equipment.  

For example, fire departments are involved in hazardous 

material incidents and may assist in the rescue of people 

trapped in vehicles.  These amendments ensure legal authority 

for fire departments to conduct these activities. 

A further amendment broadens authority for municipalities to 

enter into agreements with other parties for jointly or 

cooperatively providing services.  Agreements could be made 

with any person, organization, or agency. 

 

This amendment complements efforts of the minister's 

intermunicipal cooperation advisory committee that was set up 

last year with representatives of local governments to foster 

cooperation and agreement amongst communities.  To make 

the provisions even more flexible for agreements between 

communities, it is also proposed to allow more flexibility in the 

selection of auditors for intermunicipal boards. 

 

As I have indicated, there are several other administrative and 

modest policy amendments that are largely to respond to 

concerns raised by municipalities and SUMA.  These include 

fine-tuning dangerous-dog provisions, updating the 

conflict-of-interest provisions, revising the provisions on the 

urban municipalities board of reference, adjusting capital 

works plan provisions, facilitating enforcement of orders, 

clarifying the role of the Saskatchewan Municipal Board in 

approving water rate by-laws. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge all members to join with me in supporting 

this Bill that takes a number of steps to foster intercommunity 

cooperation and to strengthen local government.  I move 

second reading of An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 

Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I've been listening to the second 

reading presented by the minister and as it appears to me that a 

number of the areas that this Bill is addressing are ongoing 

areas of bringing points and amendments up to date. 

 

The one area that may cause some concern, I would think, 

would be the fact that the government is giving local 

governments added ability to demand increased signatures on 

petitions regarding votes that would be called for by the public.  

We trust that the government has taken the time and certainly 

that local governments have actually taken the time to converse 

with their constituents regarding some of the amendments or a 

number of the amendments that are being brought forward in 

this Bill. 

 

However to just allow for further perusal of the Bill, I move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 71 -- An Act to amend The Local Government 

Election Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of Bill No. 71, An Act to amend The Local 

Government Election Act.  Most of these amendments can be 

best described as housekeeping or technical changes to local 

election legislation. 

 

In sequence, the Bill permits reference to councillors as well as 

the term "alderman" as in the urban Act; 



1714 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1993 

adjusts the timing of the notice for a mobile poll to occur at the 

same time as a notice of the poll; permits a mixing of advanced 

poll votes with regular poll votes to ensure voting secrecy; 

gives persons leasing land and resort villages the right to run 

for office as well as to vote in order to broaden the base of 

potential candidates; clarifies that it is the municipality which 

decides on the preparation of a voters' list where the 

municipality is expected to conduct the school division 

election; requires 25 electors rather than the existing five 

electors to sign nomination papers for election candidates in 

cities of over 2,000 in population; requires $100 deposit which 

would be refundable under certain circumstances from 

candidates to run for election in cities over 20,000 population; 

moves nomination day ahead by a week to give more lead time 

to preparation for election day; permits use of cardboard or 

recyclable ballot boxes to reduce cost, provided security is 

assured; and finally, it permits combination of voters' 

registration forms as a poll book to reduce election paperwork. 

 

Many of these adjustments are being made in response to a 

request from the city clerks' association with SUMA's support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I call on all members of this House to support 

these changes, and I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as I 

understand it, this Bill is basically a housekeeping Bill, and I 

don't believe there are a number of areas that we're really 

opposed to or really would be bringing in a lot of opposition to.  

However I also think it would be appropriate to just take a 

closer look at the Bill, and therefore I move adjournment of 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 63 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 63 -- An Act 

to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this is 

a long series of Bills brought in by this government to add to 

the taxation load of Saskatchewan citizens.  Mr. Speaker, the 

New Democratic Party promised Saskatchewan people such a 

short time ago that they weren't going to add to the tax load of 

the average individual in our province.  What we have seen 

consistently, Mr. Speaker, from this government, is to increase 

that tax load at every opportunity.  This Bill is only another in a 

long line of tax increases which Saskatchewan people are 

having to deal with on an everyday basis. 

 

This Bill affects the person that drives down Albert Street 

every morning, Mr. Speaker, on their way to 

work.  It affects every farmer that goes to the field in the 

province of Saskatchewan at this busy time of the year as they 

try and seed another crop in the absence of any consideration or 

help from this NDP (New Democratic Party) government.  

Even though they promised -- the Premier promised 

Saskatchewan rural people and farmers in particular -- that 

their tax burden or tax load would decrease, if elected. 

 

What we see with this tax Bill, Mr. Speaker, is the trucking 

industry, the tourism industry, the railway business, all of them 

impacted over and over again by a government that promised 

them so much less, so much less would be on the backs of the 

average person trying to make a living in this province. 

 

Increasing fuel taxes, Mr. Speaker, when we have jurisdictions 

all around us that have a lower level of taxation in this area, 

means that Saskatchewan people are at a disadvantage, a 

disadvantage of making a living, a disadvantage of providing 

employment, and a disadvantage in marketing their products 

around the world. 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have an economy that is based on trade.  Even 

the Minister of Economic Development has said that 

Saskatchewan's future lays in trading with its partners both in 

North America and around the world.  Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan, because of our large size, the many miles that 

we have to travel as individuals, means that we are a society 

based on transportation.  Mr. Speaker, the very qualities of life 

that we appreciate in this province are tied to the fact that we 

all move large distances in this province.  What the fuel tax 

does, Mr. Speaker, is that it attacks the very fabric of what we 

in this province consider to be our way of life.  Yet this 

government has consistently raised the fuel tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask you to put yourself in the shoes of 

someone who lives anywhere near the Alberta border, for 

instance, who is having to compete and do business with folks 

in that province, along the U.S. (United States) border and 

indeed next door in Manitoba. 

 

A good example, Mr. Speaker, recently was the community of 

Moose Jaw who have always been a major transportation 

centre in the province of Saskatchewan, who are the main CPR 

(Canadian Pacific Railway) servicing and rail network in 

western Canada. 

 

In other words, between the Rocky Mountains, Mr. Speaker, 

and the lakehead, Moose Jaw has always played a very 

important role.  The opportunity for over 200 well-paying jobs 

in the province of Saskatchewan came along, a payroll in 

excess of $7 million; 200 jobs based on that industry.  It was 

tied in a large part, Mr. Speaker, I'm told, by the civic officials, 

by the business people in Moose Jaw, to the fact that this 

government refused to even look at the question of tax on 

diesel fuel. 



May 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1715 

Mr. Speaker, we in this province rely upon our railway system 

to move our potash, to move our grain, and if we have the 

opportunity to strengthen things that we've had here since we 

became a province and build our economy by using those 

natural strengths, I would think that we would at least make an 

effort to look at the ramifications of how we fit into this bigger 

picture in western Canada, and indeed, western North America. 

 

People tell me, Mr. Speaker, in my community that there wasn't 

even a serious consideration given.  We've asked the Minister 

of Highways and Transportation in this legislature and his 

estimates, what role that he played in those discussions.  And 

he said, well we didn't really do much at all.  We simply 

handed the ball over to the Minister of Economic Development 

-- the same Minister of Economic Development who tells us 

that he is meeting widely and doing everything in his power to 

bring jobs and new opportunities to the province. 

 

I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, that that is a hollow, hollow 

argument and promise by that minister and this government.  

When every jurisdiction around you, Mr. Speaker, has got a 

lower fuel tax, then you have to have some recognition of the 

fact that it is impairing the ability of people to hire other people 

and provide employment. 

 

If this government were serious, Mr. Speaker, they would take 

the advice of the people in Swift Current yesterday who said to 

the Associate Minister of Finance, who said to the Minister of 

Economic Development, who said to the Minister of Labour, 

that you've got to start addressing this issue. 

 

So far, Mr. Speaker, we have seen no indication that this 

government is prepared to address that issue at all.  They are 

saying to the average Saskatchewan citizen that we are going to 

tax you on fuel at a higher rate than anyone else.  We hear this 

government talk grandly about tourism, about the initiatives 

that they're doing in the tourism sector.  And yet, Mr. Speaker, 

when we face the difference in the American and Canadian 

dollars, when we look at Alberta, we look at Manitoba, we 

wonder why anyone would want to come to the province of 

Saskatchewan and keep paying higher and higher fuel taxes on 

a consistent basis. 

 

It makes all the other arguments presented by this government 

ring hollow, Mr. Speaker.  It means that people in every walk 

of life in the province of Saskatchewan are in a disadvantage -- 

a disadvantage that they cannot overcome by simply working a 

little harder, by putting in a few extra hours in the day, by 

trying to streamline their businesses.  Because I would say to 

you, Mr. Speaker, they've already cut to the bone in order to try 

and stay competitive.  That the average working person in this 

province has done lots of things like car pooling, like public 

transportation. 

 

Our civic administrations have tried to cut back on their busing 

routes.  School boards have tried to make 

their bus routes larger.  Our hospital system, now faced with 

closures all over the province, is going to have to rely upon 

transportation to an even greater degree.  That the ambulance 

boards that the Minister of Health tells us is going to pick up 

the slack on acute care funding in the province of 

Saskatchewan is going to have to put in many thousands of 

extra miles in the province in order to pick that slack up.  And 

yet each and every one of those instances, Mr. Speaker, faces 

an ever-growing fuel tax burden. 

 

So on one hand we have the government take it away, say 

they're giving it back, but knowing full well that those costs are 

increasing on a daily basis for those school boards, for those 

ambulance boards, for those trucking firms, and for our railway 

system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are things about this Bill that we're going to 

want the Minister of Finance to tell us the straight goods about 

in Committee of the Whole.  We are going to expect that 

Minister of Finance to come in here with the relevant details 

and data to show exactly what this regressive tax increase is 

doing to a lot of sectors of Saskatchewan's economy.  And with 

that, Mr. Speaker, I would move that this Bill proceed into 

committee and we'll then deal with it at that time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 64 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 64 -- An Act 

to amend The Education and Health Tax Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this is 

a second Bill in a list of Bills that this morning increases the 

tax load on Saskatchewan people.  I think it would be 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, if every member of the government 

today took the opportunity to read the Friday, the May 14 

edition of the market-place section of the Leader-Post, on the 

comments that chamber of commerce made to three ministers 

in Swift Current.  And the headline is, Mr. Speaker, "Group 

slams high sales tax". 

 

Mr. Speaker, anyone in the province of Saskatchewan, since 

this last budget, knows that their particular situation has been 

worsened by this government imposing a further increase on 

sales tax. 

 

The business community of this province, Mr. Speaker, have 

been saying to the Premier and to his economic ministers, it's 

time that we sat down and redefined your own document.  

Because the promises, the considerations, the commitment to 

work cooperatively with us to provide better employment 

opportunities and to build our economy are simply not coming 

true because of the actions of your budget and the way it 

impacts upon the average business person in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they're saying, if we're going to suffer 



1716 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1993 

this economic pain, then we want to know at the end of the day 

there's a light at the end of the tunnel.  The message that was 

delivered absolutely resoundingly to this government in Swift 

Current yesterday and the day before was that there is no light 

at the end of the tunnel; there's simply a freight train coming 

through that tunnel that is going to squash and run over the 

people in this province that have to provide the employment, 

that have to provide the economic wherewithal to pay the taxes 

so that we as a society will keep moving ahead. 

 

They have said to the Premier in an open letter: your sales tax 

increases are regressive.  They are causing a sense of revolt 

amongst the people in this province that work hard and try and 

get ahead.  They're saying, and I quote: people are voting with 

their feet when they go to Alberta in droves to buy their goods 

and services, to do their shopping, that when they go and they 

survey the parking lots in Medicine Hat, they find enough 

vehicles there to talk about a $10 million loss in the retail 

sector in the city of Swift Current alone. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when you go up and down the entire west 

side of this province, when you go across the entire southern 

boundary of this province, when you go to the east side of this 

province, you know, Mr. Speaker, why they're talking about a 

revolt.  That these tax increases . . . do you remember the 

election campaign in the fall of '91 when the member from 

Riversdale, the now Premier, said there will be no PST 

(provincial sales tax), no new taxes? That 5 cents on a cup of 

coffee and 10 cents on a hamburger is more than the public can 

bear. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what the public are now saying is that they 

cannot bear the solutions as provided by the member from 

Riversdale and his government.  They are saying we simply 

cannot bear the load that you have imposed upon us and still 

maintain some degree of optimism and economic wherewithal. 

 

I would suggest that more ministers of the Crown, more of 

these back-benchers who stand in here day after day and vote 

for this stuff, Mr. Speaker, should go out and visit with the real 

folks.  You know, Mr. Speaker, I think it's the reason why the 

Health minister and the Associate Minister of Health and others 

of these ministers prefer to stay in this Legislative Assembly 

and hide from the public.  Because if they were like the 

Associate Minister of Finance who yesterday actually took the 

time to go to his home constituency and face the music, they 

would have found a tune being played that they don't like very 

much.  They would have found that music was a drum roll, Mr. 

Speaker, of economic devastation -- a drum roll of economic 

devastation which this party promised Saskatchewan voters and 

taxpayers wouldn't happen. 

 

I don't know how any of these New Democratic Party members 

can go to their home communities and walk down Main Street 

and hold their head up so soon after they campaigned against 

raising taxes, raising sales taxes.  And I would suspect, Mr. 

Speaker, that they don't bother to go through the exercise of 

walking 

down Main Street, Saskatchewan, because they can't take the 

heat.  They don't have the moral courage to walk down Main 

Street, Saskatchewan, and take the heat.  Because I say to you, 

sir, the very integrity that they campaigned upon no longer 

exists.  It no longer exists. 

 

If this government had been true to its word we would have 

seen not an expanded PST, which is what we've gotten from 

them.  It isn't even the same level of goods that were taxed in 

'91.  It has been an expanded E&H (education and health) tax at 

not 7 per cent, but 9 per cent. 

 

I remember well, Mr. Speaker, in 1991 we heard the members 

of the New Democratic Party who sat on this side stand on 

their feet and they used every tool available under the 

legislative rules to block the passage of the harmonization Bill.  

They obstructed this legislature for weeks on end because they 

said Saskatchewan people cannot bear 7 per cent; 7 per cent is 

unrealistic in the economy that we have. 

 

(1115) 

 

And yet the economy that we have today, Mr. Speaker, is in far 

worse shape than what we had then.  Every economic indicator 

and agency in this country that measures economic 

wherewithal, says that this province is in worse shape today 

than they were then.  Sixteen thousand jobs less, 

unemployment up, welfare benefits up, food banks up -- every 

indicator that is around the piece, Mr. Speaker, says that this 

province is in worse shape than it was in 1991. 

 

And yet we don't have a 7 per cent sales tax, we have a 9 per 

cent sales tax and it covers nearly every item that they fought 

so hard under harmonization, except restaurant meals and 

children's clothing.  It is an increase, Mr. Speaker, that the 

average family, the average family in Saskatchewan now faces 

anywhere from 1,500 to $3,000 more. 

 

And where is the relief?  Mr. Speaker, there is none.  The 

document, the partnership document that this government 

trotted out so handily last fall, is in tatters.  It means nothing 

any more. 

 

The job projections that were made there haven't come to pass 

and nor will they.  Yesterday the Toronto Dominion Bank said 

the Conference Board was wrong, it's even worse.  It's not 1.8 

per cent growth, it's 1.5 at the best, and it may go down from 

there because this budget of this government is the only cause 

of inflation in the province of Saskatchewan today. 

 

The only cause of inflation today in this province is the 

government's sales taxes, fuel taxes, increases on utilities -- the 

only cause of inflation that an average Saskatchewan family 

has to bear today is the cause of this government.  Other than 

that, we would be in a deflationary period, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, when we have interest rates at a 

20-year low, 



May 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1717 

interest rates that the federal government has brought down to a 

20-year low, we've had legislation brought down to allow 

Saskatchewan people to purchase their own homes, because we 

have lower interest rates; because the Canadian dollar is in a 

good position, vis-a-vis the American dollar, to do our 

exporting business, to do our manufacturing businesses, to 

actually have the opportunity to employ more people.  We have 

this provincial government step in and negate every last one of 

those opportunities, negate every last one of those opportunities 

with their increases in sales tax and all of the other taxes and 

the hidden half a billion dollars in property taxes that are going 

to come down on the heads of property owners in this province 

in the next four years. 

 

The member from Riversdale said that increased taxes are the 

destroyer of jobs, the silent killer of jobs in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Well the silent killer has been stalking Main 

Street, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, as he has never stalked it 

before. 

 

People, as the president of the chamber of commerce said 

yesterday, are voting with their feet.  They hit No. 1 Highway, 

Mr. Speaker, and they turn right and they head for Alberta.  

They hit the Yellowhead and they turn right and they head for 

Alberta. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I find it hard to believe that the Premier, 

today in question period, would have the audacity to stand in 

this legislature and say that there was a couple of people from 

Swift Current that patted him on the back for his economic 

plans. 

 

I would suspect that they probably patted him on the back and 

said, so long, Mr. Premier, because I'm going to Alberta.  It's 

been nice knowing you, but I simply can't live in this province 

any more when you devastate my home community.  You don't 

have any opportunity for me to get a job.  I've simply got to 

leave. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't know when this government is going to 

wake up and start living up to their campaign promises, but at 

least they could take the opportunity when a large segment of 

our population asks for a meeting, they could take the time out 

of their busy schedule, their busy schedule of hiding in this 

Legislative Assembly, and go out and meet with them.  If 

nothing else, Mr. Speaker, they could have that economic 

summit while this legislature was in session so that 

Saskatchewan people would know what was being said at that 

summit. 

 

But day after day the member from Riversdale says no, I can't 

do that.  I've got to duck on this opportunity to actually work 

with the people that produce the employment to produce the 

tax dollars that will produce the money that we need in the 

future to maintain our social network.  I don't have time to meet 

with those people.  I'll simply hide in this legislature and bring 

down legislation that takes away the rights of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this particular piece of legislation I say the 

same thing to the Minister of Finance -- that when this Bill 

comes into committee you had better be 

prepared to come into this Assembly and give Saskatchewan 

taxpayers the straight goods.  You'd better be prepared to come 

in here and give us the information that Saskatchewan people 

want to know -- what this sales tax is doing to our economy in 

the various sectors. 

 

It's only right and proper after this much time, Mr. Speaker . . . 

And I must say normally with tax Bills like this, that they aren't 

brought in at the end of a session; they're brought in at the 

beginning of a session so that Saskatchewan taxpayers know 

that they're being taxed fairly. 

 

But here at the closing time of this Legislative Assembly we 

now have the government finally bringing through these tax 

Bills.  And if the minister tries to come in here and tell us that 

she doesn't have the economic information, the impact that it's 

having on so much of our society, then Saskatchewan 

taxpayers will know the truth -- that it's simply a money grab; 

it's I don't care from a government that told us such a short time 

ago that we do care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we await the Minister of Finance coming in in 

committee to give us the answers and Saskatchewan taxpayers 

the answers that they all want to hear. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 65 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 65 -- An Act 

to amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In this particular 

piece of legislation there are some questions I think that have to 

be answered by the minister because this once again impacts on 

Saskatchewan's ability to improve its economy:  3,000 jobs in 

the manufacturing sector, gone; 2,000 jobs in the construction 

industry, gone; 2,000 jobs in finance, insurance, and real estate, 

gone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those aren't the stats put together by the 

opposition; those are stats that are put together by StatsCanada, 

all sorts of agencies that monitor economic development, 

economic activity in Canada.  It only reinforces what we have 

said, Mr. Speaker, on the previous two Bills:  that the reason 

that the business community and others want to have a 

sit-down with this government and review their own plans, 

their own four-year document for survival, is because it simply 

is not measuring up to the mark. 

 

This Bill is just another in a long list, Mr. Speaker, that means 

that these job loss numbers simply won't improve; that this 

government has to be on a wing and prayer hoping that every 

commodity price in the world goes up at the same time if we're 

going to have any economic activity in this province at all. 



1718 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1993 

This government has no control, Mr. Speaker, over the price of 

oil, potash, uranium, grain.  And if all we're doing is hoping 

and praying, Mr. Speaker, that those things somehow will turn 

around magically for this government, then that is why the 

government's own document is being questioned by so many 

people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We will have questions in committee, Mr. Speaker, about those 

2,000 jobs in the construction industry and what this Bill will 

do to that particular industry.  We will have questions about the 

3,000 jobs lost in manufacturing and what this Bill will do to 

that; about the 2,000 jobs lost in finance, insurance, and real 

estate and what this Bill will do to turn around those job losses 

if in fact it doesn't make the situation even worse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier can stand in this legislature and say 

that he's turned the corner.  If in any way this Bill keeps people 

from taking that right-hand turn and heading for Alberta, we 

want to give the Minister of Finance the opportunity in 

committee to explain that to us. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 66 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 66 -- An Act 

to amend The Income Tax Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, if you 

remember back to the first interim supply motion that this 

government brought in, we had a lot of questions in this area 

about the changes that were made, the 8 per cent 

non-refundable manufacturing and processing tax credit that 

the minister has put so much hope in as far as being a driving 

force in the economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

And we would welcome the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to see 

how that compares with, for instance, the -- and the word 

harmonization is beyond the Minister of Finance -- but perhaps 

the integration or the combining or whatever word in the 

English language she is more comfortable with in talking about 

as far as some degree of cooperation between the federal and 

provincial tax systems. 

 

We would love the opportunity, and I think committee's the 

right place, Mr. Speaker, for the minister to explain to us how 

this particular three year -- or in the case of this one I believe it 

only goes to the end of 1993 -- but that in conjunction with 

some of the other three-year initiatives that the Minister of 

Finance has undertaken, how they will be more progressive and 

provide more employment opportunities and more economic 

activity in the province of Saskatchewan, and that simple 

process of integration which she has so much trouble with. 

So, Mr. Speaker, we'll look forward to her explanations in 

committee on this particular Bill of how that's going to work. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 67 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 67 -- An Act to 

amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, once 

again we see this government bringing forward Bills, and this 

is just another example of the kind of things that they're doing.  

This is an example of offloading -- rather than increasing taxes 

directly -- this is an example of offloading taxation onto the 

municipal level of government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then they say, this government says that they've cut 

spending.  Well indeed they've cut spending as far as the 

provincial government is concerned, but they've also cut 

programs and cut spending to rural municipalities and urban 

municipalities.  And as a result of those cuts, Mr. Speaker, 

there will be significant tax increases that will come in the form 

of tax increases at the municipal levels. 

 

And all property owners are waiting, I think nervously, Mr. 

Speaker, for their tax notices which will be coming out later 

this year in rural municipalities and urban municipalities.  They 

will see exactly the impact of this type of initiative that the 

government is bringing forward. 

 

(1130) 

 

Mr. Speaker, but something that the government opposite 

seems to miss in all of these measures that they're bringing 

forward is, is there's only one taxpayer.  There's only one 

taxpayer that's going to be footing the bill for all of these 

increases -- whether it's increases in the E&H tax, increases in 

a number of other taxes that this government's brought forward, 

increases in utility rates, or anything else for that matter. 

 

But this will mean direct impact, direct tax increases at the 

municipal level.  There's no question about that, Mr. Speaker.  

Either that, or there's going to be a slashing of services at the 

rural municipality and the urban municipality level. 

 

This government has continued to say that they are going to be 

continuing to cut spending.  And as a result of that, they'll be 

continuing to cut it and there'll be job cuts as well in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Sixty-eight thousand people now are receiving social assistance 

in Saskatchewan.  And those numbers, I predict, Mr. Speaker, 

will just continue to increase as 



May 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1719 

time goes on.  A loss of 16,000 jobs in this province since the 

members opposite took over -- another record, dubious record, 

Mr. Speaker, that they hold. 

 

Something the Leader of the Opposition was touching on 

earlier about the number of people moving to Alberta or 

shopping in Alberta.  Mr. Speaker, it would be interesting, in 

light of today's events of the constituency boundaries Act being 

brought into this legislature, it would be an interesting 

experience if we set up a polling booth in Medicine Hat so the 

people from Saskatchewan could vote there and then move 

home after they threw this government out . . . with all of the 

things that they're doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the offloading and lack of leadership that this 

government has shown is phenomenal.  They are moving in a 

direction that rural Saskatchewan doesn't believe, and urban 

Saskatchewan I think doesn't believe is necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, following . . . I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we can 

make our remaining remarks known in Committee of the 

Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 68 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 68 -- An Act 

respecting Financial Arrangements for Urban Parks be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this Bill 

carries on a tradition that has been going on for a number of 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's an unpleasant task to reduce funding to urban 

parks.  I think we would recommend to the minister that she be 

extremely careful that we don't reduce the level of funding to 

the point where these parks simply cannot operate and their 

existence is threatened.  We'll be asking further questions of the 

minister in committee about that very concern. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 69 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 69 -- An Act to 

amend The Assessment Management Agency Act be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan assessment branch is slowly losing funding.  

This year the number is dropping to $7.5 million and, Mr. 

Speaker, I guess the question that we have is who's going to be 

picking up the tab when SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency) doesn't get provincial funding any 

longer. 

Will that responsibility fall to local governments, property 

taxpayers, local property taxpayer once again? 

 

SAMA in a couple of years when the funding completely 

disappears, which we think will happen under this 

administration, how many jobs will be lost?  How much money 

will cities like Regina have to pay for assessing and research 

services? 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the kinds of concerns that are being 

raised with us, and I think it's another example of the 

government's lack of foresight.  They keep forgetting that the 

people who are paying higher provincial sales tax, higher fuel 

tax, higher income taxes, higher everything under this 

government are the same people who'll be paying higher local 

property taxes when the NDP are done with their offloading. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rest of our concerns can be addressed in 

committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 74 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No 74 -- An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The other day 

we had the opportunity to address this Bill which will have a 

serious impact on agriculture in Saskatchewan.  We went 

through a number of points as to how it will impact on 

agriculture, Mr. Speaker, and we pointed those out to the 

minister. 

 

At this time we feel that we can perhaps best address this 

particular Bill in Committee of the Whole, and we're prepared 

to allow it to go there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 

referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

Vote 22 

 

The Chair: -- At this point I would ask the minister to please 

introduce her officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To my right, 

I have Graham McNamee who is the chairman of the 

Municipal Board.  To my left, I have Marilyn Turanich who is 

the secretary of the Saskatchewan Municipal Board. 

 

Item 1 



1720 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1993 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

first of all I would like to welcome the officials here this 

morning. 

 

Madam Minister, last night when we were dealing with this 

issue, the Minister of Economic Development was kind of 

handling it.  I'm pleased to see that you're here this morning.  

He wasn't, quite frankly wasn't doing a very good job, I don't 

think.  So I'm pleased to see that the minister responsible is 

going to take over the responsibility this morning. 

 

We were discussing a situation with a board member that had 

been dismissed by your government.  And I just wonder if you 

would care to comment on the situation with Wanda Eifler, 

please. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes I will.  In the preparation of the 

1992-93 budget we realized we had to make certain reductions.  

And under the circumstances, we talked with the chairman of 

the board to find out how to best manage the reductions to their 

budget, and it was decided that what would happen, we would 

reduce the number of the members on the board by three.  We 

did so, and Ms. Eifler was one of the people whose position on 

the board was terminated. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- What were the reasons for her dismissal? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- As I've said just now, it was budgetary 

reasons.  We were under budget restraints.  As you know, we 

have a deficit that we have to control.  It requires every facet of 

government to reduce expenditures, and the Municipal Board 

was obliged to reduce its expenditures like everyone else. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So there was no other reasons for the dismissal of 

Wanda Eifler other than the fact that it was a budgetary 

concern. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And did you have an opportunity to meet with 

Ms. Eifler to discuss the situation? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, Ms. Eifler was upset about the 

reduction in staff at the board and she made numerous calls to 

my office and I finally did agree to meet with her late . . . I 

don't have the date with me, but it was about a little over a year 

ago. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Yes, your memory is fairly accurate; apparently it 

was May 3 of '92 was the date of the meeting.  And at that 

time, maybe you could enlighten us as to what the discussion 

was. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, Ms. Eifler was concerned about her 

termination on the board.  She wanted to know about the 

prospects for future employment.  At that point in time there 

was a position within the department; we had encouraged her 

numerous times to look at the position, of transferring back into 

the department to accept that position. 

 

I asked her if she would seriously consider it because I thought 

it was the best alternative, and I believe also 

she said that she would prefer to have a position on the 

Municipal Board.  And I said that it was up to her; if there was 

an opening at some time in the future, then she was free to 

reapply.  But I still encouraged her, for the sake of continuing 

her career, to look at transferring to the job that was open 

within our department. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Did you indicate to 

her . . . As you said, I guess you did indicate to her that should 

a job open in the management position of the board member, 

that she should reapply.  I just want to confirm that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I said that it was up to her if she wanted 

to reapply.  I don't discourage anybody from applying for a 

position.  It's up to them to make that decision. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Would you say that she was qualified in her 

previous position as a board member?  Qualified in . . . 

Obviously being there nine years, I guess you'd have to say she 

was experienced.  But would you say she was qualified? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Last year, as you know, we introduced 

certain specifications to the Municipal Board and there were 

certain qualifications.  We felt that the duties and the 

requirements and the responsibilities of the board are becoming 

very technical in nature and we were looking for future board 

members who would be qualified in specific areas, had specific 

background qualifications, either in municipal government or 

in assessment or in law. So we had a concern that there were . . 

. and in the past appointments made to board, this board in 

particular, who perhaps didn't meet the requirements in order to 

fulfil their duties properly. 

 

So Ms. Wanda Eifler has obviously experience working on the 

board. That doesn't mean that she is the only qualified person 

to work on the board though. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- No of course not, I don't think anyone's making 

that assertion that she's the only one qualified.  I just wanted to 

know, in your opinion, whether she is qualified. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I think under the amendment to the Act, 

her qualifications would meet those specifications. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Did she receive a severance package on her 

dismissal? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- She was offered one.  She declined it.  

She chose to go through a court of law. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Has that court of law hearing, has that been 

resolved? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes it has and she received 18 months' 

severance. 



May 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1721 

Mr. Boyd: -- Was there a further opening at the Municipal 

Board, Madam Minister, and at what time was that?  And was 

it publicly tendered out? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, the end of June last year, Don Abel 

resigned from the board and we advertised on October 1. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- What were the reasons why so shortly after the 

budgetary problem that you experienced in February of '82 -- I 

understand that was when Wanda Eifler was let go -- so less 

than one year later approximately, nine months later, all of a 

sudden the budgetary problems of the province have 

evaporated and now you're able to offer an opportunity for 

Municipal Board members.  Is that what you did? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I'm not sure I understand your question 

but I'll put the answer as best I can for you. 

 

The quorum requirements under the Act requires two.  We 

were down to two and there are instances where we need three 

board members.  We felt that it was important to maintain the 

membership on the board at three.  And so the resignation of 

Mr. Abel came after the downsizing of the board by three 

members previous to that, in the previous budgetary cycle. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Oh I see, Madam Minister.  So subsequent to Ms. 

Eifler's dismissal then, the board only had three members and 

at that point when Mr. Abel resigned, then it became two; and 

of course you need three, so that was the reason for moving to 

have another board member? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, that's right. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Okay.  Well, Madam Minister, it seems . . . it 

passes strange to me that . . . I can understand the government's 

desire to downsize, if that's what they want to do, and it 

appears that that's what you have done.  I can also understand 

that the reasons, as you've outlined, why the Municipal Board 

needs another board member.  And it was tendered -- I have a 

copy of the . . . or not tendered, but there was an opportunity 

for people to apply to the board for that job opportunity. 

 

But it passes strange to me that you have a person who has a 

great deal of experience, nine years; you have a person who in 

your own admission is qualified for the job, perfectly qualified, 

no problems in that respect.  I have her rsum and all of the 

things that you have suggested are met on her rsum. 

 

She has had experience as a municipal adviser in Saskatchewan 

Urban Affairs.  She was the administrator of a rural community 

-- Whitewood -- for seven years.  She has urban class A 

certificate.  She has a number of qualifications that makes her 

eminently qualified for this job. 

 

And yet when she applied for this job, on your own 

recommendation that she should give it some consideration, 

that she should apply for it, she 

receives a letter back from the department saying that she 

doesn't have the experience or qualifications necessary for this 

job. 

 

And yet, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, you've said yourself 

that she's qualified, she has experience, she meets the 

requirements set out as far as your department feels are 

necessary for the job, and you turn her down. 

 

Madam Minister, I wonder, is there any other reason, any other 

reason that you could suggest to us as to why you decided that 

and your department decided that she wasn't a capable 

candidate for this job? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- There are a couple minor corrections I 

would like to put on the record.  When I met with her, there 

was not an opening on the board.  I didn't encourage her to 

apply for a job on the board at that point in time because there 

wasn't an opening.  So I'll make sure you understand that.  I 

said I wouldn't discourage her for applying if she chose to 

sometime in the future, and that was her choice.  I offered her 

another job within our department which she turned down. 

 

In regard to her qualifications, yes, she meets a minimum 

qualifications, but there are other people who are very expert at 

other areas that are also qualified, and when a letter was sent 

out to Ms. Eifler, the letter didn't say that she didn't have the 

qualifications.  The letter said that there were other candidates 

who were more qualified in the areas that we felt the board 

needed further experience on.  So it wasn't a matter of her not 

meeting the qualifications; it was a matter of other candidates 

having better qualifications in the area of expertise that we felt 

were vitally needed in order for the job to be done by the 

Municipal Board members. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, how many other people applied 

for the job, and has the job position been filled? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Sixty-two people applied for that job, and 

right now the job has not been filled.  We're still looking at the 

budget and managing the budget.  I believe we're going to have 

to fill it in the near future because there are going to be appeals 

coming forward that are simply going to be too demanding on 

two board members to fulfil, and we're going to have to look 

seriously.  But we're going to look at our budget and to make 

sure that we can manage that within the parameters of the 

budget. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'm having difficulty 

accepting what you're telling me.  And the reason I'm having 

difficulty accepting what you tell me . . . because there's a lot 

of inconsistencies in what you're telling me.  On May 3, '92, 

you did have a meeting with Wanda Eifler, and your discussion 

centred on the dismissal and the reasons for the dismissal.  

During the discussion, you also indicated should circumstances 

change to permit the board to increase its membership, she 

would be given the opportunity to be re-employed as a member 

of the 



1722 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1993 

board and you encouraged that.  And I have the letter from her 

supporting that, that she has written to your department.  This 

was sent in with her application for that job opportunity.  She 

sent that attached letter in with her application. 

 

And so it seems strange that she was let go.  There was a 

position opened up.  You encouraged her to accept that 

position, or to apply for that position.  And then when the 

opportunity for that position becomes open, she does go 

through all of the information that you've asked her to, submits 

an application, is turned down, told she doesn't have the proper 

qualifications. 

 

Madam Minister, I think the conclusion can only be drawn that 

maybe she doesn't meet the blood test requirements -- political 

blood test requirements -- for your department.  And I just 

wonder if you'd care to comment on that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well once more, for the record, you have 

incorrectly summarized what the events were.  First of all, I 

had a meeting with her and maybe her interpretation of my 

remarks are different than what they should have been, but I 

never encouraged her to run for a possible opening in the 

future.  I encouraged her, in fact, to accept a position within the 

department that was open.  That's what I encouraged her to do.  

She chose not to.  She chose instead to initiate legal action and 

further to that there was an opening because of a resignation, 

and those events were out of my control. 

 

So I'm not sure what it is the member opposite is trying to get 

at at this point in time.  I can tell you for sure that what I 

encouraged Ms. Eifler to do was to take the position within the 

department that we were offering to her.  And that is a fact. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Is that opportunity still open to Ms. Eifler? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, the position within the department . . 

. As you know we've downsized and I don't believe that we 

have any further positions at this point in time that have 

vacancies. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Has there been a short-listing process for the 

position as advertised? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We have short-listed but we haven't 

selected the final candidate yet. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- When do you anticipate making that final 

selection? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I anticipate meeting with the 

chairman and talking about the workload that the board has 

now and making a determination of whether it can be managed 

effectively in the near future and whether we will have to look 

at increasing the board's size in order to respond to the number 

of appeals that are before the board. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Well, Madam 

Minister, I won't take up too much more time 

on this.  I think it's been reasonably clearly demonstrated that 

this lady has been unfairly dealt with, and it's little wonder that 

the courts gave her 18 months severance in light of the kinds of 

events that have taken place and the way that she was treated.  

Incidentally, she was offered eight months severance to begin 

with. 

 

And it's, I feel, a little bit of relief in knowing that the courts 

support her view and my view that she was unfairly dealt with 

in this situation.  And so it . . . although it is not a job 

opportunity for her, I think it is certainly some satisfaction in 

knowing that she was right and you were wrong in what you 

did, Madam Minister. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 22 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992-93 

Consolidated Fund 

Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

Vote 22 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 22 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank my 

officials for being with me this morning, and I'd like to thank 

the members of the opposition for their questions. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Chairman, I too would like to join with the 

minister in thanking the officials for taking the time to come 

this morning. 

 

(1200) 

General Revenue Fund 

Municipal Government 

Vote 24 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister at this time to introduce 

the officials who've joined us. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To my right I 

have Bill Reader, who is a deputy minister.  Behind me and to 

my right is Ron Styles, associate deputy minister, housing 

division.  To my left is Ron Davis, assistant deputy minister of 

municipal services division.  Keith Rogers, to my far right, is 

the executive director of the culture, recreation division.  Don 

Harazny, to my left, is director of human resources.  Larry 

Chaykowski is behind me; he's finance and administration.  

Doug Morcom is manager of rural revenue sharing.  Ernie 

Anderson is director of rural transportation services.  John 

Edwards is director of municipal policy and legislative 

services.  And Nick Surtees is executive director of protective 

services. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister.  

Welcome to your officials as well. 



May 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1723 

Madam Minister, I wonder if you would outline for us if your 

department decided . . . or did any studies on the impact of the 

sales tax increases in the province of Saskatchewan and what 

impact it would have on municipal government. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, to the question of the 

member opposite, we in our department don't do those studies.  

If there were studies conducted, they would have been 

conducted by the Department of Finance. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, we haven't received the 

answers to the standard questions that we asked your 

department.  I wonder if you would mind sending them over if 

you have them. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I do have a package of information for 

you; I will send it over.  In this package there's also data on the 

Municipal Board. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

when were these all prepared for us anyway? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- They were just completed within the last 

two or three days. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, something that bothers me a 

little bit when we go through this process, like we're doing 

right now, we come in and we sit down here and we ask you 

questions about your department and we receive the package of 

information, and you know, it's plunked in front of you just a 

few minutes before we have to make our thoughts known on 

your department.  And it would have been helpful had we 

received the answers to all of these questions -- even yesterday 

would have been helpful. 

 

We discussed the fact that municipal government and all of that 

was going to be coming up shortly, so it . . . I wonder if in the 

future you would consider giving us the package of information 

in advance of the actual estimate. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- You do make a good point, to the 

member opposite, and we do apologize.  Our officials have 

been very busy with the amalgamation of the various parts of 

the department.  They have been working very, very hard to get 

the budget in line and to get the department functioning, and I 

guess that was part of the reason that we did have a delay.  But 

I do apologize. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam Minister, 

we appreciate the fact that you'll try and do better in the future 

with respect to sending those questions over.  All of us, 

including yourself, are very busy and we appreciate the fact 

that your department has a significant workload. 

 

Madam Minister, I just wanted to ask a few questions about 

your ministerial staff.  Are the names of all of the employees, 

job descriptions, qualifications, salaries of your staff included 

in the information provided? 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes they are. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Is the names of all of the staff working for you in 

Regina . . . Do you have any political staff located in 

Saskatoon? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- By political staff, you mean from my 

office and not from the department's office?  All my staff 

works out of my office here in the legislature. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Have any of your staff received salary increases 

since initially hired? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I believe two of the people who are 

working in my office received staff increases within the last 

couple weeks.  I could get that information for you.  It was 

because of reclassification.  Their duties were reassigned and 

they were classified into different category. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Yes, Madam Minister, we'd appreciate the details 

of any increases in salary that your staff may have been given, 

regardless of whether it's for reclassification or anything else.  

We just want the full details of those increases. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I will certainly provide you with that.  I 

also took the opportunity to do some research into my 

ministerial expenses and my staff for the year 1992-93, and I 

compared that with the 1990-91 minister's expenses in the 

minister's office. 

 

And just for the record, it might be useful for comparison.  For 

the 1992-93 year, the total expenditures for my office including 

my ministerial staff and my secretarial staff totalled an amount 

of $155,570.  And for the year 1990-91, the former 

administration, the total amount was $266,654.  Where I have 

six people working in my office . . . I have five; one left.  The 

former minister had 14 working under his staff.  I can give you 

further breakdown of those costs if you would like.  But they 

are here; you might be interested in them. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Do any of your 

assistants . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Sure you can table 

that if you like.  Do you have any assistants that travel in 

conducting their work? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I have two ministerial assistants.  They 

do 99 per cent of their work here.  I think they travel to the 

SUMA convention in January-February, but that is the only 

time that my two staff have left my office.  There may have 

been one interprovincial-federal ministers' meeting where we 

had one of my ministerial assistants at last year.  But to the 

greatest extent possible, they remain in my office working 

there, and they do not travel. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I wonder if you 

would provide details of the departmental travel of those 

assistants.  As well as any ministerial assistant travel expenses, 

I'd like the full details of the travel including the assistant's 

name, total cost per trip, the purpose of the travel, mode of 

travel, who they accompanied -- if it was the minister or 

department 



1724 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1993 

officials -- and the destination, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, I will do that.  In fact it's in the 

package.  Once again, just for the record, I will say that 

comparing 1990-91 with 1992-93 once again, in-province 

travel plus out-of-province travel for me and people on my 

staff was $31,391.  And for a year previous to that for the 

former administration, the total amount was $42,607. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister, so you feel you're 

making significant progress.  I take it that . . . and as an 

opposition member, I see not a whole lot wrong with that.  If 

your department is saving money relative to the previous 

administration for the administration of your department, good 

for you.  Congratulations.  We appreciate the . . . I'm sure the 

taxpayer of the province appreciates that. 

 

Something that I just also would like to know, have you been 

engaging in framing of any pictures lately? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, in fact we have a very good protocol 

for making sure that all gifts that are given to us are recorded 

with the price of that gift, and they're all on record, and they all 

belong to the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister, as you recall last 

year we had a little bit of a difficulty in that area, and I suspect 

the regulations have been significantly strengthened since that 

time, and I appreciate you taking the time and attention to deal 

with that matter.  It was a problem that people had on their 

minds at the time, and as I recall you and I discussed that at 

length last year, and we won't go into that any further. 

 

Madam Minister, I wonder if you could outline for us, your 

ministerial travel during the last period and provide all of the 

details on it including purpose of the trip, who accompanied 

you, mode of travel and destination, and most importantly, 

most importantly, Madam Minister, I wonder if you could 

outline for us what you felt you accomplished on the trips that 

you took. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Those aren't detailed in the numbers we 

gave you, and we can certainly undertake to provide you with 

that.  There were two or three provincial-federal ministers' 

meetings that I attended.  I know there was one in Manitoba.  I 

attended a housing ministers' meeting in Toronto.  I believe as I 

recall . . . and I attended one sports ministers' meeting with a 

federal minister in Edmonton, but I believe those were the only 

three out-of-province meetings I attended:  one in Manitoba for 

the municipal ministers, one in Toronto for ministers of 

housing, and one meeting the federal minister of sports in 

Edmonton last year. 

 

Just so we get it on the record, your remarks around the 

pictures . . . I don't recall we had extensive discussion between 

you and I.  Those were not my pictures.  They were owned by 

the 

Government of Saskatchewan and they are still owned by the 

Government of Saskatchewan.  And I didn't ask for them to be 

framed and I gave no instructions for anyone to frame them. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  My recollection of 

the events is a little bit different, and I think the public of 

Saskatchewan's . . . taxpayers of Saskatchewan's recollection is 

probably a little bit different, too, as indicated by the number of 

news stories that there were of the event. 

 

Madam Minister, just to touch on that last question.  You made 

two or three trips, you mentioned.  Did you feel that anything 

was accomplished on those trips?  You hadn't touched on that. 

 

(1215) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I guess you could make news out of 

almost anything some days when the news is dull. 

 

But as far as what I accomplished, when we had a 

federal-provincial meeting with the minister of housing, I think 

we accomplished a great deal.  We are very, very concerned 

with the federal minister, Elmer MacKay, and his decision to 

pull out of social housing.  And last year all the provincial and 

territorial ministers requested that the federal government 

continue to hold a position in the social housing policy of 

Canada. 

 

If this country is going to be able to provide a decent standard 

of living for all residents across this country, no matter where 

they live, we feel it is extremely important that there is 

leadership and dedication of funds from the federal 

government.  That was the main area of concern last year at the 

federal-provincial-territorial meeting of housing ministers. 

 

And we tried as best we could to send a message to the federal 

minister that it was imperative that in these very difficult times 

the federal government should not withdraw funding from 

social housing.  However, as you will note from the budget that 

was brought down by Mr. Mazankowski recently, the decision 

was made that the federal government will withdraw all funds 

from social housing.  We feel that is not only a great disservice 

to all people across this country, but it puts in jeopardy our 

programs in Saskatchewan in trying to meet the requirements 

of people both in the northern communities but also the seniors 

and the people living within urban communities across the 

southern part of Saskatchewan. 

 

So that was one very important aspect of our travel to Toronto 

and we'll be continuing with that with further meetings.  But it's 

a great concern with us. 

 

On the meeting that we had with the 

federal-provincial-territorial ministers in Manitoba, we 

discussed issues that were of common concern regarding 

governance, regarding pressure on property taxation and 

services supplied by municipal governments.  And we'll be 

continuing with those 



May 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1725 

discussions because we at the provincial level value the 

relationship and we value the services that are provided by 

municipal governments and we all have those common 

concerns. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam Minister, 

has there been any cost analysis or consultations conducted on 

how . . . or what impact the workmen's compensation changes 

will have on municipalities? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, we have not done that analysis. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I've been informed that these costs will amount to 

something in the order of $25 million per year.  I wonder if you 

or your department officials would care to comment on that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The urban municipalities have not 

expressed any concern to us regarding the changes in the 

workmen compensation.  If you have information regarding 

that, we would appreciate seeing it.  The $25 million figure 

appears extremely high to us, but if you can verify it and 

perhaps show us your documentation, we would appreciate it. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- What figure would you and your department 

officials like to put on it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, we don't want to hazard a 

guess on that.  It would be pure speculation.  We will speak 

with the municipalities about this issue, and the information 

that we receive back, we'll provide the member with a copy. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Have rural municipalities expressed any concern 

about the changes? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, they have not. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Have you taken the opportunity to contact the 

urban and rural municipalities to see if they have any concerns 

about the changes? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We talk to the urban municipal 

associations and the administrators and the mayors regularly.  

This is not a subject that they have brought to our attention.  In 

our further discussions we will speak to them and see what they 

feel about it.  We will also speak to the Workers' Compensation 

Board to see if they have any information regarding this. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And have you met since the budget was released 

to discuss anything with them for that matter? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Our officials in our department meet 

regularly with the officials in both SUMA and SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities).  I have 

had conversations with the presidents of the organizations.  I 

am invited to attend their regional meetings coming up in June, 

and I have made a commitment to do that.  They haven't had a 

board meeting since the budget was brought down, but I . . . 

yes, they did.  I met with SARM after the meeting, after the 

budget.  I did meet with the SARM 

board of directors.  I haven't met with the SUMA board of 

directors after the budget though. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Has your department studied the impact on rural 

and urban municipalities of the fuel tax increases? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Once again the Department of Finance 

has done the analysis on this.  We know that there are concerns 

expressed by the municipalities.  There is no doubt there is an 

impact and we are talking with them about these issues, and it's 

just a matter of trying to manage a very difficult situation when 

you have many demands on your money and not enough 

money to go around.  And I guess if we didn't have $847 

million to pay in interest, it would be great to be able to 

provide all sorts of services to municipalities. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Has there been any 

analysis done on municipal infrastructure? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Municipal infrastructure can mean many 

things.  Are you talking about roads and streets?  Are you 

talking about water mains and sewer mains?  Are you talking 

about water treatment plants and sewage plants?  Would you be 

more specific about that question? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- No, Madam Minister.  I'm sorry for the confusion 

on that question.  What I was really interested in is how you 

and your department feels the combining of the two 

departments has gone? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We haven't received any complaints 

whatsoever.  In fact we have received very positive remarks 

about the amalgamation of the urban and the rural services.  

We think that it is very effective and will only serve to 

coordinate services better in the future. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I wonder if you 

would provide us with a breakdown of the list of all of the 

provincial transfers to urban and rural municipalities please? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Once again we have to clarify exactly 

what the information that you require is.  If you want a 

breakdown of all the allocation as far as revenue sharing to 

both urban and rural municipalities, we'll provide you with that, 

those amounts, by Monday.  We don't have it here with us. 

 

There are other funds that we distribute also to municipalities, 

like disabled transit funds and so on and so forth.  Do you want 

that included in the package or are you just talking about 

revenue sharing? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- No, I was talking about the complete package, 

the total provincial transfers to each and every municipality, 

rural and urban. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We will provide that information for you 

on Monday. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  We accept that. 



1726 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1993 

I want to go through in the Estimates, maybe we could just go 

by each heading as we come to them.  On the municipal affairs, 

item 3, I see there's a transfer to Cumberland House.  And I 

wonder if you could outline for me  I'm not familiar with that 

-- if you could outline for me what that amount of money is 

allocated for. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Are you referring to the $1 million?  Yes, 

that's just a flow-through from SaskPower.  When SaskPower 

made an agreement with the community of Cumberland House 

there was a block of funds set aside and those funds distributed 

in the allocation of $1 million a year, and it flows through our 

department from SaskPower to Cumberland House. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Is it a contractual obligation, or how exactly does 

that work?  And why isn't it directly paid from SaskPower to 

Cumberland House rather than being routed through your 

department? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That was in a negotiated settlement.  I'm 

not sure if it was through the courts, but I seem to recall it 

happened a number of years ago under your administration, I 

believe.  It was in compensation for the power projects up in 

the North that affected the Cumberland House delta and the 

people living in that area. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I wonder if you could provide me with details of 

that agreement.  As you said, it's a contractual obligation, and 

we'd like to know what the details of that agreement are, how 

long they exist for.  And also you didn't answer the question 

about why is it not paid directly from SaskPower to 

Cumberland House rather than being routed through your 

department. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The arrangement was such that 

SaskPower agreed to make compensation, but the 

compensation was paid to the province of Saskatchewan,  and 

as Department of Municipal Government we are responsible 

for the development of the northern municipalities.  And it was 

decided at that time that the funds would flow from SaskPower 

to the province of Saskatchewan and through our department 

back to Cumberland House.  We will provide you with 

background information on that, but that was a decision made a 

number of years ago. 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Yes, Madam Minister, that's fine.  It's a $1 

million transfer of funds to Cumberland House.  I'm interested 

in when the contract is up, or is it into the future for some time, 

or . . . 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Just to make sure you understand.  It goes 

to the Cumberland House economic development corporation.  

It doesn't go to the municipality of Cumberland House.  And 

it's for economic development in that area, and it's a million 

dollars a year for 10 years.  I think it helps run the Cumberland 

House farms and some other areas that they are working on 

within their economic 

development strategy. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Does the contractual obligation call for any kind 

of monitoring or anything at all of what the money is spent for?  

Or is it simply left up to the economic development committee 

in Cumberland House to make the decision on that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- This was a settlement.  It was a 

settlement dedicated to the people in that area.  And it is 

dedicated to help people there improve their standard of living 

through economic development initiatives.  So it flows into the 

Cumberland House economic development corporation.  We 

have one person who sits on that board but there is no 

legislative authority for accountability because this is money 

that they have due them.  It's their money, and they are best in a 

position to determine how they want to spend it. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- What year is the final amount to be paid out in? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- It was a 10-year agreement.  We believe 

there is about three years left in that agreement for the 

payments. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Is the money paid directly to your department 

from the General Revenue Fund, or is it transferred directly 

from SaskPower? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- SaskPower pays it into the General 

Revenue Fund, and from there it's allocated into our budget 

through the Department of Finance. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So it's simply a bookkeeping exercise of the 

transfer comes to you and you transfer it them.  That's as 

simple as it is. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That's what it is. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Under municipal affairs, item 3, I notice that 

there are grants to local authorities and other third parties.  I 

wonder if you would detail for me what those expenditures are 

for. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chair, would the member opposite 

give us again the . . . where are you talking? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- On page 92 of the Saskatchewan Estimates, item 

3, municipal affairs.  Go down to the bottom of the page, grants 

to local authorities and other third parties: $79.183 million. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That amount of $79.183 million, that is 

the total amount allocated to urban and rural governments 

under all the programs that we have which include revenue 

sharing and transit grants and so on. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Okay, Madam Minister.  Does that same thing 

hold true for grants to local authorities and third parties?  I 

notice it's in every single one of them, starting at the next page, 

urban parks.  It's the same sort of thing.  Is that the allocation as 

it's broken down, and that's the total? 



May 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1727 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, it is. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, in your former department of 

Community Services, I understand you provide low-cost 

housing for people of low income.  I wonder if there were any 

housing starts allocated in this budget anywhere. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We're still waiting for the final numbers 

from the federal government.  And as I said, we're very 

concerned with the federal government, who are our major 

partners in this, pulling out. 

 

The relationship between Sask Housing and CMHC (Canada 

Mortgage and Housing Corporation) is a 75/25 per cent 

relationship.  We anticipate about 190 units being delivered 

this year.  We haven't been able to verify that yet with the 

federal department, but that at this point in time is our 

allocation for social housing. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, 190 units is what your 

anticipation is.  And I wonder if you could detail for me . . . 

you must have some idea of what would be considered native 

and non-native. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, we haven't got the final 

numbers down but we can give you an approximate number.  

When you're talking about natives I assume you mean Indians 

and Metis living off reserves because we don't deliver 

on-reserve housing.  We anticipate that between 60 and 70 

units will be delivered to aboriginal groups in Saskatchewan 

this year.  About 46 of those will be designated to northern 

municipalities. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Could you provide us with details of the locations 

for those 190 units? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, we'd be happy to provide you with 

the information.  The trouble is right now we have to wait and 

work it out with CMHC to find out the final allocation with the 

communities, because to a great extent the communities will 

decide what their needs are.  So we do have a list of 

communities where we anticipate we're going to be able to 

provide some social housing.  By the end of May or within the 

next couple weeks we'll have it pretty well finalized.  We can 

give you, next week, an estimate but it won't be the final 

picture until a couple weeks when we've been able to work 

through all the details. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well that will be fine, Madam Minister.  We just 

wanted to have some indication of the locations where these 

units were being proposed for, and if you'd provide us with that 

we'd appreciate it. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, moving to page 95, arts and 

multiculturalism, subvote MG09, I notice that there's been a 

significant increase in two areas, the Saskatchewan Arts Board 

and SaskFILM. 

 

Dealing with Saskatchewan Arts Board first, I wonder if you 

could outline for us today what the increase will be.  What the . 

. . well not only increase, it never existed apparently before -- 

funding -- at least not in 

'92-93.  I wonder if you could provide us with details of what 

that $4 million will be used for. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I thank you very much for that question 

because it is obvious that members of the opposition are 

confused about that.  That is not an increase; it is a change in 

the way the $4 million is allocated.  Under the arrangement 

made by the former minister of community affairs before we 

took office, the Saskatchewan Arts Board was funded directly 

out of Sask Lotteries, so there was no designated funding 

within the blue book for the Arts Board.  It was a $4 million 

allocation, but it went from Sask Lotteries directly to the Arts 

Board. 

 

When we looked and reviewed that situation, it became 

obvious -- and also too some comments made by the Provincial 

Auditor -- that the Arts Board is a legislated authority operating 

under the jurisdiction of the provincial government, and as 

such we have a requirement to provide funding for it. 

 

So that $4 million, although it came out of the lottery proceeds, 

it flowed from the lotteries, transferred into the Consolidated 

Fund, and was transferred to our department and back to the 

Arts Board.  There is no increase in the Arts Board whatsoever.  

The $4 million that is there this year was the same as $4 

million last year and the year previous but it is accounted for in 

the blue book this year in a different way.  There is no increase 

whatsoever. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  We appreciate 

your answer on that.  I wasn't aware of that and I appreciate 

that.  It could have been provided in an explanatory note 

perhaps in the details of that, but that's fine.  We accept your 

answer in that. 

 

Does the same apply for SaskFILM? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Once again that is much the same. 

 

I want to make sure you understand.  These are lottery funds 

designated for sports, recreation, and culture.  In previous years 

SaskFILM was funded directly through the lotteries.  We have 

a contract with SaskFILM and as such it is appropriate that the 

funding allocated to SaskFILM be in the blue book.  It is an 

increase over what it was in previous years, and the reason that 

we have provided an increase is because we believe that 

SaskFILM provides a fairly significant economic spin-off in 

this province and they do hire a lot of people and there is 

justification we believe to provide an adequate amount of 

funding for them. 

 

So once again to make sure you understand, this is not revenue 

from a Consolidated Fund as tax revenue; it is through the Sask 

lottery funds and it is designated to SaskFILM per our 

agreement. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Is there any kind 

of auditing done of Sask Arts Board or SaskFILM, both of 

them, with respect not only to their expenditures but what their 

expenditures are used for. 



1728 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1993 

Do you do some kind of an assessment on those two areas to 

make any kind of a determination as to whether you and your 

department officials feel the money is well spent? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- All right, in regard to SaskFILM, we 

have a contract with SaskFILM that requires them to do certain 

specific requirements.  And we do monitor them, we do keep in 

consultation with them, and they do provide us with an audited 

report. 

 

In regards to the Arts Board, once again the Arts Board 

operates as an arm's length agency from the provincial 

government.  They have their records audited.  The yearly 

report is submitted to the legislature. 

 

And as I said, they operate to some extent independent of the 

provincial government, and their mandate is to provide grants 

to people working in the various artistic fields in order to 

further their careers. 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Would you 

consider though, at some point in the future, an assessment of 

those departments, of Sask Arts Board and SaskFILM, to in 

your mind determine whether the money is being well spent? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We do that all the time.  We are aware of 

where the grants are being allocated.  We feel that it is in the 

best interest of the province of Saskatchewan however, that we 

allow the people who have the expertise and the interest in that 

area to continue to adjudicate the applicants for funds under the 

Arts Board, and we believe the process that is in place is 

working very well. 

 

But nevertheless we always keep in touch with them.  We are 

provided with information on the directives of the board and 

we believe that it is a responsibility of the provincial 

government and our department to make sure that the funds 

that are allocated are properly allocated. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Do you know 

whether SaskFILM tendered on the SaskTel "Don't Worry, Be 

Happy" promotion that they're about to enter into? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That is not the function of SaskFILM.  

They don't tender on contracts.  What they do is provide loans 

for people who are in the film production or the video 

production or in those areas of film and the film industry.  They 

provide loans to those people to allow them to further their 

careers and further their own industry.  But it is not 

SaskFILM's responsibility to go out and tender on any 

contracts. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- You mentioned that SaskFILM operates under 

certain requirements from your department.  I wonder if you 

could outline what those requirements are. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes.  But I think the easiest way to 

handle this would be to provide you with a copy of the 

contract. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Yes, that would be acceptable, Madam Minister. 

 

I understand the Saskatchewan Arts Board suspended an 

employee on December 10, '92.  I wonder if you would provide 

details of that for us please. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That's true.  The Saskatchewan Arts 

Board . . . it came to their attention through their internal audit 

and through the Provincial Auditor that there were certain 

procedures that the certain employee was using that were 

inappropriate in regards to allocating his own salary and his 

own expenses.  And when that was brought to their attention 

they removed that individual from their employment. 

 

They also subsequent to that turned over all the information to 

the police and they have, I think, done the appropriate thing.  I 

think it's important also to note that the individual who had 

been using these funds had paid back to the Arts Board all the 

funds that were inappropriately taken.  So he has made 

compensation to the Arts Board.  He no longer works for the 

Arts Board, and the issue has been turned over to the police. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, thank you.  You mentioned that 

he had taken money?  Did I hear you correctly? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- What he was doing was writing out his 

cheques in advance and there was no checks and balances 

within their system to prevent him from doing this, so in effect 

he was writing his cheques for two or three months in advance 

and cashing them.  When this was brought to the board's 

attention, they put in the proper checks and balances within the 

board and that is no longer continuing. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- That's an interesting little twist on how one 

should be paid, isn't it, Madam Minister?  I'm wondering if 

there have been any controls now implemented to rectify that 

situation into the future and what they are. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, the Arts Board has undertaken to 

make sure that their procedures in regard to salaries are now 

very stringent, and they have met all the conditions laid down 

by the Provincial Auditor in this regard. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Does your 

department consider what the gentleman -- I'm not sure 

whether it was a gentleman -- the person in question was doing 

was fraudulent? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- As I have said, we have turned all the 

records over to the police and it is up to the police to make that 

determination. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Has there been any charges laid or do you 

anticipate charges being laid? 



May 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1729 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- At this point there have been no charges 

laid, and I would not want to make comment further on that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- How long had this practice been going on, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The records have been turned over to the 

police and they're investigating it.  If you want further 

information, I believe it's probably in the auditor's provincial 

report. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I guess any time 

that something like that is happening it's disturbing, and 

disturbing I'm sure to yourself and to everyone -- the taxpayers 

particularly.  Is there any indication that there was anything 

other than the amount that this person was to be paid?  There 

was nothing extra, you know, above and beyond the salary the 

person was expecting? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I believe on some of his credit cards there 

were some charges.  But as I said, all that money that had been 

missing has been paid back.  The Arts Board is satisfied that 

they have been compensated for all the funds that were 

inappropriately taken and the issue has been turned over to the 

police. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  So as far as your 

department is concerned, the situation is closed, done with, and 

it will be up to the department to make any . . . or pardon me, 

up to the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) to make 

any further investigation of it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I think that's Regina police, but I will say 

once again that the person has compensated the Arts Board for 

all the funds that were taken.  Second, all the records have been 

turned over to the Regina police force.  And third, the checks 

and balances that were required to be put in by the Arts Board 

in order to control such circumstances have been initiated, and 

we believe the situation has been appropriately dealt with. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Has your 

department put forward any thoughts or recommendations to 

the city police?  Or have they asked your department for any 

input into whether the person should or should not be charged? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, not at all.  You will recall that the 

Arts Board is an agency that operates at arm's length from the 

government.  We have not been asked for information, nor we 

have given any. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam Minister, 

previously your department was made up of Community 

Services and Rural Development.  I wonder if you could 

provide us with details of all costs associated with the 

amalgamation of those two departments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We can provide you with the 

organizational changes and the final amount saved, which was 

$2.7 million, by the amalgamation of the two departments.  I 

will ask a page to take that across. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:58 p.m. 

 

 


