




















































Hansard: March 30, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 713 

 March 30, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills 

 

Clerk: -- Mr. Thompson, as chairman of the Standing 

Committee on Private Members' Bills, presents the third report 

of the said committee which is as follows: 

 

 Your Committee has duly examined the undermentioned 

Petitions for Private Bills and finds that the provisions of 

Rules 59, 60 and 61 have been fully complied with. 

 

 Of Aldersgate College of the City of Moose Jaw in the 

Province of Saskatchewan praying for an Act to amend its 

Act of Incorporation. 

 

 Of the Bethany Bible Institute of the Town of Hepburn in the 

Province of Saskatchewan praying for an Act to incorporate 

Bethany Bible Institute and to amend an Act to incorporate 

Mennonite Brethren Church of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, seconded 

by the hon. member from Rosthern: 

 

 That the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Members' Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 

introduce to members of the Assembly and to you, Mr. 

Speaker, a group of seven cancer patients who are here with us 

today from the cancer patient lodge here in Regina.  These 

individuals are from around the province and in Regina taking 

treatment at the cancer clinic here in Regina. 

 

I'm sure all members will want to join with me in welcoming 

them here today and wishing them the best in recovery in their 

treatment. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise 

today to introduce to you, and the hon. colleagues assembled 

here, a group of Saskatchewan small-business operators in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker.  They are Joe and Emily Varjassy, Fran 

deKock, Jim Wood, and Norm Calhoun, Mr. Speaker.  And 

these individuals are also concerned taxpayers and I think 

they'll be listening with a great deal of interest this afternoon.  

Thank you.  I'd ask all members to welcome them. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have 

two introductions today.  First of all, I'd like to introduce three 

gentlemen sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker:  Mr. Harold 

Lutzer, a farmer from Weyburn; Mr. David Davis, working at 

Prosper Tractor in Estevan; and Dale Hassett from Leader; and 

also Vonda Kosloski. 

 

They're individuals from Saskatchewan who are here 

concerned about politics in Saskatchewan -- very interested.  

We want to welcome them to the Assembly and trust that they 

enjoy the proceedings today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- And, Mr. Speaker, further I would like to just 

diverge from the tradition of this House for a moment to 

introduce another individual who isn't seated in the gallery due 

to health reasons, but an individual who has called our caucus 

and informed us that she's been really following question 

period.  I'd like to introduce a Mrs. Mavor Kidd, a senior 

citizen who lives in Pioneer Village nursing home in Regina, 

and welcome her to the proceedings as she observes them 

taking place today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Contract for Pest Spraying 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  In the 

past few months the members opposite have cranked up their 

propaganda machine in a frail attempt to show the public how 

they have saved a few pennies on a few items.  A penny saved 

is a penny earned, they claim.  Mr. Speaker, I bring to this 

Assembly today just one example of taxpayers' money which is 

being wasted by the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

government, carelessly sprayed into the wind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Environment and Resource 

Management awarded a contract for the spraying of spruce 

budworms in northern Saskatchewan, not to the lowest bidder, 

not to the second-lowest bidder, not to the third-lowest bidder.  

Mr. Speaker, the minister awarded the contract to the highest of 

four bidders at a cost of $150,000 extra to the Saskatchewan 

taxpayer. 

 

My question is to the minister responsible for this new system 

of tendering.  Mr. Minister, here are 15 million pennies that 

should, could, have been earned, 15 million pennies that could 

have been saved by your government.  Can you give this House 

the background on this tender and tell the taxpayers of this 

province how it makes sense to spend $150,000 more than the 

low bid for this work? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



714 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1993 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to . . . I thank the hon. 

member for that question and want to respond through you to 

the people of Saskatchewan by saying that normal tender 

procedures were followed in this case, that in each case the 

additional costs that are required for infrastructure and 

ancillary costs for applying of the spray were added to the . . . 

were determined by an independent firm and added to the costs 

of the tenders.  At the end of the day, the contract was offered 

to the contractor for whom the . . . the qualified contractor for 

whom the total costs were the lowest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- To the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  Then I 

assume, Mr. Minister, that you are willing to come forward 

with these so-called ancillary costs that were added on to this 

contract, but not to the original ones, to the original bidders.  

And you are saying that this is a qualified -- you said, qualified 

operator.  That other means the other four . . . the other three 

were not qualified.  Am I reading you right on that, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- No.  Mr. Speaker, I want to say that one of 

the bidders was . . . the bid was determined to be incomplete 

and therefore not qualified in the competition. 

 

I am in fact prepared to table in the House and offer copy to the 

members opposite, of the ancillary costs that were determined 

by Torchinsky Engineering -- and most of which would be 

determined by them -- and the total costs for each of the 

contractors is in this summary here. 

 

And I ask someone to distribute those to the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I would ask the minister, since 

he has made a determination to . . . for the edification of the 

House this afternoon, please identify the cost that was worth 

$150,000 more.  Please be specific for the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes.  Without getting into the detail which 

the members can read from the document later on, the 

additional costs that had to be assessed for each of the 

contractors included the air strip, staging, navigators, security, 

monitoring, and supervision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- That is ludicrous, that kind of an answer.  

Ancillary costs.  There is no air strip.  There is no air strip.  

They're using the roadway.  They're using a roadway that's 

already in existence.  These gentlemen up here in the gallery 

were going to be using smaller planes and more of them.  

You're talking 

about a 502.  That's perhaps why you need . . . larger air strip or 

a longer air strip.  So don't give us that nonsense, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is our understanding that the individual who 

was awarded the contract does not even have the equipment to 

perform the work, and in fact he's going to have to lease three 

airplanes from the United States. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I ask you how on earth does it make sense 

to pay $150,000 for the work and then award the contract to 

someone who doesn't even have the equipment?  What do you 

say to the other bidders, Mr. Minister, like our guests in the 

gallery who will watch the work go on using foreign equipment 

while their equipment and their workers sit idle? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite and 

others would be aware that in the aircraft aerial-spraying 

business, the contractors are quite mobile, and I'm sure the 

contractors to which the member opposite is referring operate 

outside of this province on a relatively frequent basis.  And 

others come in to engage in contracts here. 

 

The question of the length of the air strip, I don't want to get 

into the technical detail, but I'm given to understand that the . . . 

I'm given to understand that the length of the runway is not 

longer; in fact, it's shorter for the successful bidder; that the 

department established a standard that they felt all contractors 

should be compared to in making the assessment of costs in the 

issuing of this contract. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You're talking about a shorter runway, Mr. 

Speaker, when there is not even a shorter runway.  And a 502 

only stops 150 feet less than any of the equipment that we use, 

so that's again nonsense, Mr. Minister.  Absolute nonsense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we've also been told that the time between the 

advertising of the tender and the closing date was very 

compressed and that in fact tender packages were not even 

available until five days after the ad appeared, thus making it 

close to impossible for bidders to do the appropriate homework 

for their bids.  Further, we are told that some bidders knew 

about the upcoming tenders ahead of the time, thereby giving 

them an unfair advantage. 

 

Mr. Minister, given the many irregularities in this particular 

tender, do you not feel it would be appropriate to cancel the 

award and to retender this work under some reasonable time 

lines and with a view to employing open and fair tendering 

procedures? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The tender for this project was first 

advertised on January 23 and the tenders were 



March 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 715 

opened on February 9.  The procedures of tendering were fair 

and were complete.  And if there are considerations that should 

be taken into consideration in the future, I'd be happy for the 

members opposite to advise us of those in the future.  But the 

conclusion of the department in reviewing the procedures here 

is that they were complete and that the tender was in the end 

offered to the lowest qualified bidder when all costs were 

considered. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, from this rubbish that you just 

handed me, it's going to be very, very difficult for you to 

persuade the Saskatchewan taxpayer that indeed they got the 

best bang for the buck.  There's something else afoot here, Mr. 

Minister, something else is afoot. 

 

This iceberg budget, Mr. Speaker, of the NDP government was 

made about choices, all the wrong choices again.  And we see 

that NDP cabinet minister . . . (inaudible) . . . compassion in 

regard to their medical afflictions while the average 

Saskatchewan person has to pay their own way.  And that's not 

fair and that's not right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now we uncover a choice that costs $150,000 more for the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer.  And what we get is more political 

rhetoric.  Mr. Minister, a hundred . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I would ask the 

members not to interrupt while the member is asking his 

question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Minister, my question: $150,000 would go a long way to help 

seniors on fixed income.  That kind of money would help as 

many as 63 Saskatchewan seniors in their nursing homes for a 

year. 

 

Mr. Minister, given this information and your government's 

perceived interest in saving pennies, will you do the right 

thing?  Will you retender this contract? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I had hoped that in tabling 

the information for the member opposite that he would be able 

to add up the numbers and conclude that in fact the . . . this was 

the cheapest cost for the people of the province. 

 

It may well have been the common habit of the members 

opposite to issue contracts by overriding the advice of those 

officials in the department who made good assessments of 

projects, who totaled costs, and who then came up with 

recommendations.  And I know that a significant number of 

major liabilities to the province of Saskatchewan have occurred 

as a result of members opposite and their colleagues in the 

former government absolutely ignoring the advice of their 

officials. 

 

I'm telling the members opposite that the officials of 

our government have used solid procedures, have used 

common tendering practices, have added total costs.  And the 

member opposite goes on there about nonsense.  If good math 

and good procedure is nonsense, then that clearly defines why 

he's sitting there and not here. 

 

But the fact is, Mr. Speaker, that fair procedures were used and 

the people of the province have been well served by having 

given the contract to the person who offered the lowest total 

cost to get the project done with the proper, full documentation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Income Plan Benefits 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Finance and I hope she's a little 

more forward with the people of Saskatchewan than the 

Minister of Environment has just been. 

 

Madam Minister, more painful details of your iceberg budget 

are beginning to show through.  In fact we see more pieces 

starting to break off and float to the surface.  Seniors are 

beginning to realize the extent to which you tried to deceive 

them in your budget.  They are starting to see the betrayal and 

the hurt that you've inflicted on them. 

 

Madam Minister, you announced that as a result of your 

budget, and I'm quoting from your budget address: 

 

 Low-income seniors, on the Saskatchewan Income Plan, will 

have their benefits increased by nearly 5 per cent. 

 

Many low income seniors in our province were very pleased to 

hear this news, Madam Minister, except that like so many other 

things in your iceberg budget, it's just not true.  Officials of the 

Department of Social Services have confirmed that the budget 

contained no increase in the Saskatchewan Income Plan for low 

income seniors. 

 

Madam Minister, seniors feel betrayed.  They depend on your 

support.  Madam Minister, will you apologize to Saskatchewan 

seniors for this cruel hoax, and what steps are you taking to set 

the record straight on this matter? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, in response to the 

member's question, the increase as stated in the budget 

represents the annualized cost of the Saskatchewan Income 

Plan increases that took place on October 1, 1992.  This 

represents a 13.4 per cent increase over last year and we're very 

proud of the fact that our government was able to increase the 

Saskatchewan Income Plan for seniors in our budget year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



716 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1993 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to the minister.  

Madam Minister, that's not what Saskatchewan seniors heard 

and Saskatchewan taxpayers heard.  If that was indeed the 

truth, that the announcement was made in October, then why 

was the Minister of Finance using an October announcement to 

mislead people of Saskatchewan in leading them to believe that 

there was an additional 5 per cent coming through to them. 

 

The other day, Madam Minister, we received a call from a Mrs. 

Kidd who I introduced just prior to question period, who I 

believe is watching today.  Mrs. Kidd, like many other 

Saskatchewan seniors, listened to your budget speech with 

interest and was very pleased to hear of the 5 per cent increase. 

 

When she subsequently found out that this announcement was 

nothing more than a cruel NDP hoax designed to gloss over the 

cold, painful details of your iceberg budget, Mrs. Kidd felt 

betrayed.  She told us . . . and I'd like to quote from her, Mr. 

Speaker.  This is Mrs. Kidd's quote: 

 

 The Minister of Finance said that low-income seniors are 

getting a 5 per cent increase.  I read in the newspaper that 

seniors were getting a 5 per cent increase.  We are not getting 

a 5 per cent increase.  The NDP have lied.  I have never seen 

a retraction. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  It doesn't make any 

difference whether it's a quote.  The member knows that that is 

unacceptable.  That's unparliamentary language and the 

member cannot use that.  I would ask the member to put his 

question. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I was just quoting from Mrs. Kidd.  

But I would like to ask the minister:  Madam Minister, will you 

apologize to Mrs. Kidd?  Will you set the record straight by 

apologizing for the cruel hoax your government has played on 

Mrs. Kidd and all Saskatchewan seniors? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, our government was faced 

with an over $15 billion deficit.  That represented $760 million 

per year in interest payments.  Our government had to deal 

with the horrendous mess that was left by the previous 

Conservative administration.  Our budget did several things to 

deal with a number of issues that are confronting low income 

people in the province.  We are very proud that we were able to 

increase the Saskatchewan Income Plan for low income seniors 

by close to 5 per cent in this budget year.  We're proud of that 

fact. 

 

In addition, since our government came to office, we have 

increased home care by close to 40 per cent.  In addition, we 

have a safety net program for prescription drugs for low 

income seniors and seniors living on the guaranteed income 

supplement.  We're proud of that as well. 

I think, given the tremendous circumstances we were left with, 

we have done well for the seniors of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And for the benefit of 

the House I will table this information that was sent to me by 

Mrs. Kidd. 

 

Madam Minister, after deceiving Saskatchewan seniors about 

their income plan benefits, the next sentence of your budget 

talks about: 

 

 These seniors will also receive enhanced benefits under a 

number of other programs, including chiropractic and 

optometric services and the Drug Plan. 

 

If indeed they're getting enhanced benefits, I'm not sure exactly 

where they're going to pay for these enhanced benefits or the 

services they're supposed to receive when they have to pay for 

optometric services, chiropractic services.  In fact officials 

from Saskatchewan Health have told us that seniors on SIP 

(Saskatchewan Income Plan), like Mrs. Kidd, have had their 

annual deductible amount increased from 100 to $200 -- an 

increase, Madam Minister. 

 

What's 5 per cent?  Seniors like Mrs. Kidd will be forced to pay 

$100 a year more for prescription drugs, and you say their 

benefits have been enhanced. 

 

Madam Minister, once again, you owe Mrs. Kidd and 

thousands of other Saskatchewan seniors a retraction and an 

apology.  Madam Minister, will you apologize for the false 

statements made by the Minister of Finance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, prior to 1986 when 

Graham Taylor was the Conservative minister of Health, the 

federal Conservatives in Ottawa changed the drug patent 

legislation.  And I want to remind the members, not one word 

was uttered because it was going to cost the provincial treasury 

of this province millions and millions of dollars in added 

prescription drug costs. 

 

We have a piece of legislation that is also before the House of 

Commons to change the drug patent legislation once again.  

Our associate Health minister took a trip to Ottawa to talk 

about the impact that that change would have on the provincial 

prescription drug plan.  Not one word of utterance from the 

members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this provincial budget we have ensured that 

low income people in this province, particularly low income 

senior citizens receiving the Saskatchewan Income Plan and 

receiving the guaranteed income supplement, will have access 

to prescription drugs in this province.  We have ensured that 

we will continue chiropractic coverage and 



March 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 717 

optometric coverage for those seniors living on the 

Saskatchewan Income Plan, at a time when we are dealing with 

tremendous circumstances in this province as a result of your 

fiscal mismanagement. 

 

We have done well . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

certain that any of the seniors watching today will just really be 

in a quandary as to what they are really getting from this 

government. 

 

I refer back to the budget address presented by the Minister of 

Finance.  And in this address the Minister of Finance said this 

budget requires a sacrifice, and most people of Saskatchewan 

agree with that.  But there are some in our midst who cannot be 

asked to sacrifice more.  They have nothing left to give.  Our 

strength as a society is reflected in our willingness to protect 

our weakest members. 

 

Madam Minister, seniors in Saskatchewan feel that in most 

cases they are the weakest among us.  Would you be willing to 

live on $10,000 a year or less?  Or would the Minister of 

Finance be willing to live on $10,000 a year or less? 

 

Madam Minister, you've cut their services.  You haven't 

enhanced anything for them, while you've increased funding to 

the Deputy Premier some $800,000.  Madam Minister, where 

are your priorities?  How can you possibly justify your attack 

on seniors to Mrs. Kidd and to all other low income seniors in 

the province, while at the same time giving $800,000 more to 

the NDP Deputy Premier? 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  If 

there are any people in this province that need to apologize to 

Mrs. Kidd, it's the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- In 1982 when the NDP government left 

office, we left $139.2 million in the kitty.  And what were we 

greeted with when we came into office in October of 1991?  

We were greeted with a $15 billion deficit. 

 

Now I say this to the members opposite: where were you, 

members, where were you, when you spent $490,000 -- lost -- 

on Pro-Star Mills?  Where were you?  Where were you when 

you spent over $5 million on GigaText?  If anybody has 

anything to apologize for in this province, it's you people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, if there's anyone who really must 

apologize, it's the member from Saskatoon, the minister 

responsible for Social Services -- the member who when she 

was on this side of the House 

promised so much to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

In fact, the member likes to refer to the former government and 

blame it all on the former government, while at the same time 

she cuts out the seniors' heritage fund, she increased resident 

income charges, she's phasing out level 1 and 2 care, she's 

de-insuring oxygen and insulin, she's scrapped the 

Saskatchewan prescription drug plan, imposed user fees on 

chiropractic and optometric services, and the list goes on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, how long do you think you can 

continue to hide this brutal attack below the surface of your 

iceberg budget?  How can you justify the attack on seniors 

when you increase the Deputy Premier's budget by some 

$800,000 and when you spend $20 million on gambling 

machines, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, in the 1992-93 budget 

year the people of this province will spend $760 million on 

interest rates -- interest on debt left by the previous 

administration, the Conservative Party of Saskatchewan.  Now 

did the Tories once think about the future of this province when 

they were busy spending money, spending money, giving it to 

their buddies all over this province and all over this country?  

They did not think about the future. 

 

The senior citizens in this province are concerned about their 

grandchildren's future; they're concerned about their own 

children's future.  And they, not unlike the rest of the people in 

this province that have a proud history of sacrifice, they are 

prepared to sacrifice in order to get our government back on the 

road to fiscal recovery. 

 

I want to remind the members of this.  In this budget year, we 

increased the Saskatchewan Income Plan by close to 5 per cent; 

we increased, since coming to government, 40 per cent for 

home care; we have increased . . . we have made sure that 

seniors who are the lowest income seniors in this province will 

have access to a safety net program in order to secure their 

prescription drugs.  We have not . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Leak of Code of Ethics Document 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have just one quick 

question, a very important question however, that I'd like the 

Minister of Justice to respond to.  Could you give this 

Assembly your opinion as to whether the leader of the third 

party, the member for Saskatoon Greystone, breached the spirit 

of the code of ethical conduct and statement of principles when 

last week she leaked to the media a draft of those documents. 

 

Mr. Minister, I understand those documents were given to her 

in good faith and in confidence, a 



718 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1993 

confidence that was broken to further a political agenda -- a 

shameful example of old-style pizza politics.  Could you give 

this Assembly your assessment of that member's actions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, do I detect a crack in the 

coalition that has been operating . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- There don't seem to be any easy 

questions asked these days, and this indeed is not one.  I did 

send a copy of the code of ethics to the Leader of the 

Opposition and to the member from Saskatoon Greystone and 

asked for a meeting with them in connection with that code.  

And indeed I had a meeting with the Leader of the Opposition 

last week, and on the following day a meeting with the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

In neither of those meetings was there any discussion about the 

document being made public or released to the press one way 

or the other.  I did not . . . I was not informed by the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone that she would be taking the action 

that she did.  The subject just simply never came up.  The only 

way in which I know that indeed she did release the document 

was by the newspaper reports of themselves.  But the subject 

was not discussed between us. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 41 -- An Act respecting the Financial 

Administration of the Government of Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend the Financial Administration Act be now introduced and 

read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 2 -- Maintenance of the Crow Benefit 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At the end of my 

remarks today I'll be moving a motion along the lines that: 

 

 This Assembly urge the federal government to maintain the 

Crow benefit method of payment and that this government 

further urge the federal government to cease its outrageous 

reduction of the Crow benefit by 10 per cent each year for the 

next two years, in an obvious attempt to force farmers into a 

corner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, I notice that this 

motion has come up a few different times and often I've tried to 

get the members opposite to take a stand.  And actually, we've 

brought it up in emergency debate.  We wanted to take a stand 

and see if they won't, for once, come out in support of the 

farmers instead of supporting their colleagues in Ottawa. 

 

And often they talked the clock out.  They refused to vote on it.  

They've used methods in the House to stop from being on 

record of where they stand on this issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Before I get into the motion, I think I'd like to make a few 

comments on where this all began, Mr. Speaker, as far as the 

Crow benefit and the reason for its existence. 

 

The original agreement, Mr. Speaker, for the construction of a 

transcontinental railway was reached with the federal 

government and Canadian Pacific in 1880, and brought into 

legislation in 1881, Mr. Speaker.  Construction by the 

government of the railroad had commenced in 1875, five years 

after the formation of the CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway).  

The government completed the construction of two major 

segments of the railway at its own expense, Mr. Speaker.  Fort 

William -- that's Thunder Bay -- to Winnipeg, and Kamloops to 

Fort Moody, and turned them over to the CPR without charge. 

 

I think you'll notice in my comments in the next while exactly 

what . . . how well the railroads did do and what little cost it 

was to them, and what they gained from it. 

 

They were turned over to the CPR without charge.  

Construction costs back then were $37,785,000.  As you can 

see, the government of the day was desperate to get a railroad 

across, but of course helped the CPR in great lengths.  The 

government further agreed to provide the CPR with a $25 

million cash subsidy and 25 million acres of prairie land with 

mineral rights in exchange for completing the western segment 

and operating the railroad, Mr. Speaker. 

 

About 60 per cent of the capital invested in the construction of 

the original line came from government sources -- federal, 

municipal, and provincial.  In other words, the taxpayers were 

stretched to great limits to ensure that they would build this 

system of moving commodities and did so at great expense to 

themselves in paying the CPR. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- For a good reason. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- And it was for a very good reason, as the 

member from Humboldt has stated. 

 

Total grants to the CPR for constructing the system from 

government sources, to December 31, 1977, came to $106 

million in cash in construction and 43,952,000 acres of land.  

So they were well paid of course. 

 

The CPR up to the mid-'60s realized $502 million from the sale 

of lands, but retained the mineral rights. 



March 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 719 

In its 1965-66 fiscal year, it turned over its remaining real 

estate holdings to its wholly owned subsidiary, Marathon 

Realty, on a stock exchange deal. 

 

CP's 1991 revenues from energy sources, in real estate, hotel 

operations, were $1.3 billion and $879 million respectively.  In 

return for these concessions and others, the CPR agreed to 

build and efficiently operate the railroad in perpetuity.  Mr. 

Speaker, I think that means a great deal.  As you can tell, these 

guys were well paid.  They received a lot of land, a lot of cash, 

and what they were to do was operate a railroad in perpetuity 

and that was an agreement that . . . The members opposite 

talked about breaking deals with farmers; well this was a pretty 

important deal for the farmers.  And yet now they're over there 

supporting more deal-breaking.  Where were they in 1982?  

Where are they today?  Absolutely. 

 

In 1919, Mr. Speaker, the government introduced legislation to 

formally end the Crow's Nest Pass Agreement.  As a result of 

Senate opposition, an amendment was passed suspending the 

agreement for only three years.  At the end of the three years, 

Prime Minister Mackenzie King restored the Crow rates.  In 

1925 the rates were entrenched in legislation and extended to 

include grain hauled west to the west coast and Hudson Bay 

ports and to cover all rail lines, present and future. 

 

Now I hope the member from Kindersley is listening up there 

because I know he often likes to chirp from his seat but I hear 

nothing today.  And why I'm trying to raise this to his attention 

is if they are going to be wanting to tear down a system, they 

had better ensure that they know why the system was built up 

to begin with and what it's all about.  That's why I want to read 

into the record how this came to be. 

 

Construction of prairie branch lines ended in the mid-1930s.  

By 1935, 19,285 miles of rail line criss-crossed the Prairies in 

the total absence of public planning and directions.  Then, as 

now, the operative word was competition. 

 

The MacPherson Royal Commission of 1961 -- no relations -- 

of 1961 resulted in the passage of the National Transportation 

Act.  The commission examined claimed railway losses in 

carrying grain for which for 1958 they said were $70 million.  

The commission recommended the government pay $9 million 

annually to the CPR and 7.3 million to the CNR (Canadian 

National Railway Company) to represent this share of fixed 

costs that would properly be borne by the grain traffic.  In 

addition, if revenues on grain were less than variable costs, the 

government would make up the difference, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The National Transportation Act of 1967 made for specific 

provision for the abandonment of uneconomic branch lines.  

Further, the Act provided for the payment of a subsidy to 

compensate the railways for actual losses on the branch lines 

deemed to be uneconomic. 

 

For the year 1971 the railways received $22.5 million 

as a subsidy for running unprofitable branch lines.  In 

December 1974 the government designated 12,413 miles of 

prairie branch line as basic network, protected from 

abandonment to the year 2000. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's a deal. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- That's right; it was a deal.  And at the time 

the government of the day knew that we had to protect branch 

lines, yet these guys over there, they're not with that.  That's not 

on for them. 

 

In August 1980 Liberal Transport minister Jean-Luc Pépin took 

steps to introduce Bill C-155 -- the Western Grain 

Transportation Act.  The coming into force of Western Grain 

Transportation Act on January 1, 1984, ended for all time the 

statutory rate protection on grain freight rates from which 

producers had benefited continuously since 1925, and prior to 

that since 1897. 

 

Since that date the farmers' share of grain freight rates have 

increased from an average of $4.85 a tonne to $11.98 a tonne in 

the '92-93 crop year, or by 247 per cent in 9 years -- an annual 

average of 27.4 per cent.  And that's all done under the guise of 

competition. 

 

I look back to that August 1980 when Jean-Luc Pépin did bring 

forward Bill C-155.  Of course it was a federal Liberal 

administration and our member of the third party in this House 

still supports those views held by Jean-Luc Pépin in articles 

that I read into this House a few weeks ago. 

 

But I'm asking, where were the members opposite?  Because 

federally they are now in . . . their government, the 

Conservative government, is in power and they have some 

ability to lobby their colleagues.  I would hope they do.  I 

would hope they're listened to somewhat.  But where were they 

back in the early '80s?  Back when there was an election which 

was fought, and quite heatedly so, on the Crow benefit. 

 

The member from Morse is chirping but I'll tell you, I know 

what he was saying back then, under the guise of competition 

we needed an enhanced railroad system.  But what does it cost 

the farmers?  A great deal.  The original concept of a Crow 

benefit payment was announced by Jean-Luc on February 8 of 

1982.  It was originally intended to be paid in most part to the 

producers. 

 

However after much lobbying by Quebec and prairie interests, 

the minister introduced amendments to the Bill on May 9, '83 

which proposed that the entire payment be made to the railway 

companies.  That was the wishes of the government of the day 

in 1983.  That was the wishes of the farmers, Mr. Speaker.  

And I think that if the member from Morse gets a chance to 

speak later today that he should state where his position was 

then and where it is now. 

 

The Crow benefit was committed in perpetuity and represented 

a cap on federal assistance to be paid on the railways' claimed 

losses for the grain haul, which 



720 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1993 

was to be phased in and attain a maximum of $658 million 

annually commencing in 1986-87.  However the federal 

government was never allowed the matter of the method of 

payment of the Crow benefit to rest.  And why would they with 

the federal Conservatives pushing it every year to see a 

change?  To whose benefit?  Is there a benefit on . . . I ask the 

member from Morse, is there a benefit on your farm for what's 

happened over the years, or is there a heavy cost?  Well I say 

there's a heavy cost, and we'll get into that in a while. 

 

A committee of inquiry on the Crow benefit method of 

payment was ordered by the Transport minister shortly after the 

passage of C-155.  Justice Gordon Hall's committee on March 

29, 1985, recommended the Crow benefit payment be 

redirected from the railway companies to producers as a grain 

transportation refund.  That sounds a lot like something that 

member would support, push forward. 

 

(1445) 

 

In April of 1991 the federal consultative committee on 

transportation efficiencies circulated a discussion paper on the 

subject of western grain transportation efficiencies.  It has 

clearly advocated reductions in branch lines and supported 

changes to the method of payment of the Crow benefit. 

 

Now with this discussion paper coming about under a federal 

Conservative government, I'm sure that the members opposite 

could put forward all the letters of support for the farmers' 

cause, what they've put forward to lobby their colleagues, put 

forward the views of their constituents, and no doubt they will 

bring those into the legislature later on. 

 

In January of 1992, a little over a year ago, the federal 

government commissioned elaborate transportation talks 

forums across the Prairies.  These forums were quite clearly 

intended to further undermine farmers' support by retaining the 

current method of payment.  Almost without exception farmers 

continuously passed resolutions supporting payment to the 

railways of the Crow benefit. 

 

The forums were generally recognized as a further government 

attempt to break the method of payment and loosen branch line 

abandonment regulations.  And I know that the member from 

Morse was at those meetings.  The federal member from Swift 

Current-Maple Creek-Assiniboia was at meetings that I 

attended in Mankota and Frontier, and I know the message was 

loud and clear from those people.  It was status quo. 

 

Even meetings that were held across the line in Alberta, I know 

of meetings held in Medicine Hat where the farmers were 

supporting the status quo -- no change.  But of course the 

Conservative Government of Alberta is also pushing hard, their 

Agriculture Minister Isley working behind the scenes with his 

federal counterparts to try and scuttle the whole show so that 

they can have their way, change the method of payment, 

increase the cost to the 

farmers. 

 

And I'm not sure what the member from Morse expects is 

going to come of the south-west area that he represents.  I'm 

not sure if he is in favour of seeing the branch lines disappear, 

but of course that's coming and he knows that is.  You don't 

have to go too far south of where that member lives, just across 

the line into the States, and you'll see what happens when you 

want to deregulate. 

 

They have railroads down there, Mr. Speaker, you'd swear to 

look at them that they're not even being used.  What is 

happening is that they're just not being kept up, along with their 

elevators.  I'm sure you could throw a cat through the wall of 

those elevators.  And the member knows that and he knows 

that we're going to follow suit if we make these changes. 

 

The latest attempt of the government to break the method of 

payment is contained in proposals prepared by consultant 

Ramsay Withers and put before the November 17, 1992 

Toronto meeting of federal-provincial ministers of Agriculture. 

 

And a few of those key issues that were raised: changing the 

Canadian Wheat Board pooling point to the St. Lawrence ports 

from Thunder Bay; moving away from distance-related to 

cost-related grain freight rates; permitting the provinces to 

determine how the producers' share of the Crow benefit would 

be paid out. 

 

And we know what's going to happen once some of the 

provinces have that decision to make.  You're going to have a 

dilution factor.  You're going to see the payment be diluted 

over other industries.  And it won't be long before we're all in 

trouble, and I'll get to that after a bit. 

 

Remove all prohibition orders on grain-dependent branch lines 

and simplify abandonment applications.  Phase in the changes 

commencing August 1, '94 over a four-year period by 

increasing the farmers' share of grain freight rates by $5 a tonne 

annually for three years and bringing farmers to payment of 

full compensatory rates in the fourth year. 

 

Establish a monitoring and management committee to modify 

the impact during the implementation stage.  And I'm sure that 

they would have that well organized and controlled also. 

 

The future method of payment of the Crow benefit and further 

rationalization of the grain handling and branch line system 

points ominously in the direction of rapid change.  They 

believe in the change.  They're not sure where it's going.  If it's 

going anywhere it's to help their multinational friends, the ones 

that bring them into power, that donate heavily to them.  So 

they have to repay some of those notes that are now due. 

 

Since July 15, 1981 to November 30, 1992, branch line 

abandonments have totalled 1,752 miles in this province . . . or 

in the three prairie provinces.  In Manitoba there was 429 

miles; Saskatchewan lost 



March 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 721 

912 miles; Alberta lost 410 miles.  The writing's on the wall, as 

the member from Morse well knows. 

 

When we look at what's happened to primary elevators, Mr. 

Speaker, in 1982, in the '82-83 year we had 1,578 elevators in 

Saskatchewan; 10 years later we got 779 -- half the elevators.  

Delivery points in 1982-83, we had 643; 10 years later in 

'92-93, we're at 498. 

 

The amount of storage in tonnes, 4.143 million in 1982-83; it's 

down to 3.3 now 10 years later. 

 

I think it all shows, Mr. Speaker, exactly the direction that 

things are going when you allow the deregulation and you 

allow us to break from past agreements and what was the norm, 

the never-ending attention that has been devoted to redesigning 

the system ever since passage of the Western Grain 

Transportation Act which occurred in November of '83.  On 

that occasion a historic rate officially ended, Mr. Speaker.  

Farmers lost a major historic right in grain freight costs that 

they had enjoyed for over 80 years, which assisted them in 

marketing their grain and which they still need today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The passage of the WGTA (Western Grain Transportation Act) 

represented only the first step, not the last step as many were 

led to believe, in the ongoing agenda of the government and 

corporations for incremental change leading toward a totally 

redesigned and largely deregulated rail system. 

 

Changes have occurred including the government ending the 

branch line rehabilitation program. Applications for 

abandonment of the branch lines protected to the year 2000 are 

now being proposed. Incentive rates to facilitate the 

centralization of grain deliveries, permitting discrimination in 

grain transportation rates, have been implemented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the matter of creating government policy and 

program changes in order to improve the efficiency of the 

existing system and thereby reduce costs to system participants 

and in particular to grain producers, is, on the basis of past 

experience, self-serving and patronizing.  But the farmers have 

never been the beneficiaries of any of these changes.  The 

constituents that that member across represents have never 

been the beneficiary of what he has supported in his political 

life. 

 

There are numerous instances, for example, where producers 

have fought to retain branch line rail lines and failed.  Their 

costs to move grain have not been reduced. Their operations 

have been forced to adjust to added inconvenience through loss 

of time and longer hauling distance, and in turn become less 

efficient. 

 

And when we're talking about branch lines and alternatives to 

operating the branch lines, Mr. Speaker, I want to bring to the 

attention of the legislature a letter which was sent out from Mr. 

Paul Beingessner.  He's the general manager for Southern Rails 

Cooperative and he sent copies of these letters to 

many of the producers in the province, and I just want to quote 

some of the comments that the manager of the Southern Rails 

Cooperative has on this issue: 

 

 On November 17, 1992, the federal government issued a 

"Working Draft for Grain Transportation Reform". The part 

of this paper which received the most attention was the 

proposal to change the Method of Payment -- that is to pay 

the Crow Benefit subsidy to the farmer, rather than to the 

railways. 

 

 Because farmers are hard pressed financially at this time, 

they are focusing on this issue, and on trying to extract a third 

line of defence payment from the government. 

 

And he's absolutely correct.  When we look back at what's 

happened over the last two years, we know that in the spring of 

1991 when we were cajoled into joining up a farm program at 

the time 1991 GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) was 

coming on stream, it wasn't going over so well.  So members 

opposite who were . . . And the member from Morse as 

associate Ag minister, I think, during that time . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Toy minister. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Toy minister . . . this is where he was at.  

He was there talking about what would happen if you don't join 

up to their farm programs.  You would missing out on any of 

the third line of defence monies that were coming out. 

 

And of course we did.  Join or not join, we're still waiting for 

that third line of defence money.  But people . . . Mr. Speaker, 

the farmers are so cash-strapped, and his constituents too are so 

cash-strapped that what's happening now is that they're looking 

for all ways of raising funds. 

 

And the members opposite and their federal counterparts, they 

know this.  They know that the farmers are in desperate need of 

cash.  They don't know how they're going to go out there and 

put the crop in this spring. 

 

So the federal government right today knows that if they can 

start offering up their transportation subsidies in the form of 

program payments, that it's going to be looked at -- unfairly so. 

 

Just to quote a little further from this letter from Southern Rails 

Cooperative: 

 

 Who wins through abandonment (he asks)?  Why then is it 

being promoted so hard, and who would the winners be?  The 

major winners would be the elevator companies.  They would 

be able to do the unpopular rationalization of their system 

and blame rail abandonment for it. 

 

 The other winners would be the railroads. In Saskatchewan, 

CN and CP Rail have created virtual monopolies for 

themselves.  CN in the North and CP in the South.  They 

were allowed 



722 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1993 

to do this through abandoning some branch lines and trading 

others to their "competitor" to enhance their own monopoly 

position elsewhere. 

 

 As monopolies, the railways know that under a de-regulated 

system they wouldn't have to compete with anyone. 

 

And that's right on with where your mind is at, member from 

Morse. 

 

 As monopolies they know that branch line abandonment 

won't hurt them since the grain will come to their lines 

anyhow.  Line abandonment will allow them to meet their 

goals of labour force cuts. 

 

Now that's who wins through abandonment. 

 

 Who loses through abandonment?  Of course, no one is 

proposing abandoning of the entire branch line network -- 

only the "high cost" portion.  Which brings us to the 

question, how much of the network is proposed for 

abandonment? 

 

How much is?  Well good question. 

 

 The proposal the federal government put forward is similar to 

that put forward in the "Efficiencies" Paper that the 

government floated as a trial balloon in 1991. 

 

 In summary, this paper called for removal of the Protection 

Orders that prevent the railways from abandoning branch 

lines.  All lines would be transferred to a new schedule.  They 

could be abandoned at a much faster pace than is currently 

allowed. 

 

 Funding for a trucking program, off-track elevator or short 

line railroad would be arranged with producers.  This funding 

would end by the year 2000.  Funding for short line railroads 

would not be allowed for lines which were not upgraded 

under the Prairie Branch Line Rehabilitation Program. 

 

 Immediate abandonment would be authorized for the Central 

Butte, Rhein, a portion of the Blaine Lake, Paddockwood, 

Big River, Neudorf, Meacham, Denholm, Shamrock and 

Lewvan, S. subdivisions, since these were never upgraded 

under the federal rehabilitation program. 

 

 Are short lines an option? 

 

And this fellow ought to know, I mean he is the manager of 

Southern Rails.  And the member from Morse has quoted from 

this fellow before; I remember him talking about a meeting out 

in Simmie that he attended, and how well this system will 

work, how it can replace what we now have. 

The federal proposal does allow for the creation and 

operation of short line railroads in some cases, but this is a 

dangerous illusion. 

 

Did you hear that? 

 

(1500) 

 

 The criteria being proposed for funding of short line railroads 

would make this alternative virtually impossible.  This is 

despite the fact that short lines can operate for one-third to 

half of the cost of operation by CN or CP. 

 

 Drawing on my experience as General Manager of Southern 

Rails Cooperative Ltd., Saskatchewan's only short line 

railroad, I did a rough analysis of the feasibility of operating 

a short line on branch lines in southern Saskatchewan that 

would be affected by abandonment.  Under the federal 

proposal, there is not one of these lines which would have 

long term viability. 

 

Well isn't that something?  And the member from Morse is 

quoting a fellow that's saying, well listen, none of the lines in 

the south-west Saskatchewan would be viable under this 

proposal.  But he can't table anything in this House which 

shows how he has lobbied his federal counterparts to make 

changes.  He goes on: 

 

 The worst is yet to come.  As you can see, the federal 

proposal is much more far reaching than a change in the 

Method of Payment.  As I said earlier, very little attention is 

being focused on the abandonment proposals -- partly 

because very little information about this has been made 

public and partly because some (of the) major players in the 

picture stand to benefit by this.  The federal proposal also 

carried with it the intention of moving eventually to 

commercial rates and confidential contracts.  This would 

mean an end to distance related rates and to a regulated rate 

structure as a whole.  Because they are in a monopoly 

situation, and because our transportation options on the 

prairies are quite limited, the railways would have the ability 

to charge whatever the traffic would bear. 

 

 It is time for those who will pay the costs -- the affected 

producers -- to stand up and be heard on this issue.  There are 

enough of us that the government will not be able to ignore 

us.  Perhaps it is also time for endangered communities to 

band together in some type of lobby group to speak 

specifically to this issue. 

 

 Paul Beingessner, General Manager, Southern Rails 

Cooperative. 

 

I think that's a real good letter.  I'm glad he sent that out.  And I 

think . . . I hope it's one that the members opposite are going to 

listen to a little better than what they have to date, Mr. Speaker.  

Because this is the 



March 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 723 

feelings.  This man is speaking for the concerns of the farmers.  

He knows full well that should we go to a more deregulated 

system of short-line railroads, for his business it's only going to 

improve. 

 

So why is he then saying it's not the answer for everyone?  I'm 

sure he does believe that there are a few lines, Mr. Speaker, or 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that will do well.  But when these people 

who are in the business have the farmers' interest at heart, why 

then I ask would the members opposite not be listening and not 

be acting to the betterment of the farmers? 

 

Now I know the member from Souris-Cannington must have 

some rail lines in his part of the province that are also slated for 

abandonment . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He says not, from 

his seat.  Well that explains then why he never takes a stand on 

the issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, looking at the motion, it 

deals with a 10 per cent cut over two years.  This was brought 

down by the federal government not long ago, announced 

unilaterally, no consultation, no consideration for the situation 

that other provinces and the producers within those provinces 

find themselves in -- just a unilateral cut, more offloading. 

 

What it's doing is adding more cost onto the backs of the 

Saskatchewan farmers, and I know that is going to affect the 

producers in the riding of the member opposite. 

 

This cut, Mr. Speaker . . . The Crow benefit is some 

three-quarters of a billion dollars of which some $400 million, I 

believe it is, goes to Saskatchewan.  So what we're talking 

about is $80 million over two years.  Now when they want to 

talk about raising a lot of money, they tried to make a $23 

million issue last summer, letting on that it was not that much 

money, this government could afford it, knowing full well that 

the producers couldn't afford it.  So then why aren't they 

opposing the federal government's change when we're talking 

four times that amount?  They're quiet on it. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Where is the member from Thunder 

Creek on the issue? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well so far he's sat silent.  The proposal 

reduces the Saskatchewan share of the Crow benefit, Mr. 

Speaker, as I said, by $40 million to provide compensation to 

Manitoba for changes in freight cost pooling, and this will 

mean eastern Saskatchewan producers paying more to move 

their grain to port. 

 

Now the member from Souris-Cannington, I know that he's got 

to at some point defend the people that he's representing, if he 

is representing anyone. 

 

Last July in Halifax, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Agriculture 

minister agreed that the current method . . . the current benefit 

under the Western Grain Transportation Act should remain in 

western Canada and not be diminished.  That was last July.  So 

it's not too many months later and they are already attacking 

it. 

 

And I don't see any opposition from those people.  There's been 

no real dialogue, no consultation with Saskatchewan producers 

on these issues.  The last time there was consultation and 

dialogue was during the meetings of last winter.  But for those 

members that . . . for those producers that attended those 

meetings, they sent a clear message: we don't want you people 

tampering; get out of our pocketbooks. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm looking at an article from The 

Western Producer, "Ottawa ready to pay Crow." 

 

 Ottawa says it will proceed with enabling legislation to 

distribute the $720 million subsidy. 

 

That's not what the producers are asking for, but that's what 

they're going ahead with. 

 

 The federal government appears committed to bringing in 

legislation that would allow the Crow benefit to be converted 

to a NISA type account. 

 

Now I'd have to ask the members opposite: are any of the 

producers that are in your areas, are they asking for that?  Have 

you heard of that from anyone other than the federal 

government?  Well the member from Morse shakes his head, 

no, but he won't get up and say it in the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the cost that this federal government has put onto 

the backs of agriculture producers in this province has been 

immense.  To say that the producers don't trust these members 

are . . . that's putting it mildly.  And I just think back to why 

this would be. 

 

And I suppose what many of them think about is the two-price 

wheat system.  And I know that, you know, during elections 

and such, the members opposite, they're talking about the 200 

million; how we're going to straighten that out; and we're going 

to get 200 million bucks.  They're letting on it's for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Well I still have a mailbox, so if there was any money coming 

out, I'm sure that I should have gotten my share as a producer.  

But it never came.  And nowhere, in any of the remarks I've 

heard from you since I've been a member, have I seen where 

you've been asking the federal government to come clean and 

come up with this money.  You supported that, but now you're 

nowhere, nowhere on the issue. 

 

Other offloading that they've been hitting the producers with -- 

crop insurance.  Look at the share that the producers pick up of 

crop insurance now.  Federal offloading.  Not once did the 

members opposite speak up opposed to that.  They've been 

offloading.  They've been offloading on your revenue and 

insurance programs.  They're allowing the federal government 

to offload. 



724 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1993 

In fact as I recall, the only time that the members in recent 

history have spoke on agriculture issues was when they wanted 

to do away with the cash advance, wasn't it?  Yes. 

 

Those members opposite, they were touring the province at the 

time.  They weren't saying we want to retain the cash advance, 

interest free cash advance.  They were saying it was unfair.  

Somehow it was unfair for their producers . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . .  Well I don't know how that could be unfair to 

the members . . . or to the good citizens and the people that 

produce on farms around the Morse area, because they're still 

asking for it.  They want to ensure that it remains. 

 

Never have you stood up for those people on that issue, but 

especially without ever talking about any of these others. 

 

And now what they're proposing is that we do charge interest.  

Somehow I don't think that's fair.  And I ask the members 

opposite, why not take a stand on some of these issues against 

the federal government?  If you actually think that they're 

going to be around to support you, they're not. 

 

The member from Morse, you're not the one going to the 

Senate.  So you might as well, you might as well defend your 

constituents. 

 

The people down East, in the end they're not caring about you.  

And neither are they paying your bills and wages to be here.  

So you should be defending those people that do pay that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at the proposal put 

forward by the federal government, as far as paying into a 

NISA-like (net income stabilization account) account, instead 

of or in lieu of the third line of defence, I think it runs a little 

bit of fear into the hearts of producers. Because they know full 

well that once you start to take away the transportation subsidy, 

it's only a few years down the road until it's gone altogether.  

And then what are we going to do for any cash injection?  Well 

there won't be any. 

 

What you should be doing is defending your producers, 

defending your constituents for a third line of defence.  

Defending them because agriculture is a federal responsibility 

in all the other countries of the world, but here you people have 

allowed the federal government to offload onto the backs of the 

province -- Saskatchewan taxpayers and Saskatchewan 

producers. 

 

You're going to have to be with us in defending the producers, 

because all too often the Prime Minister has made comments 

that he's going to be there to help the farmers during the trade 

wars. 

 

It's not up to the farmers to try and defend themselves against 

the United States and the European Economic Community in 

having a war.  We rely on the federal government to take that 

action.  And we rely on you to lobby them on their behalf. 

Other areas that they've pulled out of, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

look at Canadian Wheat Board erosion.  These members 

opposite have never taken a stand on that issue either . . . only 

to say that they've been supportive of it.  When oats were taken 

out of the jurisdiction of the Canadian Wheat Board, these 

members supported it.  They've always been opposed to 

single-desk marketing; they want farmers to be able to do it on 

their own.  But the producers aren't asking for that; they know 

full well the strength of marketing is in single-desk selling. 

 

And that's why at the Saskatoon rally 13,000 farmers . . . and I 

was standing near the member from Morse; we talked up there, 

didn't we? -- and, you know, when I heard speakers come out 

in favour of Canadian Wheat Board, that was when there was a 

standing ovation, 13,000 people.  I didn't see anybody in that 

building that wasn't standing.  The member from Morse was 

trying to find a chair but he happened to be standing before 

that, so . . . 

 

That's what the farmers want.  Now I know that you people feel 

you know better but somehow I think that the 13,000 farmers 

perhaps know what they want and need.  They've been around 

that business long enough to know full well who's helping 

during the campaign.  I don't think that Cargill and Continental 

and some of the bigger players are actually out there, you 

know, going to bat for the farmers.  But they support the 

Conservative Party.  And that makes people real wary as to 

what game you're actually playing. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who wins on the open market, Harold? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- That's right.  The farmers are saying: you 

know, times are tough enough and we could really use the help 

instead of you going to bat for the multinationals. 

 

I want to ask if the members will let this motion come to a vote 

or will they adjourn and by their silence support the feds in 

their attempt to eliminate the Crow benefit.  I think their game 

has gone on long enough.  I think they've got to stand up and 

take a position today.  And if they'll do so, we'll ensure that it's 

not a political decision that they're going to have to make, but 

one for the producers. 

 

(1515) 

 

And I know the members opposite are laughing because they 

have no intention of going against federal counterparts, not 

during a leadership race, not while they've got one of their own 

on the go.  Just let your constituents know where you're at.  

And I know that some of the members over there have been 

doing a bit of a tour of the province letting on that they're really 

concerned about health care, and I'm sure they are.  There's no 

doubt they are. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Well I'm not so sure about that. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well they attended all the meetings.  I 

know that they were at the meeting in 



March 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 725 

Eastend.  They hid at the back of the hall, mind you, but they 

were there.  I'm sure they could -- from their perches -- they 

had a good view of what was happening at the meeting. 

 

Then they come back here and try and say that they're taking a 

stand for the people out there.  They're standing up and 

speaking for the people of Eastend, in my constituency, and not 

myself.  I was at the front of the hall.  I had the mike. 

 

The member from Rosthern, he was at the back of the hall.  All 

you could see every so often was a little glimpse of him 

peeking around the corner.  He was writing notes. 

 

That's not what people are asking for.  They want something 

more.  And I guess that's why I really stress the point on this 

motion today.  Please stand up for your constituents and let this 

go to a vote.  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And with that, I 

will move the motion: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the federal government to maintain 

the Crow benefit method of payment and that this 

government further urge the federal government to cease its 

outrageous reduction of the Crow benefit by 10 per cent each 

year for the next two years, in an obvious attempt to force 

farmers into a corner. 

 

Seconded by the member from Biggar. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

It's with great pleasure that I speak on the area of grain 

transportation here today.  It is certainly an area of concern that 

I have had, and I have been involved in the area of the grain 

transportation discussion going on now, I would say, in excess 

of 12 to 13 years.  It is an argument that has existed in terms of 

what we do with grain transportation for a long, long time. 

 

What I wish to do today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is outline some 

of the activities that took place up until the change of 1983 -- 

that was brought forward by then the president . . . the Liberal 

government that was present at that time, first under the 

Transportation Minister Jean-Luc Pepin and finally brought 

forward by Lloyd Axworthy -- and some of the concerns that 

were brought forward by producers and the arguments brought 

forward by producers at that time. 

 

And then I want to highlight by going into the continual 

erosion of that transportation subsidy and the arguments to 

change that subsidy throughout the '80s and into the '90s, 

where federal governments have stood on that issue and the 

pressure they have put forward to make changes there against 

the wishes of producers of Saskatchewan; and where also 

provincial governments have been involved, specifically the 

provincial government that was in power for the last 10 years 

in Saskatchewan, and from there talk about the proposal that's 

been outlined 

today in reference to the motion. 

 

I think we have to understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how the 

federal government has treated the producers of Saskatchewan 

in respect to the method of payment. 

 

Recently we have seen documents floated forward talking 

about a change to grain transportation.  You know the amazing 

thing about these documents, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that these 

documents, talking about a change that has a great deal of 

impact on rural Saskatchewan, are written on two pages with 

no detail. 

 

And ministers have come and gone, as we've seen the Hon. MP 

(Member of Parliament) from Kindersley-Lloydminster.  He 

was removed as the minister of Agriculture, I think, due to a 

fact for an unwillingness, that he knew what the change of the 

method of payment would do for Saskatchewan, was unable -- 

was unwilling -- to make those changes.  And I think in the 

eyes of the federal government they needed somebody who 

would make those changes. 

 

And therefore we have seen the Minister now of Agriculture, 

Charlie Mayer, who is pushing very hard to make changes 

against the wishes of the producers of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would certainly like to sit down sometime with the former 

minister of Agriculture because I know he's had difficulties in 

terms of this area of grain transportation.  He knows what 

producers are saying out there in Saskatchewan.  Mr. 

McKnight knew the fears of deregulation and higher freight 

costs would have on the producers of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think that for that very reason is why he was removed.  

And that's a sad thing.  What the question becomes, as my 

colleague has stated in Shaunavon and I think it's important 

today that we have to know, is where the opposition stands on 

this issue.  We're facing some very serious decisions here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  And it's important that we have a vote today, 

as it's also important for the Leader of the Liberal Party to also 

take a stand on this issue.  Producers of Saskatchewan need to 

know where everybody stands. 

 

I want to talk about 1982, 1983 when the . . . I'll actually go 

back a few years.  I've been involved in many farm 

organizations before I entered politics, and those two farm 

organizations fought hard to keep the method of payment.  I 

remember being at a hotel in Saskatoon when the famous 

Jean-Luc Pepin came . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- In the back door. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- In the back door.  I was at that back door.  I 

was at that back door.  And I clearly remember how he treated 

the producers of Saskatchewan to this change.  He totally 

ignored them.  But when he brought that proposal forward on 

grain transportation, he wanted to pay the producers.  Clearly 

and unequivocally that's what he wanted to do.  And farmers at 

that meeting said no. And he ignored them. 



726 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1993 

I remember a meeting at a community at Delisle.  The rink was 

full -- 1,200 people.  Supposedly it was going to be a silent 

meeting.  There was no invitations out.  Jean-Luc Pepin was 

coming to talk to farmers, but only a chosen few.  Well he had 

a surprise.  Twelve hundred came there and greeted him and 

said keep the Crow; do not change the method of payment.  But 

Pepin ignored that again and again. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- A Liberal too, he was. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- That's exactly right.  I should outline though 

that there was a brief time where the Conservatives were in 

power in '79.  Without question, that's where the initiation 

came to change the Crow. 

 

Oh he laughs.  The member from Morse laughs.  I know that 

the former minister of Transport, under Joe Clark, initiated the 

change.  And when the government changed in '79, the 

bureaucrats didn't and they continued to push under Jean-Luc 

Pepin. 

 

So we saw this change come about. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Same chicken. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Same chicken, exactly right. Same chicken. 

 

So in 1982 we saw this fight, and it permeated into the 

provincial election.  And with the discussions on the Crow 

debate and the questions of paying the producers, farmers 

rallied.  Farmers rallied to fight pay producer. 

 

I don't know if the members would remember the white crows 

and the activity that took place there for people to sign those 

white crows and send a message to Ottawa not to change the 

Crow, not to change the method of payment. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Exactly right.  It was prairie-wide 

cooperation. 

 

I took part in an activity that farmers got together to convince 

Ottawa not to pay the producers.  And I don't know if the 

members opposite remember, but petitions were signed across 

Saskatchewan, 110,000 people from all walks of life in 

Saskatchewan -- 10 per cent of the population signed those 

petitions. 

 

Along with those petitions, letters were written.  And farmers 

in rural Saskatchewan literally went farmyard to farmyard to 

business to business to convince people to make sure we didn't 

see the payment to producers.  And Jean-Luc Pepin ignored it. 

 

Well I was lucky enough to have the opportunity to go with a 

group of farmers and present those petitions to Ottawa.  And 

when we went and presented those petitions, it was also under 

the cooperation of all the political parties in Saskatchewan.  

The then legislative 

secretary to the minister of Agriculture, Mr. Lorne Hepworth, 

came and spoke on behalf of the provincial government at that 

time.  And Mr. Hepworth said at that meeting and said to the 

producers and said to Jean-Luc Pepin: no, do not change the 

method of payment.  Do not change the method of payment. 

 

Ralph Goodale, then an MLA (Member of Legislative 

Assembly) from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, also spoke 

representing the Liberal Party and stated there: no, the method 

of payment should not change. 

 

Now I had some difficulty believing Mr. Goodale because 

when it came to Mr. Goodale I remember who he worked for in 

Ottawa.  I don't know if you people recall -- there was a button 

that would circulate in Saskatoon several years ago and there 

were two four-letter words you were not supposed to use in the 

community of Saskatoon.  Everybody remember what those 

four-letter words were? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What were they?  What were they? 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Otto Lang.  If we need to point the finger of 

a nemesis who created the upheaval in the grain transportation 

system -- Otto Lang.  Now Mr. Goodale worked for Otto Lang.  

I'm not quite sure what took place there.  But in that spirit of 

cooperation that was in that room, along with the opposition 

party at the time which is now the present party in government, 

we clearly and unequivocally supported no change to the 

method of payment. 

 

And we went out as a group of farmers and sought allies across 

the Prairies, across Canada, to support our position.  We found 

those allies.  The farmers of Quebec realized what it would do 

for the producers of western Canada.  They saw the difficulty 

and they rallied.  Other farmers from across Canada came to 

our side and rallied. 

 

And do you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what happened?  

Those farmers with those allies and with those 110,000 people 

from the province of Saskatchewan stopped, stopped the 

method of payment from changing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- And we know what that cost.  We know 

what that cost.  It cost the federal minister of Transportation.  

Jean-Luc Pepin was removed.  He was dumped.  Mr. Lloyd 

Axworthy, then the member from Winnipeg, became the 

minister of Transportation. 

 

Now I have to say, we won on that account.  We won that 

battle, but we did not win the other battles because with their 

Western Grain Transportation Act, changes came to the grain 

transportation system.  We saw the introduction of variable 

rates, which are slowly eroding the base of rural Saskatchewan 

as we see the threat to branch lines.  We see now in terms of 

the national transportation authority saying that branch lines 

should now have the opportunity to 



March 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 727 

abandon lines without hearings and without anything, just 

simply because of costs.  And I'll talk about that later on. 

 

(1530) 

 

Farmers lost protection.  They lost protection with that Western 

Grain Transportation Act.  It opened the door.  And that door 

continues to get wider and wider, where we see now the door at 

its widest position with the proposal that's been put forward by 

the federal government, which I will talk about later on. 

 

But the question becomes is that we saw the problem and we 

reacted against immeasurable odds to win that battle.  That 

battle is occurring again.  That battle is before us again, and we 

must rally together in order to do that.  We must work together 

as all political parties, as they did in '82 and '83, work together 

to fight this legislation. 

 

And that is the reason for this resolution today.  We are seeing 

the advent of federal legislation coming forward that will truly 

be a demise to what we see as agriculture today. 

 

And the route that the federal government has taken is a route 

of divide and conquer.  They have split us up.  They have pitted 

farmer against farmer.  They have pitted farmer against 

rancher.  They pitted provincial government against provincial 

government, bought off governments, rather than working 

together to find a workable solution. 

 

And I believe there is a workable solution to solve the 

problems out there without the cost, without the dramatic cost 

to the grain producers of this province; and also dealing with 

the questions of the livestock industry, without this 

polarization.  But this is the way this federal government 

works.  They want us to work against each other. 

 

You know, and what they've done is an article that's stated 

yesterday in the Star-Phoenix, stated: 

 

 Agriculture Minister Charlie Mayer's strategy of divide and 

conquer on the contentious transportation issue has 

successfully isolated Saskatchewan, he said. 

 

They have tried to buy off other governments.  They have put 

proposals forward without even putting their name to them, 

without even saying this is what we want to talk about.  They 

simply say here is a document for discussion.  Do you like it?  

Do you want to be a part of this team?  And we'll give you 

something.  What do you want? 

 

Clearly, short-term gain for long-term pain.  We can't afford to 

have this.  We can't afford to have this, but this is the direction 

the federal government is taking in treating the provinces. 

 

The proposal that was originally brought forward in November 

17, 1992, which talked about where the provinces could decide 

how the payment is made, 

how each province would decide, I equate that . . . I don't know 

if you know situations where in certain countries there are 

different gauge railway systems, small gauge and large gauge. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Australia has three gauges. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Three gauges.  Well that's what we would 

have in western Canada, three gauges of railway systems.  I 

had a livestock producer tell me from outside Lloydminster in 

Alberta, he said what he wants to make sure is that he was 

buying grain on the Alberta side and make sure he was 

exporting on the Saskatchewan side if the changes were 

different in either province.  That is not fair for producers in 

Saskatchewan.  That is not fair for producers in Alberta. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who calls for a level playing-field?  Isn't 

that a Tory word? 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Level playing-field.  A Tory level 

playing-field goes like this.  That's a Tory level playing-field.  

You jump off the cliff without a parachute and you hope there's 

water at the bottom to break your fall. 

 

I think something that has been lost in the argument though 

when we discuss grain transportation and changes to the 

method of payment is not just the dollar value and what will be 

coming to the provinces, but it's the question of deregulation.  

Clearly that is a fear.  The former minister of Agriculture in 

Ottawa paid dearly for that, for recognizing the question of 

deregulation.  And I would certainly like to know what the 

members opposite think about deregulation.  What kind of 

grain transportation system do they want to see?  And who will 

pay? 

 

When we talk about the dollar value of the Crow benefit, we've 

seen here too after the changes of 1993, a moving target.  

Federal contributions to the western grain transportation 

payment authority have moved up and down like a yo-yo, and 

this has been unfair for producers.  They have been faced with 

a hardship, one not knowing what the freight bill's going to be 

next year, and then seeing a decline in the share by the federal 

government. 

 

And if it continues the way it is without Ottawa recognizing the 

difficulties we have in moving grain in this country, the 

farmers' share will continue and continue to grow.  Now the 

question becomes: is that the kind of protection we need for 

grain producers?  And the overall discussion then with the 

change of the Crow benefit and what it means, is it simply 

transferring the cost from the railways, of moving that grain, 

onto the producers? 

 

Farmers have argued for years and years, but what needs to be 

recognized in moving grain in Saskatchewan is the cost of 

moving grain from the farm gate.  But federal governments 

upon federal governments have not recognized that argument.  

They say it's from the elevator company.  What is the most 

efficient way to do it from the elevator?  They 



728 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1993 

simply neglect that cost to the farmers in terms of that. 

 

And what we see with a proposed change to the method of 

payment is a huge transfer of cost to producers.  And with that 

huge transfer of cost to producers, they will have to react; they 

will have to react economically to protect themselves.  And 

with that kind of system of deregulation, it's unimaginable the 

kind of system we could see. 

 

You know, and this is interesting because one of the first things 

that the railways want to do in terms of changing the railway 

system -- and I wish the member from Kindersley wouldn't 

leave right now; I wanted to . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Members are restrained from 

referring to the presence or absence of other members in their 

remarks, and I want to caution the member not to do that again. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I 

apologize for that.  I apologize. 

 

For the record, I want to talk about, with the change in method 

of payment and what it would do also to the changes of rail line 

abandonment, communities that would be affected.  And 

without question, the system that the railways want to see in 

terms of grain handling in this province, I think for the 21st 

century, are two railway tracks -- one running across the 

northern part of Saskatchewan through Saskatoon, the other 

one running through Regina.  And that's not the system that we 

need. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- A lot of wheat grown in Regina. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- The member from Thunder Creek says there 

is a lot of wheat grown in and around Regina, and there is.  

And I totally agree.  But the question becomes: what happens 

to the communities that are 75 miles away from Regina, or 80 

miles, or 100 miles from Regina, or 150 miles from Saskatoon?  

What about the community of Meadow Lake?  Would there be 

any value to producing grain up there?  What would be the 

freight costs to do it from Meadow Lake? 

 

But communities affected, and I want to deal with one in 

particular, and that being the constituency of Kindersley and 

the communities that would be affected with branch line 

abandonment, with this change in deregulation.  One would be 

Coleville, north of Kindersley.  The other ones would be the 

south track, which includes Eatonia, Laporte, Eston, Mantario, 

Plato. 

 

These are significant communities in that area.  How would 

they react if their elevator system is gone?  How would they 

react when the elevator is closed?  Who's going to pay for the 

infrastructure? 

 

How would they react to the moving of grain to Kindersley 

from the area of Mantario or Eston, or south of there down by 

the river where you are restricted by the ferry, that you cannot 

go south. Because of the ferry operation you must go north, 

therefore then who 

pays for the road damage?  Who pays for this? 

 

And if they did wish to keep their railway system, who would 

pay for the additional freight costs which could be double, 

literally double, being 75 or 100 miles away from a central 

point.  Is that a fair system?  Is that a fair system for rural 

Saskatchewan? 

 

I want to talk about some other changes in terms of the impact 

of changing the Crow on rural communities.  Changes in the 

grain handling and transportation system could impact 

significantly on Saskatchewan producers and their 

communities.  Agriculture transportation policies play an 

important role in our community development and provide 

producers with the convenient and affordable access to 

domestic and world markets. 

 

Accelerated branch line abandonment could limit the future 

economic development opportunities in rural communities.  

The pace of branch line abandonment would increase in 

Saskatchewan if the proposed system efficiency measures were 

implemented and the method of payment of the western grain 

transportation subsidy was changed. 

 

Now people use the argument, well elevators are closing 

anyhow.  We are seeing a change in closure of elevators.  It's 

going to take place.  We're just going to speed it up a bit. 

 

The closure we have seen over the last 30 years has been 

controlled to allow producers to adjust in a proper manner.  It 

has been an evolution, not a revolution -- not a revolution.  We 

have seen the revolution.  The revolution took place in the 

Montanas and the Dakotas in the early '80s -- the revolution 

and the despair and the destruction of the grain handling 

system. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- A vanishing act. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- A vanishing act.  And as the member from 

Shaunavon had outlined, with no economic benefit to those 

communities. 

 

Transportation infrastructure is an important factor in the 

development of agricultural production, processing facilities, 

agricultural services, and other businesses -- the lifeblood of 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Modernization of the grain transportation system can contribute 

to the revitalization of rural communities through the 

development of cost-effective grain collection services.  

Alternatives to conventional rail service on grain-dependent 

branch lines can help to control increases in the transportation 

costs and generates new employment and other economic rural 

activities. 

 

I know the members opposite when they were in government -- 

and I give them credit for this -- activated the program of terms 

of the road-railer, which was an opportunity by which we could 

explore the opportunities of short-line railways on 

grain-dependent branch lines.  That activity 



March 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 729 

continues.  We are producers who are actively operating 

short-line railways and trying to provide a benefit, as the 

member from Shaunavon had outlined, at half the cost. 

 

But, but, I say, members, if there is a change to the grain 

transportation system, if there is a change to the method of 

payment and deregulation comes forward, short-line railways 

will not exist.  Short-line railways are a solution to some of the 

problems in grain dependent lines. 

 

I know in the area of Thunder Creek where members were 

actively pursuing in the Riverhurst area of putting together a 

short-line railway, this will disappear.  Farmers will not have 

the opportunity of working together to find solutions to their 

problems.  They will simply have to haul farther.  Simply have 

to haul farther. 

 

(1545) 

 

In 1990 Deloitte Haskins & Sells study found that any changes 

in the method of payment of the western grain transportation 

subsidies and the Canadian Wheat Pool price pooling in the 

branch line abandonment process would have significant social 

and economic impacts on rural communities. 

 

Restructuring of the rail and road networks to improve the 

efficiency of the grain handling transportation system would 

affect, quote: would affect the viability of some rural 

communities.  Some producers and their families would be 

negatively affected by changes in agriculture production 

patterns and higher transportation costs. 

 

The Deloitte Haskins & Sells study concluded that there will 

always be winners and losers -- there will always be winners 

and losers -- as a result of rationalization of grain transportation 

system. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Farmers lose and the railways win. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Exactly right.  Farmers lose, railways win.  

Farmers smile if they're close to a main line.  They know that 

they will survive.  Farmers that are 200 miles from a main line 

face some serious economic consequences, as their 

communities do, as I'll further outline. 

 

Saskatchewan producers believe existing branch line 

abandonment procedures do not effectively meet their needs or 

support rural communities.  A study done for the province 

found that more than 80 per cent of Saskatchewan producers 

are dissatisfied with the current railway abandonment process. 

 

And do you know how the federal government reacts to that?  

Do you know how the federal government reacts to 80 per cent 

of the producers not liking the system? 

 

The national transportation authority brings out a report saying 

that the rules should be easier for the 

farmers to get rid of -- easier.  Do away with hearings; simply 

file an application; take away the protection to the year 2000. 

 

And farmers are unsatisfied with the system now?  They would 

have no voice, literally no voice in how the branch lines are 

dealt with in the province.  It would be lost.  The railways 

would simply say: this one costs too much money, it's gone.  

The railways would say: this one costs too much money, it's 

gone. 

 

And I think every member in this House for any of the political 

parties should look at the map of the branch line system in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- CP says that about the main line. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Well, CP says some strange things, the 

member says from Thunder Creek. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Talk to the mayor of Moose Jaw about it. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Maybe we should explore some other 

opportunities with our grain.  Maybe we should explore some 

other opportunities.  Maybe they're not the only game in town. 

 

In 1976, the University of Regina survey concluded that the 

railway abandonment would have serious impacts in rural 

communities.  They concluded reductions in consumer 

expenditures totalling $120 million in 124 communities -- and 

this is 1976.  Now we have to tie in the years of inflation that 

took place under a Liberal regime and things like this to know 

where it stands now. 

 

Increased business failures and increased depopulation of rural 

areas.  I want to talk about the area of erosion of the local tax 

base.  And this is very important to the communities. 

 

Rural municipalities are very concerned with the change of 

method of payment and they've outlined that in the resolutions 

passed at several annual meetings where they have stated . . . I 

quote from the resolution carried at the mid-term convention in 

1992: 

 

 Be it resolved that the Crow Rate Benefits continue to be 

paid to the railways. 

 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

also talks about the question of railway abandonment: 

Therefore be it resolved when any railway is abandoned, the 

proper road impact, local environment and economic and local 

social impact be studied with regards to maintaining an 

effective rail system in rural Canada. 

 

They know the cost of a deregulated transportation system.  

Their taxpayers will face it firsthand.  Local taxpayers in terms 

of property taxes will be the first ones that will have to pay for 

the increased road impact, the damages to the roads. 



730 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1993 

And the studies go on and on in terms of those damages.  We 

see those damages.  I remember on Highway No. 7 travelling 

from the Alberta border to Saskatoon.  Several years ago, the 

Queen Elizabeth power plant was forced to haul coal from 

Hanna, Alberta to Saskatoon by truck.  They hauled it by truck.  

They showed the intensity of large units being hauled in a short 

period of time, what it did to the No. 7 Highway.  No. 7 

Highway has never recovered -- just total, total damage of the 

road system.  And SARM knows that, and they recognize that, 

they fear that. 

 

Railway abandonment affects the local tax base, particularly in 

smaller communities where the railway and elevator properties 

are significant generators of tax revenue.  Urban municipalities 

require property taxes to provide funding for community 

services.  Rural municipalities not only experience a tax loss 

when the railway lines are abandoned, but must allocate more 

funds, more funds to road and maintenance construction, and to 

accommodate increased hauling by truck. 

 

The capacity of many rural municipalities to finance additional 

road upgrading and maintenance work is constrained because 

their average annual road budgets are only 360,000.  The cost 

of 1 kilometre of road to conventional pavement standard is 

$380,000.  Long-term effects on road infrastructure from use of 

larger trucks hauling longer distances will have a major 

financial consequence for municipal and provincial 

governments. 

 

A change in the method of payment of the western grain 

transportation subsidies would reduce land values.  I remember 

having a discussion with an ag economist -- and no, it's not the 

one who is the former leader of the Conservative Party -- but 

we had a discussion one time on what it would do to land 

values . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I said the former 

leader.  I said the former leader.  He's not here.  He will know 

that after the leadership. 

 

The question of land values.  It was always said in the '70s 

when land values were high, change the Crow and the value of 

land will come down.  It will come down, yes it will, because it 

will cost so much to move it when you're 200 miles away that 

the land value will go down.  There are studies on that.  There 

are studies on that.  The member from Souris-Cannington 

doubts these studies.  I will give him volumes of them. 

 

The impact of land values depends on the criteria used for the 

distribution of the Crow benefit.  Land values could decline if 

the compensation of producers does not offset freight rate 

increases as a result of dilution. Studies have estimated land 

values could decline by 12 to 17 per cent immediately upon the 

phase-out without compensation.  This would result in an 

annual loss in equity to $180 million. 

 

And we are already seeing low land values.  Can we afford any 

more erosion?  Those people retiring, can they afford any more 

erosion of land values in Saskatchewan?  No we can't.  No we 

can't. 

Business impacts.  Agriculture service business such as 

fertilizer, chemical, and feed suppliers have a tendency to 

relocate to alternate delivery points following the elevator and 

rail line closures.  Many communities already affected by 

railway abandonment have suffered job losses.  Despite some 

employment opportunities in commercial trucking, they are 

unable to offset job losses in the railway and elevator sector. 

 

Now what impact does this have on the reliance of off-farm 

income?  Reliance on off-farm income has increased with the 

decline in farm income in recent years.  Rail service and other 

transportation infrastructure supports business development in 

rural communities.  This industrial activity generates jobs for 

producers and their families, which generates jobs to produce . 

. . A recent study has found that three-quarters of 

Saskatchewan farm families earn more from off-farm income 

than from the sale of farm produce.  So this is another thing we 

have to be cautious of. 

 

I'm not stating anything new to the members opposite.  They 

know this.  They know this.  They understood the question of a 

change to the method of payment.  Because I believe that if 

they had believed in a change in the method of payment, they 

would have agreed with Ottawa a long time ago to do it, but 

they did not.  They understood the argument.  They understand 

the impact. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- So they didn't agree and they didn't fight.  

Where do they stand? 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Well that becomes the question of the day.  

Now I don't know if they've had the opportunity to look at the 

proposal that's been brought forward by the federal government 

recently. 

 

Now we're not sure if it is the federal government or not.  We 

simply get a document on a white piece of paper that says, here 

is a proposal; what do you think of it?  What do you think of 

this proposal?  And then we're to react. 

 

And I think the members opposite knew in government that it 

was dangerous to do that when it discussed grain 

transportation, and I hope they recognize the same ploy that's 

taking place today.  Because they know, they know the 

argument.  I remember former ministers of Highways and 

Transportation talking about this issue.  I know where they 

stand.  So you have to remember that when you're talking about 

the producers of Saskatchewan. 

 

But this new plan that's been brought forward . . . this one is 

new.  I have seen it all over my years, in terms of grain 

transportation.  I have seen all the proposals.  This is a 

brand-new one.  This is new and improved, new and improved. 

 

We have talked about bond issues.  Give the farmers $6 billion 

bond and we'll allocate it out to them.  Well ministers of 

Transport and ministers of Agriculture in the federal 

Conservative Party ran into difficulty.  The 



March 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 731 

Treasury Board does not want to give out $6 billion into a 

bond.  So that's a problem. 

 

In the mid-80s or late '80s . . . and I'm afraid to admit this 

today.  I have to tell a secret.  I have a skeleton in my closet.  

Now it is through marriage but I was speaking to my aunt the 

other day at Harris and she informs me that she is a first cousin 

to Mr. Isley, the Minister of Agriculture in Alberta.  I wear that 

with a heavy heart.  My aunt also wears that with a heavy heart. 

She also refers to another cousin that she has on that side that 

has served as a New Democrat in the Ontario government.  So 

there is hope.  There is hope in the Isley family. 

 

But Mr. Isley made a proposal several years ago to deal with 

the question of dilution, and I think the members opposite and 

members in this House recognize a change in the member, of 

payment, what it would do in terms of dilution.  Farmers in 

Saskatchewan would not receive the $400 million for the 

export of grain.  It would be lost.  And Mr. Isley has seen that 

and is trying to take a larger sum of that. 

 

But the proposal he brought forward several years ago was one, 

change the method of payment in Alberta, but we recognize 

dilution.  We recognize dilution as a provincial government 

and we will pay our grain producers $115 million.  Perfect 

world -- grain producers loved it because there wasn't a change.  

They were still getting compensated.  Mr. Isley recognized 

there was a dilution factor and that's why we have to be wary. 

 

But you know something?  Mr. Isley was not going to get the 

money from the provincial government.  His proposal stated he 

was going to get it from the federal government.  Lo and 

behold, the money didn't come and the change didn't come.  

But I remember talking to leaders of farm organizations in 

Alberta who thought, you know, this did have merit because it 

was the best of both worlds.  But it didn't come. 

 

Now we've talked about the new plan, the new plan.  We'll 

throw it into the NISA account.  That's how we'll compensate 

farmers for transportation.  In the next four years there will be a 

separate account.  Farmers will have another account in NISA. 

 

Let's just talk about NISA for a minute.  NISA, that wonderful 

income stabilization program, you know, which if you make . . 

. if you have significant sales of $250,000, you can do quite 

well, thank you very much.  And the forms are so simple in 

NISA.  The forms are so simple.  They were so simple that 

they've now revised the forms to even make them simpler. 

 

They've got a long ways to go.  I talked to a farmer the other 

day and he referred to the NISA form.  It's like a schematic 

diagram for a refrigerator, is that you start it at this point, you 

went down to another box, you went across to another box, you 

went down, and you finally got where you're supposed to be. 

 

And to the average producer you know what NISA has been?  

NISA has simply been a cost.  It has simply been 

the cost of preparing the form and preparing your account, 

because that has been the only benefit you got out of NISA.  

But this is where the federal government wants to put the 

money, is in NISA. 

 

(1600) 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It never pays out. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Okay, okay.  It never pays out.  So in order 

to solve that problem, you know how they're going to pay it 

out?  They're going to create another account.  Okay.  They 

will compensate you with another account to pay you in terms 

of losses and transportation.  Simple administration.  Every 

year you'll get a cheque from Ottawa. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- One form, two accounts.  Now it's 

getting simpler. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- That's right.  One form, two accounts.  But 

do you know what's going to happen at the same time?  That in 

August 1, 1994, the freight rate for the Saskatchewan producer 

would rise $32 a tonne from $13 a tonne -- $20 a tonne 

increase with no protection. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What's the price of barley? 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Well the member asks, what's the price of 

barley.  Now I come from an old school, so I'm not very good 

at converting back from metric to imperial, so forgive me on 

that.  But in my logic, it tells me barley has no value.  Barley 

has no value.  Nice crop.  I guess you got to figure out what to 

do with it.  Maybe that's why they want to take it off the 

Canadian Wheat Board so it'll have no value then. 

 

But the kicker is, the kicker to this little proposal is that after 

four years the money goes into the income side.  That account 

disappears and it all rolls into one account.  So you will only be 

paid if your income goes down.  And if you have a declining 

income for a few years and extinguish the account, you will not 

receive the benefit until more money comes in. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- This is a different spin on the law of 

diminishing returns. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Yes, this is a different spin.  You know, it's 

like going down the river, jumping on different logs.  You 

know, where's your foot going to go? 

 

So the question becomes then, is this fair?  Is this a fair way to 

treat people?  The question becomes for the members opposite, 

is where do they stand on the issue and what is put on the 

record on this issue because that is what the people of 

Saskatchewan understand and that's what I want to hear.  I 

want to know where the opposition stands on this issue. 

 

Because if they want to play politics with this issue, they do it 

at the cost of the producers of Saskatchewan, they do it at the 

business community cost of Saskatchewan, and I don't think 

they honestly 



732 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1993 

believe it is in the best interests of the producers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Because I know and you know where you people stood on this 

issue in the government for 10 years.  You did not advocate 

change publicly.  Again and again you did not advocate 

change.  Remember those words, because that's what you said 

to the producers of Saskatchewan and they trusted you on that.  

They trusted you.  So do not deviate from that position.  Do not 

deviate from that position because you do it at your own peril. 

 

Now I digress.  I'll get back to the question of this western 

grain transportation authority.  One of the other things that 

takes place in this NISA account is now you've lost it, you 

don't know when you're going to get it.  And now we're going 

to roll livestock into that too after '95 with the end of beef 

tripartite. 

 

You know, this is an interesting scenario.  We had beef 

stabilization where we fed the most amount of cattle in 

Saskatchewan, or beef stabilization.  In 1988 when beef 

stabilization disappeared, our numbers declined because we 

went into tripartite.  And now tripartite's going to go into NISA 

so I hate to see what the numbers are going to do after that. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Checked the cow herd lately? 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- I know what cow herd is; I'm talking about 

cattle on feed.  Don't think that the hon. members are talking to 

someone who doesn't know the business.  Don't think that the 

members opposite are talking to somebody that doesn't know 

the cattle business. I have been in that cattle business, 

members. I understand it fully.  I have fed cattle; I have polled 

calves.  I know what it's like, so don't tell me that that I don't 

know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to get back to the issue . . . And I see I've hit a 

nerve with these people over here.  They're suddenly chirping.  

They suddenly woke up.  Okay. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Maybe they're going to vote on it, ha, ha. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Well maybe they are, maybe they are.  But I 

see this proposal of going into the NISA account is simply to 

see something that is a structure there that could be used.  

Farmers are not going to be fooled by that.  I think the 

opposition's not going to be fooled by that.  And they're caught 

between a rock and a hard place.  Because they know that . . . 

who's pushing this. 

 

And I outlined, as I outlined earlier, you know what this cost.  

You know what this cost.  It cost a former minister of 

Agriculture.  Bill McKnight was removed because he would 

not push the method of payment change. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Oh, that's a long bow. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Oh, a long bow.  Mr. McKnight recognized 

the deregulation. He recognized the cost 

of deregulation in this province and would not push for it.  He 

recognized the meetings that took place across Saskatchewan 

where 90 per cent of the producers stated that they would not 

support a change. 

 

But I digress, Mr. Speaker, I digress.  I must return to where I 

wish to end up.  Mr. Speaker, I think I've spoken at great length 

and I appreciate the time that has been given to me today to 

speak on this issue.  But it's important to find, I think . . . I 

honestly believe there is a solution to these problems.  I 

honestly believe that farm organizations, provincial 

governments, and federal governments can sit down and find a 

solution to the problems that exist -- a fair system by which we 

can do it. 

 

And these are the opportunities we need to look at.  So with 

that, Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to second the motion 

brought forward by the member from Shaunavon, and I await 

with great expectation to hear the comments from the members 

opposite.  Thank you very much.  And of course the vote, we 

must have the vote. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I want to, 

Mr. Speaker, outline a number of items that I believe are very 

relevant in this discussion on this motion today. 

 

I have consistently been involved in the discussions for a long, 

long time, both on the municipal level and on the provincial 

level.  And as the former associate minister of Agriculture, I 

have had a significant amount of involvement in this discussion 

and I want to bring that perspective into the discussion here 

today.  And I know that other members of my caucus are 

interested in talking about this as well so I will be pointed 

about the things that I have to say. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are three things that this government 

has as an agriculture policy, three things that they have as 

planks in their agriculture policy -- three things, Mr. Speaker.  I 

want to point them out. 

 

One is: save the Canadian Wheat Board.  That's the plank of 

this government over here.  It has nothing to do with provincial 

politics, Mr. Speaker.  That's the plank that this government is 

involved in. 

 

The second plank that they have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is: the 

method of payment has to be through the Crow.  That's the 

second policy of this government opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the members opposite, they have 

two items that are federal jurisdiction -- two items that are 

federal jurisdiction. 

 

And I want to point out the third one, Mr. Speaker.  And I want 

to talk about that a little bit today.  And that's called the policy 

in agriculture of offloading on rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The three planks of the NDP government in the 



March 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 733 

province of Saskatchewan: one, save the Canadian Wheat 

Board; two, save the Crow payment; and three, offload on rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the offloading on rural Saskatchewan is 

going to cause every person in this province to have a 

significant reflection on whether they can afford even to have 

the Canadian Wheat Board, which they're purporting to want to 

save, or the method of payment on top of that. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is exactly where they're at.  They're going to 

offload on the people of the province of Saskatchewan and 

rural Saskatchewan to the extent that nobody will be able to 

afford to live in the province of Saskatchewan.  That is the 

reason why they bring this item here to this Assembly.  That, 

Mr. Speaker, are the three planks in rural Saskatchewan 

development as far as the NDP are concerned. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out a couple of things as it 

related to what the member from Biggar said.  He said that the 

method of payment was important for the province of 

Saskatchewan.  I agree, it is.  The kind of things that go on in 

the province of Saskatchewan, people all over have said that 

that's important. 

 

Mr. MacMurchy said to Mr. Blakeney, go in April and go on 

the Crow in 1982, and it was a dismal failure because these 

people play politics every time with the method of payment.  

They play politics every time.  And what do they do to the rural 

people, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  They offload on the rural people 

all over the province.  And that's what they have done in health 

care.  That's what they've done in SaskPower utility rates.  

That's what they've done in SaskTel in utility rates.  That's what 

they've done in SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 

and utility and rates all over and across this province.  Rural 

Saskatchewan gets hit. 

 

And top it all off with health care, Mr. Speaker.  And the 

member from Shaunavon talked about health care and was 

bragging about standing at the front of the meeting in a health 

care discussion in Eastend, Saskatchewan.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

they almost ran him out of the building because of his stand at 

the front.  And the Minister of Health is ducking all over across 

this province. 

 

And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, they have three planks, 

three planks in agriculture.  One, save the Canadian Wheat 

Board, it's motherhood and apple pie across this province; the 

Crow rate, motherhood across this province; and the third one 

isn't motherhood, and that's the one they're doing . . . they're 

pulling the rug out from every rural community in the province 

of Saskatchewan.  That's what they're doing, and that's what 

they're doing with a consistency, because I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that they have predetermined that that's what they're 

going to do.  That's the fundamental question in this motion, 

Mr. Speaker, the offloading in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

They offloaded on increasing every fee that is 

available to be increased -- in pasture management, pasture 

fees for community pastures, breeding fees for community 

pastures, SaskTel, SaskPower, SGI, all over the place, Mr. 

Speaker, offloading onto rural Saskatchewan.  That's their third 

plank in their agriculture policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan, beware of an NDP government that talks 

about the Crow and the method of payment, because 

underneath they're jerking you around.  That's what they're 

doing.  They're doing it in every case.  They talk one thing and 

do another. 

 

I want to point out to the people some of the areas that I believe 

that they're hurting rural Saskatchewan.  If you want to go and 

get your brand changed, Mr. Speaker, if you want to go get 

your brand changed to register your livestock for branding 

them for identification -- transfer -- they raised it 40 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker; they raised the rates 40 per cent. 

 

Now let's take one for a person who has annual fee for licences 

for a licensed livestock dealer.  Mr. Speaker, they raised that 

from $45 to $100.  What kind of an increase is that -- 125 per 

cent or 120 per cent, Mr. Speaker?  That's the kind of thing. 

 

They have three planks in their platform, Mr. Speaker:  method 

of payment; they have the Canadian Wheat Board; and 

offloading, Mr. Speaker -- three planks.  And the biggest one 

that the people of the province have seen is offloading. 

 

The member from Biggar talked about him knowing everything 

that there was about the livestock industry.  Well he wouldn't 

understand one very important thing -- that in the pork business 

every hog that is fed in the province of Saskatchewan costs the 

producers in this province to feed that hog $7 extra because 

they have the method of payment.  That's what the pork 

producers have told us across this province. 

 

And if they would want to have the pork producers respond to 

the question about method of payment, what would they say?  

We would like to be competitive in the province of 

Saskatchewan and we would have the method of payment paid 

to the producers.  That's what the pork producers are saying, 

Mr. Speaker, and that's what those members don't listen to.  

And that's what the member from Biggar doesn't listen to 

either. 

 

There are two sides to the issue of method of payment, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I want this government to know that this 

government on this side took a stand and said to the producers 

of the province of Saskatchewan, we'll pay you some extra 

money for those offsets.  And what did we do?  We paid it.  

And what do these people do?  They take it off. 

 

(1615) 

 

The member from Shaunavon talked about the cash advance -- 

interest free cash advance for the grain producers.  And what 

do these people do?  Oh yes, 



734 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1993 

they know everything about the livestock industry.  They know 

about the livestock industry, Mr. Speaker, and they're taking 

the livestock cash advance and making the farmers of 

Saskatchewan pay interest on that. 

 

They stood all over Saskatchewan and said, the farmer who is a 

grain producer should have interest-free cash advance.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, this opposition, when they were in government, 

stood for that as well.  That is where we stand on that. 

 

And what do those people do?  They take the interest and say, 

oh you farmers and ranchers who are in the toughest economic 

times today than they've ever been and they're saying to them, 

pay the interest, pay the interest.  They say to the federal 

government, don't pay the interest on the grain.  But you 

livestock producers -- the pork, the beef, the dairy -- all of you 

fellows, start to pay your way.  That's what they say. 

 

When it comes to offloading, these people are beyond 

description, Mr. Speaker, beyond description.  And that is a 

fact. 

 

I want to point out a couple of other things.  If a farming 

business corporation wants to register its name, they've got a 

whole bunch of brand-new items that they have to deal with 

and pay to the business corporations' branch of this 

government.  They've got to pay all over.  They offload on 

every fee, every registration, every service that is provided.  

They have forced people consistently to pay more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it was our responsibility to manage the 

affairs of this province we said: we will defend the livestock 

producer in the province of Saskatchewan; we will defend the 

pork producer that needs to have some help; we will defend the 

dairymen; we will defend the poultry industry. And, Mr. 

Speaker, what do this people do?  They increase the power 

rates. 

 

The poultry industry needs the power as much as any major 

industry in this province, and what do they do?  They increase 

the rates. 

 

The pork producers need the grain from the province of 

Saskatchewan, and what do they do?  They take the livestock 

cash advance and say, no more interest being paid. 

 

And you say, you have the courage here to stand and say to the 

federal government, you better pay the interest. 

 

And what do you do to the pork producers, Mr. Speaker?  It's 

appalling what these hypocrites do in relation to the kinds of 

things that they have traditionally . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- I just want to remind the member that 

the words we use should not be such as to cause disorder in the 

House and that language should be temperate and worthy of the 

place in which it is spoken, and therefore ask the member to 

mind his language. 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to point out 

to the people of this Assembly and those that are watching 

today that there are a number of areas that are very, very 

significant in what we deal with in the matter of the Crow, and 

I want to talk about that. But the other members went way off 

on this other track, and I figured, Mr. Speaker, that they needed 

to be reminded that they know very, very little about the 

livestock industry and they know very, very little about the 

grain industry.  And that, Mr. Speaker, that, Mr. Speaker, that, 

Mr. Speaker, is a fact, even though it is inflammatory and 

they're disagreeing with it.  That, Mr. Speaker, is a fact. 

 

I want to point out something for the Minister of Agriculture 

and the Minister of Transportation for them to be aware of in 

the discussion that takes place about the relationship in the 

Crow and some of the things that have to be talked about.  

We've had these platitudes passed around for decades, Mr. 

Speaker, on who stands for the Crow, and who stands for the 

farmer, and who stands for the method of payment.  Well there 

are some very significant things going on in history too, Mr. 

Speaker, that have to be identified. 

 

One, Mr. Speaker, it is a fact.  It is a fact that the Sask Wheat 

Pool could not get the Crow method of payment put on the 

agenda for the federal-provincial discussions in Agriculture 

ministers, until the member from Estevan decided it was his 

responsibility to put it on.  That is a fact, Mr. Speaker, and that 

happened, Mr. Speaker, in 1991. 

 

And if the member from Biggar says that we have no position, 

it is only there, Mr. Speaker, it only there because the member 

from Estevan who was the minister of Agriculture, at the 

meeting in Kananaskis, said to the members there, the ministers 

of Agriculture, put the method of payment as a Crow benefit on 

the record.  And that is a fact.  And you can go ask Mr. Isley, 

you go ask Mr. Findlay, and you ask your buddy in Ontario 

whether that isn't the fact, and he will have to agree with me, 

Mr. Member.  That is a fact.  And that happened in 1991. 

 

Now I want to point out some other things that are of 

significance, Mr. Speaker.  I get fairly exercised when I talk 

about agriculture and I just want all the members to know that 

they have a very significant point. They have a very significant 

point that they want to discuss; we will discuss it. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that there are very serious 

negotiations that need to take place.  And if this Minister of 

Agriculture and this Minister of Transportation are going to 

duck and run those discussions, you know what's going to 

happen to the people of the province of Saskatchewan?  They 

will be short shifted on the volume of dollars that are supposed 

to accrue to this province because of the traditional entitlement 

that the Crow has provided to this province.  The traditional 

entitlement, Mr. Speaker, is $420 million.  That's what the 

province of Saskatchewan traditionally has received. 



March 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 735 

And if this Minister of Transport, and this Agriculture minister, 

and this Premier don't talk to the people in Manitoba, and the 

people in Alberta, and totally ignore them, what is going to 

happen with their position, Mr. Speaker?  They will be eroded.  

And the reason I say that is very simply this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The reason I say this, as pointed as I can be, is because the 

Minister of Agriculture's agenda in the province of Manitoba is 

to include the pooling process of the grains moving through 

Thunder Bay to Montreal.  He wants to include the pooling of 

those . . . that payment in the Crow benefit.  That, Mr. Speaker, 

is a fact.  And what is going to happen if our Minister of 

Agriculture, and our Premier, and our Minister of Transport 

don't take this seriously?  They're going to have the erosion of a 

significant amount of money that traditionally accrues to the 

province of Saskatchewan.  That erosion is going to occur and, 

Mr. Speaker, if they don't attack it and attack it vigorously, 

we're going to lose everything that we've got in the Crow. 

 

And you can talk about the federal government being 

responsible for talking about the change in the method of 

payment, but I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that two out of the 

three provinces in western Canada are going to change it 

whether these three people decide to say no or not.  That's 

what's going to happen because Manitoba has consistently said 

that they want to have change; Alberta has consistently said 

they want to have change; and if we're not at the negotiating 

table, Mr. Speaker, we in the province of Saskatchewan are 

going to lose.  That's a fact. 

 

I want to point out a couple of other things that are of very, 

very significant . . . significance to the people of this province, 

and that is that rationalization in the railway industry has taken 

place over the last 25 years in a very significant way.  But you 

know what, Mr. Speaker?  It has been led by the grain 

companies.  I wrote down as the members opposite were 

speaking.  I have had nine elevator closures in my constituency 

in the last 20 years -- nine of them; three railways abandoned.  

And when did it happen, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Did it happen when the Tories were in power in the province of 

Saskatchewan?  No, Mr. Speaker, it did not . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, the member from Indian 

Head-Wolseley said yes it did, and I want to point out to him 

and to the rest of these people in this Assembly, it did not.  And 

I want to point out to them also that when I was a reeve and 

councillor of the municipality of Sask Landing we had three 

elevators abandoned in our municipality alone in 1973-74.  

And do you know what the grain company, the cooperative 

grain company said we cannot find a economic reason to 

defend the existence of these three elevators on this line. 

 

And you know what happened, Mr. Speaker?  The line was 

pulled out; the elevators left.  And that submission was made 

and you can read it in the Hall commission if you want to.  And 

the Sask Wheat Pool said we cannot find the economic reason 

to defend the elevators staying here.  That is a fact, Mr. 

Speaker.  And when the municipality was working to defend it 

the 

people today have to haul 35 miles to get their grain delivered.  

And they have done that since the middle '70s.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, is a fact. 

 

What do you deal with when you're talking about changes in 

method of payment?  Mr. Speaker, we have today a very 

serious concern being expressed by the people in the southern 

part of the province.  And that serious concern is this, Mr. 

Speaker.  We have wheat and durum moving south at a 

unprecedented rate.  It's moving south in various ways but 

mainly by truck, Mr. Speaker.  And that truck transportation 

moving south on grain is being delivered by the elevator 

companies themselves. 

 

And we have raised this question over and over again and so 

have the producers: why would the elevator companies want to 

move grain from Saskatchewan into Montana and into North 

Dakota and throughout the northern states?  Why would they 

want to do that?  We have raised that question with the elevator 

companies.  Have the elevator companies come forward with 

any kind of a solution to this?  No, they have not. 

 

The people in the United States are getting a little concerned.  

They're getting concerned for a number of reasons, and so am I.  

And I raise this question for the Minister of Agriculture and the 

minister of transport and the Premier of this province: are those 

commodities that are moving from Saskatchewan -- the wheat 

and the durum -- are they going into the United States and then 

out of the United States through export enhancement into the 

international market?  Is that what's happening? 

 

And producers in my constituency and in the Shaunavon 

constituency and Bengough-Milestone and Souris-Cannington 

and Estevan are all asking that very same question, Mr. 

Speaker.  Is the Sask Wheat Pool, the UGG (United Grain 

Growers Limited), are they getting export enhancement dollars 

from the U.S. (United States) government to deliver wheat to 

Portland in order that they export it into international markets 

and, Mr. Speaker, in direct competition with the Canadian 

Wheat Board?  This is where the hypocrisy really stinks, Mr. 

Speaker.  That is the ultimate. 

 

If these grain companies who want to have the Canadian Wheat 

Board as a single-desk selling agency, if they want to have it 

and they want to defend it and they go move this grain down 

into the United States and it heads into Portland under export 

enhancement, Mr. Speaker, is sold into the international 

market, they are in direct competition, they are in direct 

competition with the Canadian Wheat Board.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, is hypocrisy.  That, Mr. Speaker, is hypocrisy and I 

think, Mr. Speaker, that it is wrong. 

 

And you want to talk about method of payment, you want to 

talk about the Canadian Wheat Board.  Mr. Speaker, I think we 

need to talk about having all of the facts put down on paper and 

all of the facts discussed before we start to point a finger at 

who's to blame, 



736 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1993 

because this government has offloaded like I have never seen 

anybody offload in my whole life in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are other individuals in 

this side of the House that want to talk about this issue because 

it's important to them.  And I will give way to that discussion, 

Mr. Speaker, and therefore I will sit down and allow other 

members to assume debate. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's 

amazing the transformation that we've seen in this government 

in the last little while, this sudden new interest in farm issues.  

It's absolutely astounding, Mr. Speaker.  This government now, 

after doing the kinds of things that they have done to 

agriculture in this province, have developed a sudden new 

interest in agricultural issues.  Well, well, well. 

 

The Crow rate, Mr. Speaker, is the thing that they're going to 

hold their hat on now when it comes to rural Saskatchewan, it 

looks like.  And they have members from Biggar and 

Shaunavon stand up and tell us all about their sudden 

new-found interest in farm issues. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe we could dwell a little bit on what 

they've done to agriculture in the past year and a half since 

forming government, and point out to the people of 

Saskatchewan and particularly the farm community the kinds 

of hits that they've had to take at the hands of this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look down the list, and it's growing 

daily, it is absolutely astounding that these people can say now 

that they have an interest in the well-being of rural 

Saskatchewan, and in particular the farm community.  The 

changes in GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) alone 

were the biggest single impact in agriculture that's been seen in 

the last year -- absolutely devastating changes, Mr. Speaker, '91 

GRIP. 

 

And we've admitted numerous times in this legislature, it may 

not have been perfect but it was a heck of a lot bigger step 

forward than this government's '92 program, the disaster that 

they brought forward as a program, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

(1630) 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, pardon me.  We see 

that the changes are forcing people to re-evaluate their decision 

to stay in the program.  That's what's forcing them to 

re-evaluate.  They look at the program and they say, this 

program isn't working . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the 

member from Tisdale, he says $400 million deficit in Alberta.  

And he's correct.  Absolutely correct. 

 

But I would ask that member, Mr. Speaker, where is that $400 

million?  Where is it?  Where is the $400 million that the 

program is in deficit in Alberta?  Well I'll tell you where it is.  

It's in the hands of agriculture.  It's in the farmers' hands in 

Alberta.  And that's exactly where it would be in Saskatchewan 

if we had a 

program like that in Saskatchewan -- $400 million dollar 

injection into Saskatchewan agriculture if we had a similar 

program. 

 

And these members stand in their place and say, it's no good.  

Can't put money into agriculture . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm sure that other members will 

get into debate later on and I think they should await their 

opportunity.  But let the member from Kindersley speak now. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We'll be looking 

forward to the member from Quill Lakes' ill-informed 

contribution to this debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as usual he chirps from his seat about his thoughts 

about . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Will the member from 

Kindersley please return to the debate, the topic at hand? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I'm trying to get there. 

 

The Speaker: -- Well let's go to the debate. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, it is indeed an important issue 

in western Canada.  And it's important that the people of 

Canada and Saskatchewan look at this issue.  It's important that 

people know the kind of impact that the NDP government has 

had on agriculture to date, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we look at the method of payment, we have to look 

at it and we have to say, Mr. Speaker, that not everyone shares 

your view.  Not everyone does.  You can get a fair degree of 

support for your thoughts in Saskatchewan.  There isn't the 

same degree of support in Alberta or Manitoba, Mr. Speaker.  

They don't seem to recognize that agriculture in western 

Canada is only . . . is made up of other provinces besides 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And we look at the discussion now, and we wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, we wonder where the discussion is going.  We look in 

the Star-Phoenix of today, Mr. Speaker.  And the Minister of 

Agriculture says in today's Star-Phoenix: 

 

 . . . if you want to get a good deal for Saskatchewan, you'd 

better get to the table and start talking about this and agree to 

some changes, (the Minister of Agriculture) says. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, is that not in direct conflict of what his 

members are saying today?  His members are standing up and 

saying, we don't want any changes.  We don't want to do 

anything.  We want to insure that it's going to stay the same.  

And yet the Minister of Agriculture -- and I'll reiterate, Mr. 

Speaker -- he says: 

 

 . . . if you want to get a good deal for Saskatchewan, you'd 

better get to the table and start talking about this and agree to 

some 



March 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 737 

changes . . . 

 

That's the quote in today's paper, if any of you want to take the 

time to pick it up and read it.  That's what the Minister of 

Agriculture said today in the Star-Phoenix. 

 

So what do you people say?  Your minister says you'd better 

get to the table and address this concern.  And you people stand 

up and say, we don't want to talk about it.  Your minister 

obviously wants to talk about it now.  He realizes that in order 

to get a good deal, as he puts it, for Saskatchewan farmers, this 

issue must be talked about and we must be willing to agree to 

some changes. 

 

Well where are you people?  Where are you people in this 

debate?  You've obviously lost touch with what your minister is 

doing.  The members from rural Saskatchewan aren't keeping 

up with what your Minister of Agriculture is saying.  That's 

what he says in today's paper. 

 

 "If we dig our heels in and they put in the things Alberta and 

Manitoba want, it leaves us high and dry.  They have the 

power; this is federal jurisdiction.  We don't have the power 

to say no.  At some point, it becomes a pretty mean game and 

we have to get in it." 

 

That's what he said. 

 

Well it's high time that this government recognized that they'd 

better at least be at the table, Mr. Speaker.  They'd better at 

least be at the table and be willing to talk about this, rather than 

the ill-informed view of a few of these members opposite that 

say, let's just stay home and hope it stays where it's at. 

 

Your minister realizes, Mr. Speaker, that they must be at the 

table in order to negotiate.  It's high time the other members, 

the back-bench members of this government, realize the same, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, he goes on to 

say, and I quote from the newspaper here: 

 

 Cunningham's best case scenario is that the feds will hold off 

altering the method of payment until after an election. 

 

Well that's a great thing to hold your hat on, Mr. Speaker.  It's a 

great thing to say to Saskatchewan farmers that we're going to 

sit back and wait, and maybe the federal election will clear up 

all this kind of confusion that we've created. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that's reprehensible that this 

government would sit back and hope, hope that an election will 

decide it for them.  People in this province are looking for 

some leadership.  They're not looking for your hopes of what 

an election will do, Mr. Speaker.  The farmers of this province 

want some decisions made with respect to the change, they 

want decisions made with what this government's position is 

going to be.  Are they going to be at the table as the minister 

himself suggests, or are they going to take the 

view of the back-bench members -- stay home and do nothing. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister goes on to say, it's a very 

insightful article that is in today's newspaper about the 

minister's views. 

 

 The railway companies are getting more and more room to do 

variable rates and to ship grain around.  The adjustments are 

happening and you can see it by the steel and cement 

elevators springing up around the province. 

 

 The adjustment is happening with or without change. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Whose elevators? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Whose elevators?  That's the question, exactly, 

Mr. Speaker.  Who is it that's putting up these big elevators 

around the province?  Who is it that's building one out at 

Davidson?  Who is it that's building them all over this province 

right now?  These very same people, Mr. Speaker, that said we 

can't have any change.  We can't have any change.  And the 

member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster chirps from her seat 

about the kinds of change we're seeing in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, but it is indeed the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool who's 

building elevators all over this province in anticipation of some 

changes.  And yet they hold fast to the argument that we can't 

have any change under any circumstances, Mr. Speaker.  And 

yet they are preparing daily for changes.  They're preparing . . . 

Every time we turn around we hear about another Sask Wheat 

Pool elevator going to be built somewhere -- concrete, huge, 

huge mega-elevators. 

 

And I recall not too long ago -- it's an interesting evolution that 

the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has gone through -- when they 

had the largest grain handling system for drawing in the grain, 

and they still do, when they bought out Federal grain company.  

It was a funny thing, that we absolutely cannot have big, huge 

terminal-type elevators.  That was the discussion.  It's wrong; 

we've got to have small, little elevators placed all over rural 

Saskatchewan.  That was the position of the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool. 

 

And it's an amazing transformation that they've gone through, 

building these huge terminal elevators all over the province.  

And it's an amazing transformation as well when you consider 

that their counterparts in National Farmers Union . . . I'll just 

relate a little story to you, Mr. Speaker, about their position in 

all of this.  It seems absolutely astounding. 

 

I haven't seen any criticism from them with respect to 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool building terminals all over the 

province -- no criticism whatsoever.  There sure used to be, 

though.  There sure used to be.  When there was an elevator, a 

large terminal-type elevator built in Rosetown, Saskatchewan 

about 60 miles from my home, Mr. Speaker, I remember the 

controversy. In fact I was there that day.  It was absolutely 

amazing when they decided to have the opening of that 



738 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1993 

elevator in Rosetown. 

 

The National Farmers Union turned out in record numbers that 

day.  They turned out and they stood in the driveway of the 

new elevator and they said people shouldn't be allowed to 

deliver grain into this elevator; they shouldn't be allowed to 

open this elevator; they should be driven away from here and 

not be allowed to do this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then it was later on in the day when the elevator company 

decided to host a little barbecue.  It was interesting to see who 

was standing at the table first that day, Mr. Speaker.  All of the 

NFUers (National Farmers Union), all of the NFUers that were 

standing out protesting all day long, when it come time to get 

up to the table, they were right there.  Quick, quick as you 

could get there for a free hamburger.  It was absolutely 

amazing.  Everybody noted that. 

 

Just take an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to talk to some of the 

people from Rosetown that were there -- and area -- that day.  

They all recognized that.  They all tell the same story that I tell 

about that -- the amazing transformation that day of the 

National Farmers Union once they realized they were getting a 

little hungry later on in the day. 

 

And I wouldn't be surprised if the member from Biggar was 

there that day.  He was always a great National Farmers Union 

supporter.  Were you there that day?  I think that's the question 

that people would be asking of that member if they had the 

opportunity.  Were you there that day?  Did you have an 

opportunity for a hamburger that day?  After the protest was 

over, did you belly up to the table for one? 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, when the National Farmers Union . . . 

when the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool puts on these huge 

openings of massive-type terminals, ones that dwarf that one in 

Rosetown today, where's the hue and cry coming out of 

members like the member from Biggar?  Where is that one?  

Where is the hue and cry -- we're going to see the destruction 

of rural Saskatchewan; we're going to see all those kinds of 

things that the National Farmers Union said was going to 

happen.  Where is that happening now, Mr. Speaker? 

 

It was absolutely an amazing day in rural Saskatchewan.  The 

National Farmers Union, the most backward farm organization 

in this country today, and the kinds of things that they're 

talking about.  They've always said that everything is going to 

collapse the moment we have any change.  Can't change this; 

oh can't do that, Mr. Speaker, it will mean the destruction of the 

rural way of life. 

 

Where are they today, Mr. Speaker?  Where are they today 

when we see those kinds of things that are happening in rural 

Saskatchewan today?  Where are these people that are standing 

up and saying they're the voice of Saskatchewan agriculture?  

Where are these National Farmers Union people when it comes 

to what's happening today?  Well, Mr. Speaker, they're sitting 

back at home.  They don't want to say anything 

that may be contradictory towards what this government is 

doing.  They're their blood kin, Mr. Speaker.  They don't want 

any part of exposing this government for what they're doing in 

agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's interesting to see that transformation.  It's 

interesting to see the transformation in the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool.  It's interesting to see the transformation of the 

member from Humboldt.  He used to speak on behalf of 

farmers in this province, Mr. Speaker.  He used to stand up and 

call for help for agriculture, Mr. Speaker.  And what does he do 

now?  He quietly allows these kinds of things to go through, 

Mr. Speaker, the kinds of changes that are absolutely 

devastating to agriculture. 

 

He allowed the changes in GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) to go through.  He allowed the utility rates to go 

through, the utilities in rural Saskatchewan. And for those of 

you that are in the city, they have a very, very significant 

impact on rural Saskatchewan agriculture, Mr. Speaker, 

absolutely amazing impact. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this government's sole agenda when it comes 

to agriculture seems to be . . . their sole agricultural platform 

seems to be to point a finger east and say, the federal 

government has a responsibility, they have to help us out.  We 

don't know what we're doing, so you'll have to help us out.  

That seems to be the sole plank of their agricultural portfolio, 

Mr. Speaker.  Get some help from Ottawa. 

 

So what do they do?  They all load up on a plane, 

buddy-buddy, gather in all the friends -- probably a bunch of 

NFUers to boot -- fly on down to Ottawa, stomp around the 

Parliament Buildings down there, and demand some action in 

agriculture. 

 

And what did they come back with?  What did they come back 

with?  They come back with a big, fat bill for the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan.  A big, fat tab is what they ran up that day, Mr. 

Speaker, and no help whatsoever for agriculture, other than the 

Premier of this province standing up and saying, we're going to 

squeeze what we can out of Ottawa and we're going to demand 

it and we're not going to allow constitutional change unless we 

get help. 

 

(1645) 

 

Threaten. Threaten the parliament in Ottawa, threaten the 

Prime Minister, threaten the people of Canada -- unless we get 

help we're not going to do anything in this province; we're not 

going to allow federal help whatsoever. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Political war. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, a political war.  That's what he was going 

to start.  Well where's the war?  Where's the ammunition? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I have listened very carefully, 

although I will admit I was not in the Chair earlier in debate.  I 

do assume that we are on resolution 



March 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 739 

no. 1, which does say that we should maintain the Crow benefit 

and ask the federal government not to . . . or to stop its 

reduction of the Crow benefit rate. 

 

I've tried to put a connection between what the member is 

saying and the resolution, and I find it very difficult.  So I ask 

the member to possibly get back to the resolution, resolution 

no. 1. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the debate that we're hearing 

today is an important debate and it's finally time, I think, that 

the government members stand up and say what they think in 

agriculture.  And it's unfortunate that the only thing they can 

conclude from what they're doing here in agriculture today is 

that the federal government has to come forward with help. 

 

Well the federal government has helped, Mr. Speaker.  The 

federal government has had significant help for agriculture in 

the past in this province, Mr. Speaker.  And where were the 

NDP members when that was happening?  All they could do at 

that time was call for more, and cash the cheque, probably, as 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the kinds of offloading that this government has 

done make the Crow rate absolutely pale in comparison to what 

they're doing in agriculture.  The changes in the GRIP program 

alone cost more than the annual subsidy with respect to the 

Crow rate in Saskatchewan.  The changes, the changes in the 

GRIP program from '91 to '92 are a bigger impact in this 

province than the Crow rate total for one year in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Interest-free livestock cash advances were done away with, and 

they stand up and say that the PCs (Progressive Conservative) 

were against cash advances for grain farmers.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, who is against cash advances?  You are the ones that 

took them off on livestock, Mr. Speaker.  The offloading that 

you have forced on this province is absolutely astounding, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The decline in rural Saskatchewan is a result, a direct result of 

the policies of this NDP government, and you'll never be 

forgotten for those changes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are others that would like to enter this 

debate and I'd allow them to do that at this time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I realize that time is 

limited, but there were a few things that twig me a slight bit as 

I listened to the members, particularly the member from 

Biggar, as he went through a very wide range of dissertation 

about all aspects of agriculture in Saskatchewan. 

 

It's amazing, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Shaunavon 

and the member from Biggar, two relatively new members to 

the House here, would stand up and give us a history lesson of 

the progression of the grain industry from the mid-1930s until 

the 1990s.  And I just remind these members, Mr. Speaker, that 

in the last 50 years, the New Democratic Party 

and its predecessor, the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) have held power in this province for thirty-two and 

a half years. 

 

Thirty-two and a half years of sitting on their duffs, Mr. 

Speaker, when it comes to forwarding agriculture in this 

province.  When you look across the agricultural spectrum 

here, Mr. Speaker, and they talk about the railroad, they talk 

about the railroads, they talk about the elevator company, and 

at the end of the day the member from Kindersley has pointed 

out the end result -- the end result of this great history lesson 

that we've gotten here. 

 

The end result is, Mr. Speaker, that all of the elevator 

companies are consolidating.  Elevator companies that talked 

against terminals 10 years ago own 5-million-bushel ones in 

the city of Moose Jaw.  Elevator companies that used to 

demand an elevator in every town in the province are now 

abandoning them by the dozen.  Railroad companies, Mr. 

Speaker, are abandoning branch lines.  And, Mr. Speaker, at 

the end of the day which is coming very quickly, in '97 or '98, 

every farmer in this province is going to be without a Crow 

benefit. 

 

The reality is, Mr. Speaker, that these people, in thirty-two and 

a half years as government of this province, didn't diversify this 

province enough so that when the inevitable day comes, when 

the inevitable day comes, what's going to be left? 

 

And what we see from them in their budgets, Mr. Speaker, is 

just a whole whack of offloading.  All sorts of taxes, of hidden 

taxes, are going to smack dab right in the middle of rural 

Saskatchewan at the end of the day.  There's a half a billion 

dollars of offloading over the next four years by this 

government. 

 

And you know where it's going to land, Mr. Speaker.  It's going 

to land on the same people that in a few short years aren't going 

to have a Crow benefit, because these people won't negotiate.  

They simply want to fall back on the past.  They want to talk 

about history, history that's becoming irrelevant day by day.  

They want to blame someone. 

 

I mean I really wonder, Mr. Speaker, what's going to happen in 

this province when the New Democratic Party any longer 

doesn't have the crutch of blaming the railroad, or blaming a 

multinational, or blaming somebody else.  What in the world 

are they going to talk about?  What is . . . I mean we're not 

going to see an agricultural resolution come out of this bunch 

for years, because they won't have anybody left to blame. 

 

The simple fact is, Mr. Speaker, the simple fact is, that times 

are changing.  And what the province of Saskatchewan needs at 

this point in our history, what the province of Saskatchewan 

needs is people that are committed to the agricultural sector, 

committed enough that they will sit down and negotiate, that 

they will sit down and plan for the future.  And there is no plan 

in evidence, Mr. Speaker, no plan at all, after 18 months from 

this government. 



740 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1993 

People in this province in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, want to 

know where the red meat sector is going to be in the next five 

years.  We've got the biggest cow herd we've had in this 

province in the last 15 years.  Mr. Speaker, that's in spite of the 

policies brought down by this NDP government, where they 

have virtually stripped the livestock sector of any support. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that thirty-two and a half years that this 

party's held power in this province has guaranteed that the 

livestock sector in western Canada exists in the province next 

to us in Alberta.  Because they refuse; they refuse to look at the 

future.  They refuse to see how an important part of the 

agricultural sector meshes in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how many flour mills are left in this province?  

How much value added processing existed in this province on 

the agricultural side before 1982?  Virtually none, because in 

all the years these people were in power, they all had the 

attitude of the former minister of Agriculture, Gordon 

MacMurchy.  The Hon. Gordon MacMurchy stood in this 

House.  And I remember it well.  Farmers were planting their 

crops.  I believe it was '80-81.  And he said: boys, just go out 

and sow the whole thing wall to wall to wheat.  Wheat's going 

to $10 a bushel; all you've got to do is sow it wall to wall to 

wheat.  And the Canadian Wheat Board will just look after and 

make you all millionaires. 

 

Well unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, some people believed him.  

They sold their cows; they sold their hogs; they didn't do any 

processing.  They sowed it wall to wall to wheat.  And we 

know what the results were, Mr. Speaker.  We know what the 

results were. 

 

And when we should have been doing some planning, when 

this province had money in the bank, when natural resources 

were at their top, when there was money available to diversify 

and to plan for the agricultural community, what did we do?  

We went and bought a bunch of used holes in the ground.  We 

bought a bunch of used holes in the ground, Mr. Speaker, 

instead of dealing with the salt of the earth which in this 

province is the agricultural people, instead of having the 

processing in place. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I know it's been a very wide-ranging 

discussion today.  And I want to go back to this Crow issue in 

the way that the member from Biggar talked about farmers in 

this province being between a rock and a hard place. 

 

Well I'll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, the only rock and a hard 

place for this party right now is the fact that their federal leader 

and their federal party, who they're counting on to make the 

changes that they want, has got less credibility than the people 

that go out looking for Elvis Presley on a day-by-day basis.  

That's where Audrey McLaughlin is in the polls today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now how do you think Audrey McLaughlin's going to deal 

with the Crow?  You know where she's going to deal with the 

Crow?  She's going to deal from it from opposition.  Because 

that's where she's going to be 

after the next federal election.  Opposition because the New 

Democratic Party refused to deal with reality, refused to deal 

with the future. 

 

There is an opportunity in the next short little while, Mr. 

Speaker, for about 60,000 farm families in this province to 

have somebody show some leadership instead of talking about 

the past all the time.  There's an opportunity to take that 

benefit, whatever's left of it, that Saskatchewan's solution, 

Saskatchewan's solution isn't dictated to us, isn't dictated to us 

by the province of Alberta or the province of Manitoba or the 

federal government. 

 

And that means that the leadership that's absolutely necessary 

on the Crow issue has to come from this government because 

it's two more years before this party takes over again in this 

province, Mr. Speaker -- two more years before we're back in a 

position to show that leadership in agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- And I'm not sure, Mr. Speaker, that farm 

families can wait that two years if these people don't get on 

with the job and throw their partisanship aside, throw their 

unfortunate history aside on this Crow debate, Mr. Speaker, 

and get down to brass tacks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have much more to add to this debate, but at this 

time I would ask leave to adjourn debate on the issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 

 

 


