




















































Hansard: April 20, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1037 

 April 20, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm happy to 

present on behalf of the people of the Gull Lake and Tompkins 

area, petitions concerning the health issue.  I will read the 

prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

And as I said, there's several people from a meeting last night 

and we'll present them now. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have 

some petitions to present to the House today.  I'll read the 

prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners humbly pray. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I as well 

have some petitions I'd like to present to this Assembly from 

the Gull Lake-Webb-Tompkins area.  And the prayer reads, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I as well have 

petitions with respect to the health care issue in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, these petitions are from the Gull 

Lake-Tompkins area as well as the Eston-Richlea-Plato-Milden 

area of the 

province.  Mr. Speaker, I present these now. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have 

petitions to present today and I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

My petitioners today, Mr. Speaker, also are from the west side 

of the province, and would cover right from the far south up the 

west side.  I so petition. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to table some 

petitions today with respect to health care.  A couple of pages 

of men and women, senior citizens from the area of Gull Lake 

and Webb, Saskatchewan, and the south-west part of the 

province.  And I will read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I now table these. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too 

would want to join with my colleagues this afternoon in 

presenting petitions to this Legislative Assembly.  The prayer 

is: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come mainly from Gull Lake, 

Saskatchewan, but a number of them I see also from Tompkins 

in the surrounding area.  It is my pleasure at this time to present 

these petitions to the Assembly. 



1038 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1993 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise too with a 

petition from undersigned landowners, renters, persons affected 

by and interested in opposing the 230 kV (kilovolt) 

transmission line from Dundurn to Saskatoon. 

 

And I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Honourable 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to do the 

following: 

 

 1. Order SaskPower to facilitate the production of non-utility 

generated power in areas of increased demand; namely, 

Lloydminster and Meadow Lake.  Several companies in this 

area have applied to generate power. Allowing non-utility 

generation of power in this area will make the construction of 

the power line and its attendant $42 million expenditure 

unnecessary. 

 

 2. Order the Minister of Agriculture to undertake a complete 

environmental assessment including hearings. 

 

 3. Order SaskPower to ensure that there is full and complete 

compensation package for all affected landowners with 

increased emphasis on compensation for loss of property 

value experienced by owners of smallholdings on or near the 

proposed route. 

 

 4. Order SaskPower to table, in the legislature, a complete 

economic analysis by an independent auditor that proves the 

economic benefits of the proposed line exceed the economic 

benefits of non-utility generated power or conservation. 

 

 5. Order SaskPower to table, in the legislature, a review of all 

national and international studies on the effects of electric 

and magnetic fields on humans. 

 

 6. Further, order SaskPower to cease and desist all planning, 

surveying, or preparation for construction of the Condie to 

Queen Elizabeth 230,000 volt power line on any of the 

proposed routes until all other points in this petition are 

honoured. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people are from Hanley, Clavet, Allan, 

Rural Route 5, Rural Route 3, Davidson, Humboldt, Saltcoats, 

Kenaston, and Saskatoon. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

The Clerk: — According to order, a petition regarding The 

Health Districts Act presented on April 19, 1993 has been 

reviewed pursuant to rule 11(6) and (7) and is found to be 

irregular and therefore cannot be read and received. 

According to order, the following petitions have been reviewed 

and are found to be in order and hereby read and received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act. 

 

Session paper no. 110. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take the opportunity to 

introduce to you and to the members of the Assembly, in the 

Speaker's gallery, men and women who have joined Vonda 

Kosloski today who have concerns with respect to family 

values and have concerns with respect to Bill 38.  I'd like all 

members to welcome them here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Oh, I'm sorry.  I didn't . . . Well I'm sorry.  If 

we can go back.  If the member did ask a point of order before 

question period, I didn't hear.  Could we go back by leave? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Speaker: — What's your point of order? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — I do have a written question today, and 

I'm wondering if we are going to have notices of motions and 

questions. 

 

The Speaker: — It certainly is a valid point.  Could we revert 

back?  It was my omission.  Notices of motions and questions.  

Could we go back? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice 

that I shall on Thursday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Health and hemophiliacs who 

received blood and blood products contaminated by the HIV 

(human immunodeficiency virus) virus from provincially 

sponsored Canadian Blood Committee: (1) will the Minister 

of Health agree to follow the lead of Nova Scotia and 

compensate hemophiliacs that became victims of the 

province's failure to help ensure that our blood supply and 

blood products was free from HIV virus; (2) did the minister 

originally agree with the other provincial Health ministers to 

deny hemophiliacs infected with 



April 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1039 

contaminated blood compensation which Nova Scotia's 

Health minister has now offered; (3) does the minister agree 

with her Ontario counterpart who regrets the decision by 

Nova Scotia to offer compensation to hemophiliacs who were 

infected by the AIDS (acquired immune deficiency 

syndrome) virus as a result of failings of the blood 

committee; and (4) will the minister launch an investigation 

with other governments to examine the circumstances and 

possible wrongdoings which led to the contamination of the 

supply of blood and blood products with the HIV virus? 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Public Employees' Dental Plan 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It seems 

to be getting more and more difficult to have question period in 

this House with the heavy-handed procedures of the members 

opposite who yesterday, Mr. Speaker, deprived the opposition 

of its normal question period.  And I don't know if that's ever 

happened before either in this Assembly. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, my question is to Madam Minister of Health.  

Yesterday, Madam Minister, we saw another glaring example 

of your government's warped idea of fairness.  Because on June 

30, Madam Minister, Saskatchewan families will see the end of 

their children's dental coverage.  But, Mr. Speaker, not the 

families of the NDP.  Not the families of the NDP cabinet 

ministers. 

 

Your coverage will only be continued, Madam Minister, if . . . 

and it will be improved to include children up to 25 years of 

age, Madam Minister — 25 years of age.  And this will be . . . 

the cost will be borne by the Saskatchewan taxpayer, Madam 

Minister. 

 

You're telling working men and women in this province . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order.  Does the member have a question?  I 

want the member to put his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

you're telling the working men and women of this province that 

they will have to pay for your extra coverage.  Madam 

Minister, how can you possibly justify this blatant, blatant 

double standard? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

Minister of Health for allowing me to answer this question, and 

I want to thank the member for the question. 

 

I want the House to know, Mr. Speaker, and I want the 

members of the opposition to know — and they do know — 

that it is and has been the policy of this government that during 

these difficult times which we face, there are no enhancement 

or increases of benefits to MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly).  We have frozen salaries now for four years, 

indemnities of members of the legislature.  And in fact there 

have been some reductions in some of the benefits. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are some areas in which there are 

contractual obligations that exist, which were signed by the 

members opposite with the public service, that have to be lived 

up to. 

 

But I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, in response to the 

member's question, that the government's position is and 

continues to be that indemnities and benefits to MLAs, 

including the dental plans, will not be enhanced.  That is not 

going to be changed from what it may already be, and we are 

asking the Board of Internal Economy to take this under 

consideration and implement it, because it is the Board of 

Internal Economy that must bring that implementation into 

place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  That, 

Mr. Minister, is a blatant cop-out, nothing more than a cop-out. 

 

This opposition caucus, Mr. Minister, has gone on record as 

saying that we are not a privileged person.  We are MLAs, but 

we are no better, no worse than the average citizen of this 

province. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Minister, what we are saying is that this 

expanded coverage is something that we refuse to accept.  So 

now, Mr. Minister, I tell you . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I tell you that what we want to know is the 

cost analysis. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is normal procedure for members 

opposite when they get into a corner.  When they're on a hook, 

they try to get off.  They try to get off the hook, Mr. Minister. 

 

And what we want to know is if this new step that you have . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order.  Order.  I would ask the 

government members to please not make so much noise that I 

can't even hear the member asking his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — When you're caught with your hand in the 

cookie jar, Mr. Minister, don't pawn it off on the Board of 

Internal Economy.  Make the decision yourselves as leaders, 

not followers. 

 

Yesterday we committed ourselves that there would be no 

special benefits for MLAs.  Now what I want to know is, Mr. 

Minister: what is the cost saving of this process? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1040 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1993 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I want to respond to 

the member's question.  I think I made it very clear what the 

position of the government was, not only on this matter but on 

other matters where it impacts on members of the Legislative 

Assembly.  There will be no enhancements.  The position of 

the government is there is not to be any enhancement in the 

dental plan for the purposes of members of the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

I want to remind the member from Rosthern that it was his 

government who put this plan into place through the Board of 

Internal Economy.  And that's a legitimate place to do it and the 

legitimate way to put it into place. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order.  Order.  Will the member from 

Estevan and the Government House Leader please come to 

order.  I'm sure if the member has a question, he'll direct it to 

the Government House Leader.  Order.  Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am 

pleased to be able to complete my answer.  I'm saying, Mr. 

Speaker, that we are taking a policy and a program that was 

implemented by the members opposite when they were in the 

government, and we have said that there is not to be any 

enhancement under the dental plan for members of the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

And it has to be undone, Mr. Speaker, by directives of the 

Board of Internal Economy because . . . and that's under the 

process by which it exists now.  So we're going to ask the 

Board of Internal Economy — on which the members opposite 

have representation and I hope that they will address this 

question — to address it and make the changes that are 

necessary in order that the position of the government and 

obviously the members opposite is put into place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Deputy Premier, you may have taken the 

Minister of Health off the hook, but you impaled yourself.  I 

have right here — from Linda Kaminski, director of personnel 

and administrative services — the outline.  This says that 

according to the public employees' dental plan, your child or 

stepchild of 21 years of age is going to be covered.  Your child 

or stepchild, if it goes to educational institutions, is going to be 

covered up to 25 years. 

 

There's no mention anywhere here, sir, that the NDP cabinet 

and the NDP MLAs are not going to get this special kind of 

treatment — nowhere.  Now you're saying it's going to be up to 

the Board of Internal Economy, Mr. Member.  That doesn't fly.  

That doesn't fly.  Don't push it off on someone else.  I ask you . 

. . 

 

The Speaker: — Order.  Order.  I ask the member from 

Rosthern to please put his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Member, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy 

Premier, what do you say to the average citizen in this province 

who's going to be footing the 

bill to pay for the expanded coverage of your cabinet ministers 

and your NDP MLAs and the Leader of the Liberals?  Answer 

that question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member 

opposite obviously is not listening to the answers that are being 

provided.  Because I have said on behalf of the government, 

Mr. Speaker, that the members of the government will not and 

have no intention of receiving any enhanced benefits under the 

dental plan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the directive or the memo that the member 

opposite from Rosthern speaks of is a memo that came out of 

the office of the Legislative Assembly.  Obviously that 

supports what I have just said, that there has to be a change in 

the directive that has been provided by the Board of Internal 

Economy that instructs the Legislative Assembly Office what 

the position of the government is and what the position of the 

members of the opposition are. 

 

The position of the government is very clear:  MLAs should 

not receive enhanced benefits.  That's not a position that was 

stated just today, it has been stated since November 1 of 1991.  

And that's going to continue to be the position.  And I hope that 

when the Board of Internal Economy puts this into place finally 

that the members opposite will be there and will support that 

change. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I don't believe this scurrying and 

sidestepping and running around.  Mr. Member, it's not up to 

the Board of Internal Economy.  The regulations are stated now 

that automatically every member of this Assembly is going to 

get those enhanced benefits.  You, sir, are the one as an 

individual that will sign a statement, saying I don't want those 

enhanced benefits.  That's how it operates, Mr. Member. 

 

Now I want . . . You are not the one that's going to be giving 

this, obviously.  But what I would do is challenge other 

members of the cabinet to get up and say that we will not be 

accepting any of these enhanced responsibilities or privileges, 

that we are only normal people, normal people, so that the 

taxpayers of this province are not forced to pay for the special 

privileges that you have lined out for yourselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the 

member, I can't help what the members opposite put into place 

when they put this plan into its existence.  It's there.  It needs to 

change, Mr. Speaker, and the position that I have stated is that 

it will change, that members of the Legislative Assembly 

should not receive additional benefits during these difficult 

times when we're asking everybody else in Saskatchewan to 

sacrifice.  Members of this Assembly have to sacrifice 



April 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1041 

as well. 

 

But I can't help the regulations or the policies that the former 

government put into place.  But I'll tell you what can be done, 

Mr. Speaker.  We can ask the Board of Internal Economy to 

deal with this and change those regulations if that's what they 

are, so that the position of the members of this Assembly is put 

into place and cleared up.  The position of the government and 

the members on this side of the House is very clear; now the 

appropriate bodies have to make sure that it's carried out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I have said on 

numerous occasions, every time the government members, the 

NDP back-benchers rise in a chorus of applause, it's because 

they're hurting and they're scrambling.  You got caught with 

your hand in the cookie jar, Mr. Deputy Premier.  You got 

caught.  You're trying to cover your tracks by scurrying around 

and trying to hide behind the Board of Internal Economy, to 

whom you, when you were the minister of Finance, and your 

Premier, dictated terms — to the Board of Internal Economy.  

That's what you did through your cabinet ministers.  There was 

no choice.  You control the Board of Internal Economy so this 

is a cop-out — an absolute cop-out — when the people of 

Saskatchewan got up and spoke. 

 

Mr. Premier . . . or Deputy Premier, why did you take it away 

from the common people in Saskatchewan, but reserve this 

right for yourself?  And now you're making deathbed 

repentance moves — that's all that you're doing, Mr. Minister.  

That's all that you are doing. 

 

But you took it away from the common people, Mr. Premier, 

and I say, shame on you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, for the member 

for Rosthern to get up and speak in these terms, I think, lacks a 

certain level of credibility.  He knows . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — He knows how these programs, 

and I'm not being critical of them, were put into place.  When 

they were in the government they put them into place.  When 

we are in the government we're saying that there will not be 

any enhancements.  That is not . . . that is a position we have 

taken for some time. 

 

I understand, and the member from Rosthern may know this, 

that there was today scheduled a meeting of the Board of 

Internal Economy.  I'm not sure whether the Board of Internal 

Economy is still meeting today or whether it's no longer 

meeting, but if it is . . . but if it was still meeting, Mr. Speaker, 

it could deal with this issue today, since this issue has arisen, 

and rectify the situation. 

And I would hope, Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite still 

thinks that the Board of Internal Economy should meet that 

early, members of the government side will be there to deal 

with the issue.  But they have to deal . . . the Board of Internal 

Economy, the Board of Internal Economy has to deal with the 

directive that put this policy and this program into place in 

order to rectify the situation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rural Hospital Closures 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question, Mr. 

Speaker, is for the Minister of Health. 

 

Madam Minister, the other night in Eston you had an 

opportunity to hear what the people of Saskatchewan have been 

saying about your plan to close rural hospitals.  You heard the 

hurt, the anger, the confusion, and the sense of betrayal that 

you are causing in rural Saskatchewan.  Surely by now, Madam 

Minister, you must understand that what the opposition has 

been saying is exactly what the rest of the people of 

Saskatchewan are saying out in rural Saskatchewan right now. 

 

Madam Minister, in light of what you heard from the 1,600 

people at Eston the other night — incidentally the largest 

public meeting ever held in that town — in light of that, 

Madam Minister, will you now slow down your process and 

postpone the passage of Bill No. 3 so that you can hear the 

concerns of more of Saskatchewan people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — The betrayal, Mr. Speaker, that's taking 

place in rural Saskatchewan is not on the part of the 

government; it's on the part of the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) MLAs who are out there spreading 

misinformation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — They are betraying their constituents as 

they tell them we're padlocking the doors on rural hospitals.  

They are betraying their constituents when they tell them there 

will be no more health care in their communities.  And that's 

the kind of rumours that they're spreading throughout rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that we are not padlocking the door 

on facilities.  We are looking at converting hospitals to health 

care centres with emergency acute care and other health care 

programing. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What does that mean?  Explain a 

hospital care centre. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — The members opposite say, what does 

that mean.  They should know what it means.  This sort of 

thing has been recommended numerous times in Saskatchewan 

as a way to deal with the situation in rural Saskatchewan.  It 

exists in some 



1042 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1993 

communities, and if they went to visit them they would know 

what it means. 

 

With respect to the availability of emergency acute care, it will 

be there, Mr. Speaker.  People will not be without health care, 

and we've reassured them of that.  If there's a betrayal, it's the 

misinformation the members opposite are spreading. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, the 

only role change of hospitals that you're talking about is from 

being open to being closed.  That's what's happening. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — What we oppose in this process, Madam 

Minister, is your heavy-handedness.  No debate, no 

consultation, no local input — just a unilateral decision made 

in Regina to close 52 rural hospitals.  That's what you did, 

Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, if this is all within your wellness plan, then 

why rush it?  Why rush it through, Madam Minister?  Why not 

slow down the process — exactly what the people of rural 

Saskatchewan . . . exactly what you heard in Eston the other 

night.  Why not slow down the process and allow the people of 

rural Saskatchewan to have their say in this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, a few short weeks ago the 

members opposite were saying, you have to make these tough 

decisions; you're passing the buck to district boards; you've got 

to make these decisions.  A few short weeks ago they were 

saying, how long is this process going on?  People are getting 

fed up with it.  You've got to have some sort of conclusion to 

this process. 

 

We heard that throughout the province.  People were asking us 

for when the process would be wound up.  We set a deadline, 

August 17, and that deadline remains firm, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We made the tough decisions with respect to rural hospitals.  

Now they are saying, hold it, we don't want this to occur.  Slow 

it down.  That, Mr. Speaker, is talking from both sides of your 

mouth.  It's a position that's taken by people who don't want to 

reform the health care system because they want to destroy 

medicare and see it go down the tubes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, that 

isn't what you heard the other night in Eston.  Sixteen hundred 

people were there at that public meeting and they asked you to 

slow down the process, give them adequate time for 

consultation, hold public meetings around this province.  That's 

what they asked you that night; that's what they wanted from 

you that night. 

They didn't want your rhetoric.  They didn't want the member 

from Rosetown-Elrose's rhetoric that night.  They wanted some 

consultation; they wanted information, and you did not give it 

to them. 

 

Madam Minister, will you commit to this Assembly today that 

you'll provide that kind of information, that kind of 

consultation that the people of rural Saskatchewan are asking 

for? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — We will continue to consult with 

Saskatchewan residents throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker.  We will continue to consult.  We will continue to 

have meetings.  We'll continue to have discussions about health 

reform in the general direction.  And we're doing it constantly 

today, and it'll continue. 

 

We will work with planning groups, and many of these 

planning groups throughout the province are very anxious to 

get district boards in place, and we'll continue to work with 

them.  We'll continue to develop their plans and put in place a 

district board, Mr. Speaker.  And so the process of 

consultation, unlike some other provinces in Canada, will 

continue in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Changes Pilot Project 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Question as well to the Minister of 

Health.  Madam Minister, when any new product is offered to 

the public, be it a new car, a new drug, or a new health care 

model, people have expectations that it's going to live up to a 

warranty. 

 

Madam Minister, you claim that your wellness model will 

deliver better and more cost-efficient health care than what we 

have today.  What evidence, what test results, can you provide 

to the people of Saskatchewan which will guarantee that the 

changes that you are imposing on people will produce these 

results? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, in the areas where we 

already have established district boards, there have been 

savings identified.  We know throughout Canada, not just in 

Saskatchewan, that by organizing on a district or regional basis, 

that efficiencies can be realized in the health care system. 

 

Beyond that, we also know that it provides a more coordinated 

and integrated health care system.  The government has to 

contain costs in health care, but it goes beyond that.  Our health 

care reform is not simply a formula for cost containment, it's a 

formula for emphasizing more community-based services and 

more health promotion.  In the long term, as we emphasize 

more health promotion, more community-based services, we 

will develop a better health care system in Saskatchewan.  I 

believe in that very strongly.  And I think the member opposite 

recognizes that as well. 



April 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1043 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, what you're doing with 

health care reform is like asking the whole province to board an 

untested rocket ship on a trip to the moon.  And your 

government has as much proof, Madam Minister, that the 

wellness model will work, as they have knowledge of outer 

space travel in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now why have you refused to give this project a test run so that 

all of the experts and ordinary people all over our province, 

particularly in rural Saskatchewan, are going to be able to not 

only see the benefits, but are going to be able to see the 

problems and work together in order to perfect a prototype 

before you go province-wide? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Because, Mr. Speaker, it is essential that 

we move with health reform quickly for a number of reasons.  

If we launch on five-year test projects, we will be way behind 

the rest of the country and will be doing our citizens a 

disservice. 

 

The province is in a difficult financial situation.  Our response 

to that is a process of community development and consultation 

to set up regional boards in order to contain health care costs 

and improve the health care system in the long term. 

 

Other provinces have different remedies, Mr. Speaker.  

Privatization is the remedy of the Liberal Leader in Alberta, 

and it's written up in The Edmonton Sun as he talks, as 

Laurence Decore speaks to the need for privatization in 

medicare. 

 

New Brunswick:  they impose a blueprint on their province, 

unlike Saskatchewan which has had months of consultation, 

months of working with communities, and we'll continue to do 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  With all due 

respect, Madam Minister, Premier McKenna is not the premier 

of Saskatchewan and I'm trying to keep your mind off politics 

and on health care. 

 

You know, I am really appalled that you would force upon 

people of this province, without testing it or proving its merits, 

an entirely new model.  And if you believe in this model, you 

would not be afraid to test it.  You've been in power for 18 

months — don't talk about having to do this for five years in 

the future, talk about what could have been done and what can 

be done in a specified period of time.  If you have any doubts 

about it, about its ability to pass a test, then how dare you do 

this to the people of this province? 

 

Now are you going to show responsible leadership and 

implement a wellness-model test district?  I am asking you that 

today.  Will you do this in order to look at how people can 

participate in this process to deal with problems that arise, that 

are going to have extraordinary economic problems for people 

in rural 

Saskatchewan as well as potential health problems? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I am appalled at the 

member opposite's lack of information and knowledge of 

what's happened in Saskatchewan.  Midwest has been in place 

for several months and they are moving towards conversion 

and working successfully.  Twin Rivers have been having a lot 

of discussions; they formed a board and they're working 

successfully. 

 

If the member opposite truly supported health reform rather 

than choosing to make it a political issue, if she truly supported 

health reform she would be onside with creating health districts 

through the province.  She would understand the urgency, the 

urgency in making sure that we have health districts in order to 

protect our smallest communities and move on with health care 

reform and developing a better health care system for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Arborfield 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to 

move first reading of a Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Arborfield. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:39 p.m. until 2:40 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen  

— 8 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Lautermilch 

Thompson Calvert 

Wiens Murray 

Simard Hamilton 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Teichrob Draper 

Shillington Serby 

Koskie Whitmore 

Anguish Sonntag 

Solomon Flavel 

Goulet Roy 

Atkinson Cline 

Kowalsky Scott 

Carson Kujawa 

Mitchell Crofford 

Penner Stanger 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Hagel Harper 

Bradley Kluz 

Koenker Carlson 

Lorje Langford 

Pringle Jess 

— 46 



1044 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1993 

A Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Birch Hills 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I move 

first reading of a Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Birch Hills. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:44 p.m. until 2:45 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

— 8 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Lautermilch 

Thompson Calvert 

Wiens Murray 

Simard Hamilton 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Teichrob Draper 

Shillington Serby 

Koskie Whitmore 

Anguish Sonntag 

Solomon Flavel 

Goulet Roy 

Atkinson Cline 

Kowalsky Scott 

Carson Kujawa 

Mitchell Crofford 

Penner Stanger 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Hagel Harper 

Bradley Kluz 

Koenker Carlson 

Lorje Langford 

Pringle Jess 

— 46 

 

A Bill to restore health care services to the 

 community of Dodsland 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I move 

first reading of a Bill to restore the health care services in the 

community of Dodsland. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:47 p.m. until 2:48 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

— 8 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Lautermilch 

Thompson Calvert 

Wiens Murray t 

Simard Hamilton 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Teichrob Draper 

Shillington Serby 

Koskie Whitmore 

Anguish Sonntag 

Solomon Roy 

Goulet Cline 

Atkinson Scott 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Carson Stanger 

Mitchell Knezacek 

Cunningham Harper 

Hagel Kluz 

Bradley Carlson 

Lorje Langford 

Pringle Jess 

— 42 

 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Borden 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to restore health care services to the community of Borden. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:50 p.m. until 2:51 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

— 8 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Calvert 

Thompson Murray 

Wiens Hamilton 

Simard Johnson 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Teichrob Draper 

Shillington Serby 

Koskie Whitmore 

Anguish Sonntag 

Solomon Roy 

Goulet Scott 

Atkinson Crofford 

Kowalsky Stanger 

Carson Knezacek 

Mitchell Harper 

Hagel Kluz 

Bradley Carlson 

Lorje Langford 

Pringle Jess 

— 38 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Climax 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to move first 

reading of a Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Climax. 



April 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1045 

The division bells rang from 2:54 p.m. until 2:55 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Britton 

Devine D'Autremont 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Boyd Haverstock 

Toth  

— 9 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Pringle 

Thompson Calvert 

Wiens Murray 

Simard Hamilton 

Lingenfelter Draper 

Teichrob Serby 

Shillington Whitmore 

Koskie Sonntag 

Anguish Scott 

Solomon Crofford 

Goulet Stanger 

Atkinson Knezacek 

Kowalsky Harper 

Carson Kluz 

Mitchell Carlson 

Bradley Langford 

Koenker Jess 

Lorje  

— 35 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To expedite 

matters I would indicate to the House that I'm prepared to stand 

items 9 to 16. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Rulings on Points of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day I want to address 

some points of orders that were raised the other day by various 

members in this House.  The first one pertains to petitions. 

 

On April 15 the member of Souris-Cannington raised a point of 

order that his petition should be categorized as a personal 

grievance and therefore be brought into immediate discussion 

under rule 11(8).  I have had opportunity to review the 

member's petition and others of a similar nature tabled in recent 

days.  I find they pertain to a collective grievance and are not 

of a personal nature. 

 

For a petition to be categorized as a personal grievance it must 

not be a matter which affects all citizens or a large number of 

people or a group or a class.  I refer members to a petition laid 

on the Table by the member for Cumberland, June 18, 1990 as 

an example of a personal grievance.  Therefore I find this point 

of order not well taken. 

 

On April 19, 1993 the member for Morse raised a point of 

order concerning the propriety of recent  

ministerial statements.  I have reviewed the record and find that 

all but one of the ministerial statements of this session have 

been within the limits of our practice. 

 

A statement made April 5 however, which congratulated the 

curling champions, was out of order as the member from Morse 

has suggested.  It had nothing to do with government policy, its 

administration, nor did it announce new or existing government 

initiatives.  However, I want to remind the member that at that 

time I did rule that congratulatory messages are not properly 

ministerial statements.  Therefore I find the point of order not 

well taken. 

 

(1500) 

 

On April 15, 1993 the member for Thunder Creek raised a 

point of order stating that comments by the Premier in the 

House on April 14, 1993 were out of order as they referred to 

the presence of a member in the Assembly.  I have reviewed 

the text of Hansard of April 14, 1993, to which the member of 

Thunder Creek referred, and I find that point of order is not 

well taken.  Order. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I would 

ask leave of the Assembly to make brief remarks with respect 

to condolence for Governor Mickelson. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it 

saddens me today to report to the Assembly that an outstanding 

American, a personal friend of mine, a friend of Saskatchewan, 

and indeed a friend of Canada has been called from us along 

with several of his companions. 

 

In my time serving the people of Saskatchewan, I had many 

opportunities to work with Governor George Mickelson and 

always found him to be sincere and deeply committed to his 

own people.  But one of the truly remarkable things about 

George was that he understood his hopes and dreams for the 

people of South Dakota and that they were intimately bound up 

in the hopes and dreams of those all around him.  He reached 

out to others like a lot of politicians could only wish to do.  In 

Saskatchewan, in particular, we found that he searched for 

ways to benefit us as well as the people of the United States. 

 

He was not one of those politicians who takes the easy road 

out, hiding behind fear or intimidation but instead encouraged 

his people to be open to the world, to face challenges squarely, 

and not to shy from an honest fight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, George Mickelson became South Dakota's 28th 

governor on January 10, 1987, precisely four decades after his 

father before him swore the same oath of office.  In January, 

1991 the Governor was again entrusted with his people's 

confidence and entered into his second term.  Prior to 



1046 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1993 

being the governor, George served in the House of 

Representatives for many years, and you will be interested to 

know, Mr. Speaker, that he also held the office of Speaker of 

the House for a total of four years. 

 

The governor was a very active and committed leader, and one 

area of concern that he shared in common with most 

Saskatchewan people was his work to improve access to health 

care.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, Governor Mickelson served as the 

co-chairman of the national governors' association task force 

on health care. 

 

A Republican, Governor Mickelson led a ground-breaking 

administration with landmark environmental legislation, 

educational reform, health care reform, water management 

initiatives, economic development, and of course an abiding 

commitment to open and free trade. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he was a son of the prairies, as we all are, and he 

was one of the great leaders born to the prairie.  Today the 

people of South Dakota experience a great loss.  And to them I 

send the heartfelt condolences of this Legislative Assembly, 

and I know I can say also the condolences of all the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But I also want to particularly say, Mr. Speaker, to those 

people who have been part of the Governor's operation and part 

of the Governor's life — to his staff and to his friends and his 

family, and most deeply and sincerely to Linda, his wife — the 

thoughts and prayers of our people are with you.  We are 

grateful for the time they allowed us to share their governor 

and we are proud to honour him today. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I would 

move, seconded by the member from Regina Elphinstone: 

 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of Governor George Mickelson of South Dakota, and 

that this resolution as passed, together with the transcript of 

the oral tribute to the memory of the deceased, be 

communicated to the Legislative Assembly of South Dakota 

on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, we would certainly 

give leave for this motion to be passed and to be forwarded to 

the family of George Mickelson.  I too would like to add the 

condolences of government members to the family and friends 

and constituents of the late Governor of South Dakota, George 

"Speaker" Mickelson. 

 

Governor Mickelson became governor on January 10, 1987, 

exactly 40 years after his father.  He served his country through 

his time in the U.S (United States) Army from 1965 to '67, 

during time which he served in Vietnam. 

 

He became the Assistant Attorney General in 1967 and worked 

as a special prosecutor in the Attorney General's office.  In 

1969 he established a law practice 

in Brookings and continued until 1987. 

 

Governor Mickelson was a member of the South Dakota House 

of Representatives from 1975 to 1980 and served as Speaker 

pro tem for two years and Speaker of the House for two years. 

 

Some of Governor Mickelson's achievements in office focused 

on the state's revolving economic development fund; the state's 

centennial celebration; environmental legislation; education 

and health care reform; water issues; a state-wide reconciliation 

program that will continue to exist into the next century. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members of the government caucus want to 

join with all members in the Assembly today in sending our 

sincere condolences to the family and friends of the late 

Governor of South Dakota, George Mickelson. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Koenker: — A point of order.  Mr. Speaker, earlier today 

during the introduction of guests, the member from Estevan 

referred to Bill 38 in his introduction.  I point out to you that 

just four sitting days previous you had called that member to 

order stating in Hansard: 

 

 Before the member introduces guests, I just want to remind 

members to please not refer to Bills that are on the order 

paper or any business of government when we are 

introducing our guests. 

 

I would ask as my point of order that you review the record and 

reinforce this point of procedure to the whole of the Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I will take the member's point of order under 

advisement and bring back a ruling to the House. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that items 94 

to 109 be converted to motions for returns (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: — Written questions 94 to 109 convert debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — What's the point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — By leave of the Assembly, 



April 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1047 

we would like the member from Bengough-Milestone to move 

the motion under rule 16 by agreement and leave of the 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Does the member have leave?  Does the 

member have leave? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He said a point of order.  I thought I had 

a right to stand up and speak to a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — Oh, did he say . . . Oh, I'm sorry.  That's 

right, you do have.  Okay, the member is right — for once. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Health Reform 

 

Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And I am pleased 

to stand here today to make the following motion at the end of 

my remarks — a motion that will encourage our health care 

reform, that will promote our health care reform goals, and 

which deplores the attempts of the official opposition to 

destroy medicare in Saskatchewan through obstructionist 

tactics in the legislature and misleading messages in the 

countryside. 

 

As I prepared for this debate today, I went back to my 

education background to identify the problem and seek 

solutions.  I questioned, what is the official opposition really 

opposing?  What are the real issues in this debate?  And what 

as a government are we proposing and why?  There must be 

logic to the debate.  There must be fact, not fearmongering and 

misinformation. 

 

In the next few minutes I will set the facts before you; 

summarize why the government is proposing health care 

reform and what the reform is, and what the official opposition 

is opposing. 

 

And I suggest to the members opposite to listen, and to listen 

carefully.  Something as important as health care to the people 

of this province should not be used for political gain by fear 

and misunderstanding.  If you listen carefully and have a 

conscience, maybe then you will not be so afraid of change — 

change which will protect our health care system, not destroy 

it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1962 we showed North America how to create 

a publicly funded, publicly administered health care system 

which made core health care services available to all, 

regardless of income.  Thirty years later we embark on another 

reform, one which will show North America how to create the 

next generation of medicare; community-based, 

community-controlled health care services which not only treat 

illness, but encourage and promote healthier lifestyles. 

We call this the wellness approach to health.  The pioneers of 

medicare dreamed of this 30 years ago. 

 

And remember what Tommy Douglas said, and I quote:  When 

we began to plan medicare, we pointed out that it would be in 

two phases.  The first phase would be to remove the financial 

barrier between those giving the service and those receiving it.  

The second phase would be to reorganize and revamp the 

whole delivery system. 

 

And of course that's the big item, that's the big thing we haven't 

done yet.  And, Mr. Speaker, the second phase of health care 

reform is long overdue, and we must act on it now. 

 

So why do we need health care reform?  We have to modernize 

and reform the delivery of health care services.  In the last 30 

years just think of the changes which have occurred. 

 

Firstly, the high cost of new health care technology.  An 

example is the $1 million MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) 

machine for diagnostic purposes — $3 million to bring in, $1 

million a year to operate. 

 

Secondly, new and better medical techniques.  There's more 

day surgery.  A few years ago a bone cartilage operation may 

have taken weeks in a hospital bed, whereas today with 

orthopedic-type surgery, a person may be mobile in 48 hours. 

 

There are new health problems that we're facing, many due to 

environmental or occupational hazards which have occurred 

over the last 30 years. 

 

Fourthly, we are overgoverned.  There are more than 400 

different health agencies and boards and organizations looking 

after the needs of health care with little opportunity to integrate 

and to cooperate. 

 

Fifthly, we have reduced financial commitment of the federal 

government to health care services.  This year alone we have 

$500 million less federal money going to the province. 

 

Sixthly, there's better transportation, and there is changes in the 

demographics in the population of our province. 

 

So we know, Mr. Speaker — it is clear — we need to reform 

the health care system.  It must be cost-efficient and it must 

provide high quality. 

 

Then the question is: what kind of reform?  And we reject what 

the members opposite propose, which is no change, because no 

change means losing our health care system. 

 

We reject what is being done in New Brunswick where the 

Liberal government simply introduced legislation which 

basically expropriated the province's 51 hospitals from local 

communities and churches and then began to set about closing 

many of them down.  No health districts, no local input, no 

community needs assessment. 



1048 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1993 

(1515) 

 

We reject the approach taken by the Alberta Conservative 

government.  They have simply allowed the public health care 

system to remain as is, with no reform, and it has deteriorated 

to the point where companies are now setting up private profit 

clinics to provide certain medical services. 

 

You can get a quick appointment to get a MRI scan as long as 

you have $900 to pay for the test.  And as the Liberal leader in 

Alberta, Mr. Decore, said, he wants to see private profit 

hospitals and other care services. 

 

The privatization of health care we reject.  We reject these 

approaches because we remain committed to the principle of 

publicly funded and an administered health care system. 

 

So let me summarize, Mr. Speaker.  The health care system we 

have today is overburdened, in many ways maybe out of date.  

But in Saskatchewan when we're facing the financial situation, 

we also require new ways to do more with less. 

 

In short, Mr. Speaker, unless we reform the health care delivery 

system, we're in danger of losing it.  So we must reform it, and 

the task is ahead of us, and we're pushing hard to pass our new 

health care districts legislation so communities will have the 

legal framework under which they can join together to assess 

the health care needs of their district, work to reduce 

duplication and inefficiency, cooperate in the planning of a 

whole new range of health care services as quickly as possible.  

The Department of Health has officials ready to help but the 

impetus has to come from the local communities. 

 

The new budget begins the process of moving the delivery 

system away from its overemphasis on acute hospital care.  The 

budget encourages new approaches such as community-based 

wellness clinics.  Our province currently has more hospital 

beds per person than any other province.  The budget suggests 

bed targets which will see a reduction in the number of acute 

care hospital beds in favour of alternative services. 

 

These targets we are setting out are only guidelines intended to 

assist health districts in their planning process.  Such targets 

will not blindly apply to every district with no regard to local 

circumstances and priorities or unique situations within their 

district. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look at it as putting a puzzle together in our 

health care districts.  Once the district is formed an assessment 

is done and the process of health care services and delivery are 

put together to best meet the needs of the people in that district.  

There will be some juggling, there will be some alterations, but 

this is what we have to do.  We have to become efficient with 

our health care dollars. 

 

And so what is it that the Conservatives are opposing in 

forming health care districts?  Are they opposing democratic 

elections of district health boards?  Are 

they opposing the amalgamation of services to provide for cost 

efficiencies and less expenditure by district health boards?  Are 

they opposing allowing districts to determine how their 

revenues are spent?  Are they opposing annual meetings open 

to general public?  What are they opposed to in forming health 

care districts? 

 

I feel that they are opposed to the change, that they don't want 

the local input to assess the needs.  The formation of districts 

allows for assessment of people's needs, allows for adjustments 

of health services to meet those needs. 

 

Is this what they oppose?  Or is it the funding levels?  Of 

course we wish we did not have to reduce the funding levels in 

health care, but we had no choice.  And who is responsible for 

our limited choices?  Who ran up the $15 billion debt at the 

expense of all Saskatchewan people, jeopardizing our health 

care system?  And so, Mr. Speaker, I conclude the members 

opposite are responsible for the financial crisis that we're 

facing. 

 

But do we give up?  No.  We face the challenge.  We're 

responsible for our fiscal reality and to reform the delivery of 

health care so money can be well spent to secure health care for 

all of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: — Working together, we can accomplish a 

reform as enduring as the introduction of medicare itself.  But 

it's going to take the Saskatchewan spirit of cooperation and 

community to make it happen.  And our communities, in spite 

of some of the misinformation they've been given, are willing 

to work together with us to reform health care service delivery. 

 

We do face a big challenge and we have to work together to 

overcome it if we hope to secure a better future for ourselves 

and our children.  And so I move the following motion: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the Minister of Health to continue 

her efforts to ensure that Saskatchewan achieves the second 

generation of medicare, a second phase that will realize the 

goals of health reform, of community-based, 

community-controlled health care services; and further that 

this Assembly deplore the attempts of the official opposition 

to destroy medicare in Saskatchewan through obstructionist 

tactics in the legislature and misleading messages in the 

countryside. 

 

I so do move, and seconded by the member from Meadow 

Lake.  No, sorry.  Seconded by the member from Regina 

Wascana. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am proud to 

second the motion that is before us, presented by the member 

from Bengough-Milestone. 



April 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1049 

It's been a long time in coming to Saskatchewan when we talk 

about second generation, although, Mr. Speaker, second 

generation thinkers have been everywhere in Saskatchewan for 

a good number of years now and are not just thinkers that have 

sprung up within the last few months. 

 

We see second generation thinkers everywhere who believed 

what the previous premier of the province, Tommy Douglas, 

said when he said that the first generation of health care was 

put into place to remove the barriers between those who could 

afford to pay, between the sick and those who were delivering 

the services, so that we wouldn't have a two-tiered system of 

health care in this province — one for the rich and and one for 

the poor.  Publicly administered and publicly delivered health 

care system that's not based on anyone's ability to pay. 

 

And it's not something that the members opposite have really 

come to terms and grasped.  And you have to wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, when they are not coming forward and joining us in 

the second generation of reform, why they're doing that. 

 

Well, number one, they had a number of years, nine years in 

this province to put forward some reform measures and we 

didn't see it forthcoming.  What we saw is a complete lack of 

understanding about spreading the system out so far and so 

wide and so thinly that what they were indeed doing was 

putting the system in danger of complete collapse. 

 

If they didn't know that, that's one thing, Mr. Speaker.  But 

perhaps what they did know, Mr. Speaker, that spreading out 

the dollars so widely and so thinly, based on — as people on 

the W5 program said — based on petty political gain, then 

their method and their motive is far more sinister to the 

people's health in Saskatchewan in that perhaps it was leading 

to the idea, let's collapse the system that the CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation) NDP put in place and let's go 

forward with what their goal was all along and had been stated 

by the member from Estevan on the program on Sunday night 

— that the way to fix systems is perhaps to privatize systems. 

 

That's the real motive when they talk about not going forward 

with reform and that's the real motive when they don't consider 

themselves second generation thinkers and wanting to move 

forward in the formulation of health care districts and having 

people involved in the delivery of services. 

 

I think they're much like the Liberal leader in Alberta, 

Laurence Decore, who is now praising private medicine 

coming into Alberta.  And this must be the motivation of the 

members opposite in their zeal, in their blind zeal for 

privatization. 

 

We saw that elsewhere in the province over their last nine 

years, when they had people come over, and they spent a great 

deal of money having people come over from Margaret 

Thatcher's Britain to tell us how to privatize.  I'm sure that the 

message was carried 

forward and said, uh-huh, this is what we can do to health care 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Not while there are second-generation thinkers, and 

second-generation thinkers of followers of Tommy on this side 

of the House and governing the province of Saskatchewan, will 

we stand for the privatization of our health care. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: — What is second-generation thinking and 

reform thinking in the province of Saskatchewan?  Well reform 

and second-generation thinking speaks to the idea that health is 

much more than the absence of disease, but it speaks to how we 

address all of the issues that concern people.  How they address 

people in their own communities and their own constituencies 

is different from one community and one district to another 

district in the province.  Not everyone sees their needs being 

the same. 

 

And if the members have been out in rural Saskatchewan and 

been trying to listen rather than to disturb and to put 

fearmongering tactics and misinformation out to the public, 

they would hear that communities are ready to respond, 

because second-generation thinkers are out in rural 

Saskatchewan saying, you know, let's look at what's happening 

in Delisle. 

 

Perhaps let's look at what's happened in Prince Albert when 

they have a strong community clinic system and an approach to 

wellness, to coming together and talking about prevention 

rather than curative care as being the be-all and end-all in 

health care.  And they're saying it's working.  It's working. 

 

We've got bits and pieces of this working throughout the 

province.  We want to be there and we want to be involved.  

We don't want it imposed from Regina.  We in rural 

Saskatchewan know what's best in health care for our people.  

And we want to be there in the second-generation and reform 

of health care. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: — It's amazing to me, Mr. Speaker, when I 

come from a constituency where people are very close to the 

land in agricultural Saskatchewan and have relatives out in 

rural Saskatchewan, that they can try the power of politic of 

division in Saskatchewan.  Because it's no longer present and 

alive in Saskatchewan.  We're all in this together. 

 

Rural members are concerned and they want to know, and they 

have good reason to want to know what's going to happen 

within the next five years, as we work to closure of the Plains 

Health Centre.  And they should know and be part of the 

process and the public involvement meetings that are going to 

happen in that process. 

 

Rural people want to know because if it impacts on the cities, it 

impacts on them.  And urban people want to take care and 

concern for the people and say, now 



1050 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1993 

what can we give in the way of dollars and attention to the rural 

areas and say to help them convert to the uses that they want in 

those centres? 

 

Because it certainly . . . the shrouds over the emergency care 

facilities in the hospitals that we saw in Dinsmore, or saying 

that the facility hasn't delivered a baby in five years, why let 

people think that that's what dollars should be poured into?  

They know that that's wrong.  They see that happening there.  

They want to have services that their community needs and is 

asking for.  And through the thousands and thousands of 

citizens that have already been involved in the consultation 

process, they're saying, please help us go forward. 

 

As we're becoming new boards, we want you to tell us what's 

going to happen with acute emergency services in rural 

Saskatchewan.  And people, when we tell them what's going to 

happen say, well that's what we've got now except better.  We 

can adjust to these changes as long as our fears are allayed in 

the emergency care area and as long as we're knowing in our 

constituency and in our area that we'll have strong services 

when we need them for the delivery of a heart, long-term 

disease and illness. When we're in need of curative care, it'll be 

there for the residents of Saskatchewan.  When you need 

emergency care, it will be there for the residents of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And we all wish that the members opposite would stop putting 

the fear into people when it's not necessary and doesn't have to 

be there.  And they know that. 

 

(1530) 

 

Well what else are they opposed to if they're talking about not 

being second-generation thinkers — again the democratic 

process.  When we're talking about people being able to elect 

from their local areas people who will most represent them on 

the local district health boards, people in their own community, 

who know their needs, being elected. 

 

We, saying the members opposite, again are against the 

democratic process of election to occur in health care.  That's 

not what they said when we looked at reinstating the ward 

system in urban and rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Well what else could it be that then they're trying to oppose in 

second-generation thinking or the reform that needs to go 

forward?  It might be that the amalgamation of services that 

would provide cost efficiencies and be less expensive to run by 

the district health boards themselves is what they're against.  

And again we have to ask why. 

 

Number one, because they really don't understand the system 

that would work in a cost-effective way.  We haven't seen them 

understand that in the last nine years.  It was: let's pour money 

out there into bricks and mortar and hold onto it, but we won't 

provide any services out there. 

People are no longer fooled by that and in the first place they 

weren't.  They say that's cheap political theatrics.  We want 

more.  We want services out here and better services out in 

rural Saskatchewan, delivered in a cost-effective manner. 

 

Well maybe it's that they're opposed to the minister giving 

grants to people in rural Saskatchewan.  But if that's the case 

let's look at local government.  They're the people who best 

adjust the money to the needs of the local area.  They do that in 

education, they do that in municipalities, and they do that in a 

very reasoned way. 

 

The municipality I came from is a very cost-efficient 

mechanism, and evaluation is immediate if it's not so in rural 

Saskatchewan, because people are very close to the people at 

local government level. 

 

The same can happen for the health districts.  They would be 

very open to evaluation at the local level through public 

meetings, allowing the public to view their by-laws, their 

district by-laws, and so on. 

 

So again, if that's what the Conservatives are opposing you 

have to wonder why.  And it's certainly going to be a hard 

message for them to sell in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Well we saw a program on Sunday night that looks at what has 

been happening in rural Saskatchewan, and they said 8 

hospitals for every 16,500 people.  To have Toronto match that, 

Mr. Speaker, they'd have to open a 10-bed hospital every 3 

months for the next . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order.  The member's time has 

elapsed. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased to stand and debate this motion that's before this 

Assembly, although I find it interesting that the mover has not 

taken the time to remain and give a few moments to discuss the 

motion — the original mover — and one has to wonder if 

maybe the impact of the cuts that are taking place out in the 

riding of Shaunavon are not having an impact. 

 

And it would seem to me when you look at the motion before 

the Assembly and this motion commending the government for 

what it's doing, and yet what I'm hearing in my community — I 

heard it at a trade fair in Wawota the other day, Mr. Minister — 

everybody in the rural areas that I've talked to, even though 

they indicate they are not against rationalization, realize we 

must look at ways and means in which we can made our 

system more effective, they feel this motion talks about the 

minister . . . Let's see: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the Minister of Health continue her 

efforts to ensure that Saskatchewan achieves the second 

generation of medicare, a second phase that will realize the 

goals of health reform, of community-based, 

community-controlled health care services . . . 

 

And that's the big problem we have, Mr. Speaker, is 



April 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1051 

the fact that the motion talks about community-based and 

community-controlled, and yet what we're seeing is there's a 

diminishing involvement of community.  And many people are 

really concerned.  They're wondering about what the 

government really means with this wellness model, what they 

are going to have at the end of the day, what impact will they 

have on this government.  And as we're going to see tomorrow, 

Mr. Speaker, and as you have seen in the debate that has taken 

place over the past number of days, people right across this 

province, from every corner of the province, are raising 

concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me refer to a meeting just last evening in the 

community of Grenfell.  The problem that people have and the 

problem that this government is having right now . . . and 

they're patting themselves on the back and yet they have not 

laid out a clear picture so the community can understand what 

the Minister of Health, what the government means by 

community-based health care centres. 

 

Instead they find it more convenient, while on one hand a 

couple of weeks ago the minister continually told us that the 

regional boards would make decisions about who provides the 

health care, what communities would have hospitals or care 

home beds, the other day the minister then again retracted on 

that and told 52 communities that they were losing their health 

care.  So people are really concerned. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the motion before us . . . And 

I just want to reiterate the fact that even today a number of 

government members have indicated that as an opposition we 

have stood here totally opposed to changes in the health care . . 

. (inaudible) . . . and want to let people know and let the 

government members know, if they haven't heard it — and 

maybe they should read Hansard and some of our speeches — 

and they'll realize that we have indeed spoken about the fact 

that rationalization of the system is something we must work 

towards. 

 

But we've also brought out the concern and the fact that in the 

throne speech this government talked about openness, talked 

about accountability, talked about taking the time to really go 

out there and converse with people.  Unfortunately they haven't 

really laid out a game plan by which they can sit down so that 

people get a better, a good understanding of what is taking 

place. 

 

And as we found in Grenfell last evening, as the people came 

and they started the meeting discussing the fact that if they sat 

down and threw out some suggestions and didn't become very 

angry, that indeed maybe the government would take the time 

to listen and make some changes.  And maybe the member 

responsible for Indian Head-Wolseley can verify some of what 

I'm saying here today. 

 

But what I am saying, Mr. Speaker, as I understand, the debate 

took place for a while, but as the debate was taking place and 

as people began to see that the government was more than 

determined to close the hospital in Grenfell, the frustration of 

people 

began to show.  And the frustration came about because some 

people felt that their MLA had indicated to them that they 

wouldn't lose their hospital because of the size of their 

community.  And yet as the . . . I believe it was the Minister of 

Social Services was there, had indicated that no, the 

government was committed to downsizing health care and 

downsizing in that meant eliminating hospitals even in 

communities like Grenfell, which means a significant blow to 

the economy of that community.  So that's what we're saying, 

Mr. Speaker — the uncertainty that is out there, and we've 

asked the government to lay out a clear plan. 

 

In fact it would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, while these 

communities are all gathering around trying to establish areas, 

on one hand one member of the department or department 

personnel would say, well a region of about 14,000 people may 

be large enough; on the other hand, another department official 

would say no, you better look at it at about 30,000 people. 

 

Well why not let communities know?  Let the province of 

Saskatchewan know.  Let rural Saskatchewan and urban 

Saskatchewan know exactly what you mean by regional 

districts.  Maybe even lay out some boundaries and then let 

people work around them rather than having everybody pulling 

back and forth, and that's what we're seeing, and the 

uncertainty that's created out there. 

 

And I find it interesting that the debate we're taking place and 

all caught up in today is brought forward by a government that 

not that long ago . . . and I just want to refer to an article in the 

Leader-Post, Friday, April 16, some comments from this 

article.  It says: 

 

 . . . no party in this province is as responsible for running up 

the bill on this unaffordable health infrastructure . . . (as) the 

NDP. 

 

 The party that resisted rural hospital closures by the Thatcher 

government in the 1960s, added to the hospital infrastructure 

when it was in power in the 1970s and absolutely demanded 

that the PCs do the same in the 1980s is now left with an 

unaffordable legacy in the 1990s. 

 

And anybody who was here in the last session from '86 to 1991 

knows exactly the stand that many members took on this side 

of the House.  In fact the article says: 

 

 It was the year then (that) health critic Louise Simard argued 

much more had to be spent on health care because 

Saskatchewan had the second-lowest per capita spending on 

hospitals in the nation.  (She some how neglected to mention 

that the largest reason for that was because we had the 

highest number of hospitals per capita in the nation.) 

 

And now all of a sudden, while the former minister was talking 

about the fact of the number of hospital beds that were in the 

province and the reason that we should be looking at ways of 

rationalizing our system 



1052 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1993 

and it was wrong then, all of a sudden it's right today.  And one 

may wonder why we had the cynicism out there in the public. 

 

It would seem to me that if the NDP when they were 

campaigning in 1991 really believed that and would have taken 

a close look at where we were in health care and where we 

were in the deficit even though they knew it was there, and if 

they would have laid out a plan, possibly the numerical 

numbers in this House might be considerably different if 

people had an idea prior to the election of what was really 

going to take place afterwards. 

 

In fact the Minister of Health prides herself on what she's doing 

today, but she used to stand up and bring cases of individuals 

before this Assembly and the problems people were facing 

because the government of the day wasn't putting enough 

money into health care. 

 

And I quote again from the article: 

 

 Simard paraded case after case before the Tories — including 

the death of four-year-old Glenda Hall who bled to death on 

the way to Regina because she couldn't be operated on in 

Assiniboia — as examples why rural health care had to be 

maintained. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we're all aware of the letter that the Premier, 

when he was in opposition in the Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 

by-election, the letter he brought forward and told the people of 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, don't elect a PC candidate for your 

riding or you will lose all your hospitals.  And yet what do we 

find today? 

 

And it was interesting to note, even in the debate as the private 

members' motions or Bills were coming forward that the 

member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg realized the significance 

of the debate and stood up and actually I believe as when he 

was saying yes to the motion about the closure of the Climax 

hospital, he really realized that it was significant to him and in 

fact wanted to show his support for his communities, because I 

believe he wants to represent his communities as well as he can 

and to the best of his ability. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that so many MLAs in 

this Assembly, so many MLAs on the government side of the 

House haven't taken the time or didn't, on numerous Bills that 

were brought forward in support of health services - 

_ not specifically buildings, but services in their communities 

— didn't take the time to stand up for their small communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's so much more that I could enter into, but I 

realize this is a limited debate, and I'd like to move an 

amendment to the motion before us.  And so I move, seconded 

by the member from Kindersley: 

 

 That all the words after the word "Assembly" be deleted and 

the following substituted therefor: 

 demands that the Minister of Health heed the petitions of the 

people of Saskatchewan to postpone our health care changes, 

changes which are causing great unfairness through 

cabinet-based, minister-controlled health care services; 

 

 and further that this Assembly deplores the complicity of the 

following MLAs in the destruction of medicare in their own 

constituencies: the MLA for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, the 

MLA from Bengough-Milestone, the MLA for Canora, the 

MLA for Cut Knife-Lloydminster, the MLA for Indian 

Head-Wolseley, the MLA for Kelvington-Wadena, the MLA 

for Kinistino, the MLA for Last Mountain-Touchwood, the 

MLA for Meadow Lake, the MLA for Melville, the MLA for 

Nipawin, the MLA for Pelly, the MLA for Quill Lakes, the 

MLA for Redberry, the MLA for Rosetown-Elrose, the MLA 

for Saltcoats, the MLA for Shaunavon, the MLA for 

Shellbrook-Torch River, the MLA for Turtleford, and the 

MLA for Weyburn. 

 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's certainly my 

pleasure to enter the debate this afternoon, although the debate 

this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, as we understood it, was going to 

be moved by a different person than actually moved.  And we 

have to wonder why, Mr. Speaker.  Why did that member from 

Shaunavon decline to want to speak on this important issue . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Exactly, Mr. Speaker.  He 

disappeared out of the legislature right before . . . vanished 

right before . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order.  The member knows that he is 

out of order.  And I ask the member to please be careful to 

follow parliamentary procedure in this House. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Certainly I withdraw 

those comments, Mr. Speaker, but the fact of the matter is, I 

guess, even though the member from Shaunavon did move this, 

he had to do the same sort of thing that he did in Kincaid. 

 

If anyone would like to know what he did in Kincaid the other 

night, maybe I'd just like to bring everyone up to date a little 

bit.  In Kincaid, Saskatchewan, a community within his 

constituency he had to have — get this — he had to have an 

RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) escort to get out of 

town.  Can you imagine that, Mr. Speaker.  That's what took 

place in a town within his own constituency.  He had to have 

an RCMP escort to be able to get out of that meeting.  That's 

how strongly people feel about health care in this province, Mr. 

Speaker.  That's how strongly the people of the south-west are 

opposed to what he is saying to them in those communities. 



April 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1053 

And that's why, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe he wants to speak 

to this important resolution — because he knows the people of 

his constituency do not agree with him.  They do not agree with 

him, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I feel sorry for the member from Bengough-Milestone for 

having to stand and take over the debate in his place, Mr. 

Speaker.  I feel sorry for her.  And the reason I feel sorry for 

her is really quite clear, Mr. Speaker.  Not only is the member 

from Bengough-Milestone had to stand in for that member but 

she is losing every single hospital in her constituency.  Every 

single hospital, by the time this health care reform is 

completed, will be gone from Bengough-Milestone.  

Bengough, Pangman, Radville — all three hospitals that are 

currently in her constituency will be gone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it's no wonder, it's no wonder she was having difficulty 

enunciating the speech that was dropped in front of her.  It's no 

wonder she was having difficulty saying those things.  Because 

she knows how profoundly it's going to affect her constituency.  

She knows how profoundly the people of her constituency feel 

about the closure of hospitals in her area. 

 

Bengough, Pangman, and Radville are the hospitals that she's 

going to lose, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Milestone. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — And probably Milestone as well.  Milestone as 

well, my seat mate confirms.  So every hospital in her 

constituency is going to be lost. 

 

And I also feel sorry for the member from Regina Wascana 

Plains for having to speak on this important issue.  Cast into a 

debate, cast into a debate that is so fundamental to rural 

Saskatchewan, and what do they do?  They put up a member 

from Regina to speak on it.  An obvious expert on rural health 

care.  Nice and close to a hospital in Regina, but yet she seems 

to want to and will, I predict, vote along with the government 

on the closure of hospitals in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

If this health care reform goes through, I will lose two hospitals 

in my constituency.  The member from Rosetown-Elrose will 

lose six hospitals in his constituency.  Four in 

Bengough-Milestone.  They're falling by the wayside all over 

the place. 

 

And it was interesting to note, Mr. Speaker — very, very 

interesting to note — that when we today proposed to move a 

number of Bills forward in this legislature to restore health care 

to communities all over rural Saskatchewan, every single NDP 

member that was here, every single NDP member that voted 

was opposed to restoring health care in those communities.  

Every single one of them — even though, Mr. Speaker, some 

of the hospital closures that are about to happen were in their 

constituency. 

 

And the only one, Mr. Speaker, the only one that was having 

second thoughts about it was the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg.  He almost had a Freudian slip and 

said yes to restoring health care, but then he 

realized, then he realized the wrath of the government would 

come down on him and he changed his mind and voted no.  

The only one that decided to do that was him up in the corner 

over there, and we're thankful that you at least thought about it 

for a second, sir — at least thought about it for a second. 

 

And not only that, Mr. Speaker, I want to also say that we were 

surprised initially, surprised initially that the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone abstained from the votes.  But we 

realized later on, as she came to her senses and voted in favour 

of restoring health care to Climax, we appreciate the support 

that she gave us on that Bill.  After having an opportunity to 

think it over, she realized the error of her ways and voted in 

favour of restoring health care to Climax. 

 

And we were very glad to see that, Mr. Speaker.  We were 

very, very happy to see that, and we were almost, almost ready 

to congratulate the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, but 

he realized that he couldn't possibly vote against his own 

colleagues; couldn't possibly vote in favour of his constituents; 

couldn't possibly vote in favour of the people in his 

constituency, even though during the election campaign he 

promised, solemnly promised to the people of 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that he would build a hospital in 

Assiniboia for them. 

 

He promised that, Mr. Speaker, but he didn't do it.  Not only 

did he not do it, but you, sir, are going to lose hospitals in your 

constituency too.  And it would be interesting if the medical 

doctor from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg would enter this debate, 

Mr. Speaker, and let us know which hospitals in your area are 

targeted.  Which hospitals are targeted in his area now, I 

wonder, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an extremely important issue.  There's been 

public meetings all over this province.  The people of Eston, 

for example, had 1,600 people out to a public meeting.  The 

community only has 1,300.  There's only 1,300 people in the 

community and yet surrounding residents came to show their 

support and the entire community turned out, just as they 

turned out at Eatonia at the opening of the hospital there last 

summer, just as they turned out . . . and the member from 

Biggar knows that because he was there that day. 

 

I wonder if he will also preside over the decommissioning of 

that hospital when it happens.  I wonder if he will be there that 

day when they decide to permanently lock the door after these 

changes, these destructive changes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the minister of Community Services, it was interesting to 

note — and, Mr. Speaker, I have attended a number of these 

health care meetings that are taking place around the province 

— and it was interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that at the health 

care meeting in Kindersley, the member for Melfort, the 

minister of Community Services, stood up and said, Mr. 

Speaker, that there was a huge package of information that 

went out to everybody on this.  Rural health boards, MLAs, 

everybody got huge packages of 



1054 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1993 

information and they all know exactly what the government's 

planning.  They know all about wellness; they know all about 

everything. 

 

And the people . . . It was funny, Mr. Speaker, the people that 

were on those health boards said: but, Madam Minister, we 

didn't receive anything from you.  How can that be, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

The member from Melfort says that there was huge packages 

of information sent out on this wellness and health care reform, 

and everybody in the province should be informed on it; 

everybody should know exactly what the plans are of this 

government because we've sent out information.  And yet 

health care provider after health care provider at that meeting 

in Kindersley said no, we received no information on this; we 

don't know what the government is planning for us; we don't 

believe what the government is saying.  That's what the people 

out there are saying about you folks.  That's what the people are 

saying with respect to your wellness plan.  They don't believe 

you any longer. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, I attended a meeting in Kerrobert — 

600 people at that meeting; 600 people at the meeting in 

Kerrobert.  And, Mr. Speaker, what happened at that meeting?  

There was people standing up, moving up to the mike in a 

public meeting and saying, Mr. Speaker, that they had worked 

for the NDP for their entire life.  They had worked for the NDP 

Party, they had worked for to get this government elected.  One 

lady said she probably worked as hard or harder than any 

individual in this entire province to get you people elected.  

And then she went on to say she was ashamed of you . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order.  The member's time has 

elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  When I 

listened to the member opposite from Kindersley talking about 

thinking of things, I suggest they would have been a lot . . . the 

health care system would have been a lot better off if they had 

thought about things in the 1980s as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: — Also when I listened to the members talking 

and think about wellness, I also am certainly reminded that 

they are not the picture of wellness in many of the remarks that 

they make either. 

 

I was at three meetings this past weekend, Mr. Speaker, and I 

was horrified to find that many of the members opposite has so 

distorted the facts, Mr. Speaker, that people actually believed 

that their facilities were closing. 

 

I was in St. Walburg and in Loon Lake and in Goodsoil, and 

when I met with the staff there, Mr. Speaker, they actually 

believed that the facility, the doors were going to be locked as 

of December 1.  After 

sitting down with them and explaining to them that this wasn't 

in fact going to happen, there was a great deal of relief on their 

behalf. 

 

They told me about many of the older people in the community 

who had lost a lot of sleep over this and were just absolutely 

desperate and terrified by this.  And I think it's disgusting, Mr. 

Speaker, that from the members opposite they would spread 

these kinds of stories in our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is absolutely committed to 

preserving health care in Saskatchewan.  We are not going to 

turn health care into free enterprise . . . turn it over to free 

enterprise or for profit to private corporations.  The Liberals 

and the Tories opposite, with respect to health care and the 

changes, have never accepted the concept of reform in the 

health care system. 

 

Unlike the Tories, we are not going to give up health care.  In 

spite of the horrible mess that we are faced with, Mr. Speaker, 

it is our intention to make health care a priority.  There are 52 

communities, Mr. Speaker, that were affected recently by the 

cuts that we made.  Of the 520 towns, cities, and villages in 

Saskatchewan, 378 don't have health care facilities at all right 

now, Mr. Speaker.  That's hospitals, integrated facilities, or 

special care homes. 

 

People in Saskatchewan have always travelled long distances 

to have health care beyond the normal doctor visits.  The 

Tories have overbuilt health care facilities, Mr. Speaker.  They 

spent money on construction rather than on services.  Some of 

the facilities that are affected were not needed at all and were 

just built for their own political interests.  The Tories' attitude 

towards health care, Mr. Speaker, has been purely political.  

Construction contracts were handed out as political rewards to 

their supporters.  New Democrats are taking these measures 

because they are absolutely necessary to save medicare, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Liberal response to medicare is, and always have been, 

deterrent fees and health care premiums.  These changes are 

not based on the ability to pay, and are actually a tax on the 

sick and the poor.  As well, premiums would likely be between, 

somewhere between, 500 and $1,000 per family.  People will 

not, and I emphasize not, be put out onto the street by health 

care or hospital conversions. 

 

In all of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, only 83 people who are in 

the hospital right now in acute care beds will be affected; 83 

people, and 52 of those 83 people, Mr. Speaker, currently live 

in communities that already have alternate facilities. 

 

People tell us and myself all the time, Mr. Speaker, that health 

care needs to be reformed.  The cuts made were not aimed at 

specific towns or districts.  Costs per patients in small towns in 

10 beds or less run the same as for large, high-tech hospitals in 

the city but with far fewer services.  Health care, Mr. Speaker, 

in Saskatchewan needs to be reformed.  The members 



April 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1055 

opposite are trying to create division by saying that rural 

people only get a small percentage of the health care funding.  

That simply is not true and is destructive. 

 

While it is true that Regina and Saskatoon get 80 per cent of 

the hospitalization funding, it must be remembered that 45 per 

cent of the cities' patients are rural residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people ask what wellness is all about.  Wellness 

is about democracy, it's about rationalization, it's about 

preventative health care versus treatment or intensive care, it's 

about community, and it's about a holistic approach. 

 

With respect to democracy, we took our plan, Mr. Speaker, out 

to the people of Saskatchewan and asked for their input.  We 

asked them to form their districts.  We asked them for their 

opinions and their ideas. 

 

(1600) 

 

With respect to rationalization, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote 

from the Leader-Post, Tuesday, May 12, 1992: 

 

 With about four per cent of the nation's population, the 

province has 10 per cent of its hospitals: 134 hospitals with 

7,521 beds, one hospital for every 7,463 persons and a 

hospital bed for every 133.  To maximize hospital use, every 

man, woman and child in Saskatchewan would be required to 

spend 2.7 days of every year in hospital.  In fact, many of our 

rural hospitals are . . . nursing homes funded as hospitals.  

Many of the urban hospital beds simply do not get used. 

 

 Used or unused, hospital beds cost $568,067,462 annually; an 

average of $207 per bed per day.  Reducing this expenditure 

by one-third will, of itself, result in an annual saving of 

$189,355,821 — a far greater gain than revenues from 

premiums. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, speaking from a national perspective, I 

quote from an article here, talking about rationalization:  

Rationing of health care or sickness care is already implicit.  

Patients are given priority in intensive care units.  The badly 

burnt teenager gets in ahead of the 90-year-old with congestive 

heart failure.  A new hip that will last for 30 years may not 

necessarily be given to an 80-year-old patient — she gets one 

that's good for only 10 years.  Hospitals are establishing 

surgical quotas and providing . . . and provincial drug plans are 

eliminating selected pharmaceuticals from their subsidized 

plans, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to tell you a story, Mr. Speaker, very briefly about 

something that affected my family, and it's with respect to my 

grandmother who in the 1930s . . . and some of the members 

opposite may remember some of the stories that took place in 

the 1930s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My grandmother had a ruptured appendicitis. 

Appendicitis, for those who don't know, in the 1930s was very, 

very serious.  They weren't sure what to do so they rushed her 

to the hospital.  The doctor wouldn't take her in at the time 

because they didn't have any money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

After lengthy consultation with the doctor, the doctor decided 

of his own free will that he would take my grandmother into 

the hospital, but they did have to provide guarantees that they 

could generate and raise funds.  After the operation, and my 

grandmother spent many, many months in hospital, they 

mortgaged all of the land that they had and then over years and 

years, only then were they able to pay it back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't want to go back to that type of a health 

care system.  I don't want to go back to a system that allows for 

privatization, that allows for the free enterprise to take over 

nursing homes and take over hospitals and take over our health 

care system.  Mr. Speaker, I want a core health care system that 

provides universal care to all Saskatchewan people and to all 

Canadians. 

 

My goal is to save medicare, Mr. Speaker, and I want to be part 

of a government that makes decisions that serve the needs of all 

Saskatchewan people, and that's what we're doing.  We are 

correcting the mistakes of the past and in spite of the limited 

resources we are having, we are going to save medicare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to close with a quote from Poundmaker, 

and it goes like this: 

 

 It would be so much easier just to fold our hands and not 

make this fight . . . to say I, one man, can do nothing. 

 

 I grow afraid only when I see people thinking and acting like 

this. 

 

 We all know the story about the man who sat beside the trail 

too long, and then it grew over and he could never find his 

way again. 

 

 We can never forget what has happened, but we cannot go 

back nor can we just sit beside the trail. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I speak in opposition 

to the amendment but will certainly support the motion as put 

forward by the member from Bengough-Milestone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will be supporting 

the motion and . . . or the amendment to the motion and voting 

against the major motion, rule 17. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have with me a file of newspaper 

clippings from across the province of Saskatchewan that are 

condemning the NDP administration on health care.  People are 

in shock.  People are angry.  People have said those that 



1056 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1993 

designed this must have had mud for brains.  People are 

looking at their very communities folding up — first the 

hospital, then the school, then the church, and then the town. 

 

And the NDP have a motion forward here bragging about what 

they're doing to people in Saskatchewan in terms to health care.  

It's unbelievable that they'd even put forward the motion, let 

alone have somebody second it and talk about it.  What is there 

to be happy about when your town has been unilaterally told 

that they're going to close your hospital?  There's nothing 

happy about that and nothing even positive. 

 

And then you're told it's going to save $5 million this year — 

$5 million.  The NDP administration has $365 million in 

Cameco shares that they're just sitting and holding.  They're 

just holding.  They're shareholders in uranium, shareholders in 

uranium and they say: no, we're going to close 52 rural 

hospitals for $5 million this year.  And even if we put it all 

together, you're going to be in a position where you might save 

$20 million, and that's 1.3 per cent of your health budget.  And 

you've just gone out and said, I'll just axe these communities 

and hit them. 

 

Look what the people are saying: shock and anger at the NDP.  

Shock and anger.  This isn't about money.  You're not saving 

enough money to make a difference.  This is about the fact that 

you are not prepared to take it on the chin and say, I guess 

we're going to have to change our ways to create economic 

activity in the province of Saskatchewan and save health care.  

No, we're going to go out and we're going to axe rural health 

care. 

 

Half the population of this province lives in rural 

Saskatchewan, and they are in shock and they're angry and 

hundreds . . . in fact 12 to 1,500 people will show up and boo 

the cabinet ministers. 

 

And you have a resolution in here bragging about your new 

policy.  This isn't about money.  Hard to believe.  You say, oh 

I've got to squeeze a few little pennies and dimes out of these 

rural people — seniors, farmers, young people, all kinds of 

rural people.  You say, I'll just squeeze a few pennies out of 

them.  It doesn't matter if their town goes.  I'm going to get a 

few pennies. 

 

And then ironically, do you know what . . . and despicably 

what we heard today is: they're going to cancel the children's 

dental program for all the ordinary people in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Certainly the rural people don't get it.  They're 

going to close all our hospitals but they forgot to tell you, 

whoops, if you're an MLA, if you're on the government side 

and you're part of a little clique, then you get to keep your 

dental program.  And in fact you can even have it propped up 

for your kids until they're 25 years old — not the ordinary 

people. 

 

This new bunch of so-called socialists have people in shock 

and are angry . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — The decision's been made. 

Mr. Devine: — And the members opposite say, the decision's 

made; they don't want to hear about it.  That's why they want to 

rush through it.  I'll tell you what's over.  Your political career 

is over, young fellow.  Your political career is dust. 

 

You go to the meetings and you defend this when hundreds and 

thousands of people are going to be here tomorrow in shock 

and anger and saying no to the NDP.  You didn't get elected on 

this.  You didn't get elected on this.  You didn't have the 

courage to campaign on this.  You promised a $400 million tax 

cut and more money for health and education; that's how you 

got elected.  And now what happens? 

 

An Hon. Member: — We dealt with reality. 

 

Mr. Devine: — You dealt with reality?  You didn't tell the 

people the truth.  They wouldn't have voted for this.  And they 

sit there and laugh at the people now.  They laugh at them.  

They laugh at the people.  And they laugh at people who would 

even stand up and speak on their behalf. 

 

Well you get out on the steps tomorrow and you laugh.  You 

get out and laugh tomorrow at anybody you like, and you see 

how it goes over.  Okay?  We'll tell them you laughed.  People 

that are watching television know that the NDP are laughing at 

them. 

 

An Hon. Member: — We're laughing at you. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Yes, that's because I'm speaking on behalf of 

the people. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. 

 

Mr. Devine: — You get out and lip off to the folks out there 

tomorrow on the steps of the legislature.  You tell them how 

you're defending their towns and villages. 

 

SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) is meeting and they are 

upset, and members of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses are 

going to be out there on the steps of the legislature condemning 

the NDP administration. 

 

Dental coverage is criticized, says the paper.  Children of 

MLAs are insured and normal people aren't.  How do you feel 

about that?  It's not true?  Have you cut off the public?  Yes.  

Do you still have it?  Yes.  Well explain it.  You didn't here in 

the House. 

 

You cut off the public in the dental program.  That's true.  

They're cut off.  And yet you can still get it.  So you have a 

two-tiered dental program: one for the ordinary people, 

particularly those that live in the country, and one for 

yourselves that live here in the city.  And the people don't like 

it. 

 

Look at Weyburn.  The rumours of closure worry Weyburn 

people.  They don't like it.  If you go to Grenfell, if you go to 

Beechy, if you go to Leader, if you go to Mankota, you almost 

have to have an armed guard for the NDPers to get out of the 

room.  They 



April 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1057 

don't like you and they're not going to vote for you, and why 

would you even run for this? 

 

Hospital cuts 1967 versus 1993 — you're going back to the 

Thatcher days.  You got more cuts and more harm to rural 

communities than any political person in Saskatchewan's 

history.  And you're sitting there with a motion that condones 

this?  Why would you support it for $5 million?  You could 

save that kind of money if you just didn't take the dental plan.  

Don't use the dental plan . . . anybody over there, don't use it 

and keep your friends and say no, no, no, we won't do this. 

 

Editorial's right.  It's the end of social democracy.  The 

CCF-NDP really don't care any more at all.  Look at that.  Your 

friend Conway says the socialists aren't really socialists any 

more.  They don't like . . . You can look at the clock.  I know, 

you've cut everybody off so they can only speak for a few 

minutes. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It's rule 16. 

 

Mr. Devine: — It's rule 16, Mr. Speaker, and they're still 

looking at the clock.  They've got so habitual now in looking at 

the clock, maybe we can shut up the members of the 

opposition.  Look to the clock.  Well why don't you stare at the 

clock?  I'll tell you, after the next election you'll have lots of 

time to stare at clocks.  Okay?  You can stare at the clock all 

day, all night. 

 

You say, well I'll have to . . . won't have to have any limit on 

my time because you'll have lots of time on your hands.  That's 

what they're going to say because of the hypocritical nature.  

You didn't campaign on it.  And then it says, whoops.  There's 

more and more taxes under the NDP, more taxes. 

 

You campaigned on no new taxes, cutting the PST (provincial 

sales tax).  What have you got?  You've increased taxes from 7 

to 9 per cent, and when you couldn't really balance the budget 

you put the tax on the back of the ratepayers, $450 million over 

four years on RMs (rural municipalities) and urban ratepayers.  

And this is your claim to fame?  And then you run around and 

you close rural hospitals. 

 

Look at this: despite wellness model Eston is sick with anxiety.  

How's that?  Why didn't you read that in your motion?  Why 

didn't you read that in your motion?  The people are sick with 

anxiety because the NDP administration . . . You didn't tell 

them the truth in '91, you're not telling them the truth now, and 

even when you make the cuts you save a little kitty for yourself 

and your children but not the public. 

 

And they're saying they've never seen such political hypocrisy 

in their life.  And you stand in here and have the gall to 

condone and clap with each other, and put a motion forward 

and say, aren't we doing really good. 

 

What have you added to the deficit?  The debt was 14 billion 

when you took office; now it's 15.6.  You've added 1.6 billion 

to it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes and he says my interest 

payments. 

Did you make any promises?  In 1991 you promised 400 

million in tax cuts, and you knew what the debt was.  You got 

elected on the biggest political story in Saskatchewan's history.  

You said, we don't need the PST (provincial sales tax).  And 

you knew it.  And you knew it and you said: oh it's okay, we'll 

offer it any way. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order.  The member's time has 

elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'm very 

pleased today to rise in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and will be 

opposing the amendment and will certainly be supporting the 

amendment of the motion . . . supporting the motion, Mr. 

Speaker, that speaks to the fact of our government and the 

minister continuing her efforts in ensuring that Saskatchewan 

achieves the second generation of medicare and the second 

phase that will realize the goals of health reform, 

community-based health control health care services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I'd like to attach myself closely to the 

health care reform particularly from the point of view that over 

the last several years have had a close working relationship 

with the health care department and health care services, 

particularly in the areas of home care, served on hospital 

boards, level 1 and 2 facilities, and had the opportunity of 

serving on a special committee reporting to the deputy 

minister, Mr. George Loewen, for a period of time under the 

Tory administration. 

 

And as I listened to the debate in this legislature over the last 

few days as it pertained to the district Bill, the members 

opposite seem to associate themselves around two particular 

issues in my mind, one of those being that health care reform in 

this province is really not necessary, and the second being that 

they talked about the process in what we're using in terms of 

bringing health care reform in this province. 

 

And it concerns me to a large degree, Mr. Speaker, that for two 

days nearly the members opposite don't participate, don't get 

involved in debate.  Instead they ring the bells, obstruct the 

work of the House at a time when Saskatchewan people are 

saying that they want to see reform not only in health but 

reform, Mr. Speaker, in this particular Assembly.  Public 

taxpayers' dollars wasted, speaking out the clock. Mr. Speaker, 

when we have major issues like health care reform that we're 

dealing with in this province, we have members opposite . . . 

work to do, members opposite refusing to participate in the 

debate. 

 

It is well demonstrated in this province, Mr. Speaker, that per 

capita we have too many hospital beds, and the example 

particularly of acute care beds in this province.  And this 

knowledge, Mr. Speaker, has been known to me for better than 

two years.  And I 



1058 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1993 

remember that vividly, Mr. Speaker, because the members 

opposite whose individuals were responsible for delivery of 

service through the Department of Health visited our health 

care facility in Yorkton, the hospital board.  And they said to us 

that we have too many acute care beds in Saskatchewan, 

particularly in the regional hospitals.  And they said to us that 

what we need to do is we need to reduce funding to the 

regional hospitals. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who said that? 

 

Mr. Serby: — The Tories said that, the administration of the 

Tories.  They said that we had too many hospital beds in 

Saskatchewan.  And so what we did, Mr. Speaker, in April of 

1991 we reduced the funding.  We saw reductions of funding to 

hospital beds, acute hospital beds, to regional hospitals across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is well-known that institutional costs and the 

treating and convalescing people is far more expensive and less 

effective in community-based services.  People recover, we 

know, and sustain themselves for much better and quicker if 

they're in their own homes or they're in their own communities, 

and not in institutions. 

 

Accordingly, community-based treatment is being 

implemented not only in Saskatchewan, but all across North 

America, Mr. Speaker, today.  And we see it happening in 

mental health services.  We see apartment living programs.  

We see it happening through home care services. 

 

In 1980, Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic government 

implemented a home care program which is a model today, not 

only in Saskatchewan, but across the country, leading the way 

in health care services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the mid-'80s that supported, Mr. Speaker, throughout the 

1990s . . . or throughout the 1980s by the Tory administration 

recognizing . . . them recognizing that home care services were 

essential and assisted in broadening some of those services, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want to bring to the attention of this House, Mr. Speaker, in 

the mid-'80s, the Tory administration closing the North Park 

Centre in Prince Albert, an institution for long-term care of 

mentally ill folks.  And they proposed at that time, Mr. 

Speaker, to move those folks to the Valley View Centre and to 

a number of communities across the province.  The rationale, 

Mr. Speaker, was that institutions were too expensive to 

operate.  They were too costly, and the residents could do 

better if they were served in community — special care homes, 

family homes, and group homes across the province; Mr. 

Speaker, a Tory administration telling us that institutional care 

is too costly and we need to proceed with broadening the base 

and home-based services in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, wellness, health care wellness and reform, is 

about facilitating a process that enables 

people to remain independent in their own homes, in their own 

environments, providing services to the whole person, to the 

entire individual.  Today we, our government, takes some 

major steps to work beyond the previous Tory administration 

and move health care into a new phase. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: — A second point, Mr. Speaker, that I'd like to 

touch on very quickly is that the members opposite say that 

there was no consultation.  Well I know that the Minister of 

Health has been around this province on two occasions.  On 

two occasions the Minister of Health has been — on two 

occasions — around this province in every community, Mr. 

Speaker.  And she's talked to health care professionals, to 

individual groups, to community leaders, and everyone 

interested in listening about health care reform.  And the 

process, Mr. Speaker, goes on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health reform and wellness is designed to give 

communities responsibility for designing and priorizing what 

they believe is in the best interests of the folks who live in their 

districts.  That's what health care reform is about, because local 

communities know what's best for their communities; 

empowering communities to take responsibilities to make 

decisions because I believe that given the opportunity and 

information, local decision making and priorization is what 

people want, understanding and trust.  This is what our reform 

is about in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Consultation, Mr. Speaker, in our community, in our district . . 

. we have three hospital districts that have come together, who 

are saying that they are going to form a regional district — 

community-based model programs that can move 

appropriately, streamlined, integrated, and rationalizing the 

needs. 

 

There is no one on my steering committee, Mr. Speaker, who 

doesn't believe that we need change in the way we deliver 

health care services.  And the committee in Yorkton have all 

sorts of folks on it.  We have Liberals and we have Tories and 

we have Reformers and we have New Democrats.  And they 

say that we need to reform health care; we need to change it, 

and we need to work together.  And that's happening, Mr. 

Speaker, in our district. 

 

In Yorkton we happen to use the democratic process of 

selecting our steering committee.  We had an election, Mr. 

Speaker, where we allowed individuals to get elected to the 

steering committee.  And fortunately we had 25 people who put 

their names forward; the difficult task of choosing only eight.  

Truly community-based autonomy and decision making is 

what's happening — communities setting their priorities in the 

direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in our district in Yorkton and across the province, 

we will be shifting in how we treat, prevent, and promote 

health care.  And in each district there will be some differences 

in how we do that.  It is true that my steering committee is 

made up of elected 



April 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1059 

representatives of the district . . . seeing duplication, overlap, 

and underutilization and are making recommendations on how 

the board can make some appropriate changes.  They have 

consulted throughout the district.  And in my constituency, Mr. 

Speaker, in the very near future you are going to see the 

coming together of a district board. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order.  The member's time has 

elapsed. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I can't believe that 

any government who has watched what has happened in rural 

Saskatchewan and in the cities of this province over the past 

two and three weeks would have the nerve to bring forward 

such a motion, a move to try to congratulate the Minister of 

Health for destroying medicare itself in rural Saskatchewan, 

that will eventually destroy medicare in the city of Regina and 

Saskatoon and all of this province. 

 

The downloading of responsibilities and the cutting of the 

funding so that hospitals will be ensured and guaranteed to 

have to close only means, Mr. Speaker, that in our cities . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order.  The 75-minute time limit on this 

debate has elapsed.  And we will now turn to private members' 

motions. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 6 — Publishing Fees and Charges by 

Government 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At the end of 

my speech, I will be making the following motion, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

 That this Assembly urges the government to improve 

accountability by publishing a complete list of all fees and 

charges made upon any member of the public by any part of 

the government and that this published list be updated when 

new fees and charges are established or existing ones 

changed. 

 

I will move this, and it will be seconded by the member from 

Kindersley, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The members opposite talk a good line about being open and 

being accountable.  In fact that is one of the many promises 

that the NDP vowed to keep when they were given the chance 

to form government.  Well we are here, Mr. Speaker, a year 

and a half later and the NDP have done little to become more 

accountable or more open. 

 

In fact the Premier has said they will no longer release certain 

types of information so as not to upset the public.  In fact the 

truth is so as not to make the public mad or angrier at the 

government. 

 

Any openness is very, very limited, Mr. Speaker.  Very small 

steps have been taken in this area, and I stress, Mr. Speaker, 

very small.  Mr. Speaker, it's no secret 

that the NDP, since forming government, have increased 

everything from marriage licences to speeding tickets.  They 

are taking more of the share of city fines from our cities while 

chopping revenue sharing to municipalities at the same time.  

These fines, Mr. Speaker, have gone from the government 

taking a 7 per cent share to the provincial government taking a 

25 per cent share. 

 

There are so many hikes that it's hard to keep up with them all, 

Mr. Speaker.  Utilities, vehicle insurance rates, appeals to the 

court, fees to start divorce proceedings, hearing fees at 

chambers, marriage licences, speeding tickets, licences to drill 

oil wells, register cattle brands, deposits on soft drinks, 

including tetrapacks, Mr. Speaker, on which there is no deposit 

return, fines for failing to keep camp-sites clean, hearing-aid 

add-on fees — and, Mr. Speaker, this is just to name a few.  As 

you can see, Mr. Speaker, to keep up with the frequent changes 

in fees and licences is quite a job. 

 

Articles with headlines like:  nickel-and-dime fee hikes worth 

15 million to the government.  This was said on January 19, 

1993 in the Leader-Post.  Or "Invisible increases," January 18, 

1993, the Leader-Post, shows just what this government is 

doing. 

 

What this motion asks the government to do is to uphold the 

truth in their promises.  It asks the members opposite to publish 

all of the fees, all of the increases, Mr. Speaker, all of the 

nickel and diming that has gone on under this government.  

Whenever there's a fee change, Mr. Speaker, this motion asks 

that the government publish it, that they prepare a list that is 

accessible to the general public, to the members, to the media, 

to whomever — that lists all of the categories of fees and what 

those charges will be, Mr. Speaker, and when changes are 

made to it, that these changes be also published. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in considering that they promised openness and 

accountability on a number of occasions, I doubt that there will 

be any MLAs voting against this motion.  Mr. Speaker, how 

could any MLA, any NDP MLA vote against this motion? 

 

(1630) 

 

They were the ones who ran an election campaign on open, 

honest, and accountable.  Open and accountability have not 

been upheld by the members opposite, as the Provincial 

Auditor's report has shown.  For instance, they have not upheld 

open and accountability . . . for instance, the auditor's 

document on page 49 says: 

 

 . . . Orders-in-Council and Ministers Orders did not specify 

pay and expenses for . . . 24 (boards and) agencies. 

 

Those were held back and not released, Mr. Speaker.  These 

are fees, licences, payments that are not being held open to the 

public scrutiny, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the pay and 

expenses in question totalled 



1060 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1993 

more than $700,000.  About $50,000 of this amount went over 

to the member from Riversdale's former law partner, Mr. Ching 

of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation). 

 

Another one: almost $90,000 went to Crop Insurance, and over 

$50,000 went to Economic Development.  These payments 

should be accountable to the MLAs in this Assembly and 

surely, Mr. Speaker, to the taxpayers.  And that's what the NDP 

promised before the election — before the election, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The report goes on, Mr. Speaker, on page 64 to say that, and I 

quote: 

 

 . . . two-thirds of the 1991-92 annual reports did not improve 

their description of what the department has done, where the 

department is now, or what the department plans to do. 

 

Two-thirds of the annual reports, Mr. Speaker, did not improve 

their openness, did not improve their accountability even 

though that's what the NDP government had promised. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they had promised to be more open and 

accountable, and this motion asks that the government be more 

open and accountable in allowing access to all the fees and 

charges that are placed upon people in this province.  And that 

whenever those changes are made, as this government has done 

on a very regular basis, that those also be published so people 

know what the changes are, rather than just happening to go 

down to the government agency one day and ask for a 

particular item and finding out, all of sudden, what was a $5 

fee is now a $50 fee. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Ching, the head of Crown Investment 

Corporation, argued with the Provincial Auditor because he did 

not want to become more accountable to the people.  Does that 

sound like open and accountability?  No, Mr. Speaker, it does 

not. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Finance, the newly 

created provincial secretariat department and Executive 

Council did not prepare any annual reports.  The auditor says, 

and I quote: 

 

 As a result, MLAs and the public may have difficulty at 

assessing the performance of these departments. 

 

This is from page 51, .07.  No kidding, Mr. Speaker, if there's 

no report it does create some difficulty in trying to access what 

the departments are doing, what they're spending the money on 

and why they're spending the money.  The members opposite 

feel it is okay to create a new department, a department which 

has been established to carry out the political agenda of the 

NDP and then not be held accountable in any way to the 

taxpayers who are footing the bill.  This does not sound like 

openness and accountability to me. 

 

In fact it's just the opposite, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

 all that this motion is requesting is for the government to lay 

out all of their fees, all of their little rate increases, including 

those for Crown corporations, all of the things that add up to a 

heck of a lot of money to the average small business person, 

farmer, and family, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It was somewhat ironic that this motion should come up today, 

Mr. Speaker.  When you look at page 3 in the Leader-Post 

today, it talks about there's more than taxes, and it goes down 

and it lists various fee increases which took place within the 

last two years. How the Department of Highways drivers' 

licences have increased by 25 per cent this year, going up by 

$5; how SaskEnergy increased by 4 per cent last year which 

cost the average family $24; how it increased by 2 per cent this 

year and cost the average family $13.  SaskPower went up by 

5.5 per cent for $31 last year, and 4.9 per cent this year for $29.  

All told, this article concludes that it cost the average family of 

four in Saskatchewan $1,452 of tax increases, fee increases, 

licence increases and all the other kind of increases that this 

government has imposed on the people quietly. 

 

The people heard about the tax increases.  It's just like the 

liquor tax increase that occurred.  In the budget, Mr. Speaker, 

the Minister of Finance did not include any alcohol increased 

taxation.  And when asked outside  of this Assembly why she 

did not do so, her reply was: well that's something that we can 

do at any time and perhaps we'll take a look at it this fall.  Well 

it was surprising how fast we went through the spring and the 

summer and reached the fall, Mr. Speaker, because it was only 

about 10 days later that our liquor tax increase occurred.  The 

minister was simply trying to avoid having more tax increases 

in her budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion asks that all of these type of increases 

be included in a pamphlet, in a booklet that the general public 

of Saskatchewan can have a look at.  And I can't imagine why 

any MLA would try to amend this motion in any way or in fact 

vote against it.  And if an MLA does, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure 

that the people will be very interested to find out why. 

 

So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move that motion. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am very pleased to 

be able to rise in support of my colleague and his motion with 

respect to this important issue.  And I believe, Mr. Speaker, 

that we shouldn't even be debating this.  I think that the 

government should outright adopt this and the sooner the 

better.  They should come clean and adopt it as quickly as 

possible because the people of Saskatchewan, I believe, want to 

know, they want to know specifically what kinds of fees and 

increases that have been placed upon them and they want to 

know for future reference what kinds of fees that they think 

will be imposed on them down the road. 

 

The NDP claim, Mr. Speaker, that they were elected on a 

campaign of open and honest government.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

that was their claim but yet we see now 



April 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1061 

 the types of things that are happening in this province, and the 

people of Saskatchewan I don't believe support them in their 

claim any longer. 

 

The public has the right to see in published form the fees and 

charges levied by the government.  The NDP government that 

came to power promising no more taxes is refusing to publish a 

list of hidden fees and charges that they have imposed on the 

public. 

 

To mention a few, Mr. Speaker, they include the cost of a 

marriage licence and increased fee to start divorce proceedings.  

They imposed new user fees for cancer treatments.  They've 

increased the breeder fees at bull stations around the province.  

They've increased the fee for initial registration of an animal 

brand, and they've increased the annual fee for a livestock 

dealer of over a hundred per cent.  They are just a few 

examples, Mr. Speaker, of the fee increases that the people of 

the province have been forced to have imposed on them. 

 

Tax and utility rate hikes are well publicized.  The ones 

mentioned here today, Mr. Speaker, are ones that aren't 

publicized, and no one is aware of them unless you're put in a 

position where you have to pay them and the government is 

forcing that on people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one has to wonder whether, after looking at just a 

few examples . . . And I have before me page after page after 

page of fee increases that the government has imposed on the 

people of Saskatchewan without the people's knowledge, 

without consulting the people of the province.  I say to the 

government, Mr. Speaker, that this is wrong, and I would 

certainly agree with my colleague that they should be published 

as soon as possible. 

 

An NDP government had no problem creating a financial 

review commission, better known as the Gass Commission, to 

reveal dealings of the previous government.  They couldn't 

wait, Mr. Speaker, to start this commission up, yet the 

Provincial Auditor receives no cooperation from them for his 

review of the NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP took great pleasure in creating the Gass 

Commission to open the books.  The books were opened, and 

the Premier and his NDP friends were disappointed.  They 

were disappointed because the commission didn't uncover any 

dirt or underhanded dealings.  They couldn't because there 

wasn't any, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Gass Commission did however make a number of 

recommendations.  The government has given itself top marks 

for following these recommendations, Mr. Speaker, but they 

don't mention the list of recommendations that they ignore.  For 

example, the government does not recognize the province's $3 

billion unfunded pension obligations as a liability on its books.  

The NDP government has rejected a recommendation aimed at 

making the Crowns more accountable.  The NDP ignored 

Gass's recommendation that cabinet ministers should not sit as 

chairman of Crown corporations.  The government 

ignored the recommendation that legislation should not be 

passed concerning the amount of money that can be committed 

to a project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP government wanted to be truly open and 

honest.  If they wanted to be truly open and honest, they would 

adopt all of Mr. Gass's recommendations.  But they dare not, 

particularly the one respecting Crown corporations.  They dare 

not reveal what is really going on in Crown corporations 

because then the people would see just how badly they're being 

gouged by this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people would like to see the NDP for what 

they really are, and are now beginning to realize what they 

really are — masters, Mr. Speaker, of deception. 

 

If the true financial situation of this province were revealed, 

people would see how the NDP bloated the budget.  Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP should come clean.  They should adopt the 

remainder of Mr. Gass's recommendation.  They should adopt 

the principle outlined in this motion.  They should come 

forward and give the people of this province an opportunity to 

find out exactly what kind of fees have been imposed on them 

over the last few months in this province. 

 

And the list is extensive, Mr. Speaker.  The initial registration 

of an animal brand has gone up from $20 to 25.  Renewal of a 

registered brand, $20 to 25 — $5 increase.  Livestock dealers' 

fees used to be about $45; now they're a hundred dollars.  A 

certificate of incorporation, so if someone in the province is 

interested in incorporating a company to do business, the fee 

used to be $50; now it's 75.  A search, a registered search in 

Saskatchewan, it's a new schedule that they've set out, wasn't 

even in existence before.  The certificate for an alternate name 

of a company, a new fee of $50. 

 

There's just list after list after list, Mr. Speaker, of changes, 

increased fees that are being hoisted upon the people of this 

province.  New fees — fees on things that people didn't even 

know about before, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

are now being asked to pay. 

 

The list is extensive, Mr. Speaker.  There's other people that are 

interested in debating this.  I'd like to give them that 

opportunity now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to speak to 

the motion presented by the member from Souris-Cannington, 

and I will be making an amendment at the end of my remarks.  

When the members opposite spoke about accountability it is a 

joke.  When the member from Estevan was premier, the 

Treasury Board did not meet the last 18 months that the PCs 

were in government. 

 

My question is: who made the decisions about how the people's 

tax dollars were spent?  How much did the former government 

rack up?  One billion for every 



1062 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1993 

year that they were in power.  Each individual Saskatchewan 

citizen — man, woman, child, and infant — owes $14,000.  

Each Saskatchewan family of four are faced with repaying 

$64,000; each taxpayer in the province owes $31,111. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Speaker, where did the money go?  Where did the money 

go?  Here are some examples: $15,035.25 worth of booze was 

delivered from the Saskatchewan Liquor Board warehouse to 

the legislative office of the PC minister responsible for the 

Liquor Board.  One hundred sixty-eight passes worth 10,000 to 

the Big Valley Jamboree purchased by the Liquor Board for 

distribution by the minister to his friends and colleagues.  Sixty 

thousand paid in 1989 to a consultant for advice concerning 

potash matters in India.  The PCs estimated that the 

government's share of the Rafferty-Alameda dam project would 

cost $42.5 million.  This figure sky-rocketed to 155 million by 

the 1991 election.  Slightly overestimated, I would say, or 

underestimated, I mean. 

 

Where did the money go?  Here are some other examples. The 

GigaText translation services systems failure, $3.5 million lost; 

the Supercart International failure, almost 8 million lost in only 

nine months; the Joytec failure, over 5.2 million lost; the High 

R Door manufacturing failure, half a million lost. 

 

And the member from Kindersley says there were no . . . the 

Gass Commission couldn't find any problems with the former 

government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The Austrak 

Machinery Corp. failure, $700,000 lost; the Pro-Star Mills 

failure, $490,000 lost.  And I could go on and on. 

 

What about the secret organizations that they set up by four 

Tory cabinet ministers, the Saskatchewan Diversification 

Corporation, a secret organization.  Don't believe me: here is a 

quote from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, October 11, 1991.  It 

says: 

 

 The head of Saskatchewan's Taxpayers' Association was 

"amazed" Thursday to hear four cabinet ministers have 

invested $4.1 million of taxpayers' money in 19 small 

businesses through a government-owned corporation set up 

last year. 

 

 Kevin Avram doesn't like the arrangement and considers it 

improper. 

 

 "If they (the government) can't tell taxpayers what they're 

doing with their money, maybe it's a deal (that) shouldn't 

(have been taken) . . . in the first place," he said. 

 

For instance: 

 

 Grant Schmidt, minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Diversification Corporation, has refused to identify more than 

two of the 19 companies the government has invested in over 

the past year . . . 

And here's another from October 11, again: "Schmidt won't 

reveal SDC (Saskatchewan diversification) expenditures." 

 

 The government has spent $4.1 million over the past year, 

taking equity positions in various business enterprises with 

no public disclosure. 

 

 . . . Schmidt and three other cabinet ministers — George 

McLeod, Jack Klein and Lorne Hepworth — serving as 

directors. 

 

 Among the expenditures SDC has made is a $400,000 

investment in a 40-per-cent equity in the Melville phone 

company Trinitel International, established through a 

community bond. 

 

And we know who the member from Melville was, don't we? 

 

And here's an editorial from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix: 

"Business given priority over public." 

 

 The sheer audacity and ethical bankruptcy demonstrated by 

Grant Schmidt's explanation of why the government hid the 

Saskatchewan Diversification Corporation (SDC) from the 

taxpayers is astounding. 

 

Remember, this is not the words from any NDP publication; it 

is from the paper, the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. 

 

 No acknowledgement of the fact the public has the right to 

know how money is spent. 

 

So this is the former government and their discussion about 

accountability.  Here's another quote: 

 

 The establishment of SDC was not general knowledge, 

Schmidt said . . . 

 

Like one of the members asked, why didn't they tell about these 

secret organizations?  Here it tells.  Here's Mr. Schmidt's 

explanation: 

 

 The establishment of SDC was not general knowledge, 

Schmidt said, because he didn't want every community bond 

corporation thinking the government would take an equity 

position in it.  As the old anti-drug slogan goes, the 

government could "just say no." 

 

 By hiding the existence of SDC, the government made the 

money available only to a select few.  Those few included a 

shaky telephone manufacturing company in Schmidt's riding 

and an Alberta firm which had been turned down for 

government loans (by the province of Alberta). 

 

An Hon. Member: — I wonder if there's any kickbacks? 



April 20, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1063 

Ms. Stanger: — I don't know.  I don't know if there were any 

kickbacks. 

 

When we were elected, we appointed the Gass Commission to 

review and make recommendations about our financial 

situation.  Since the report, the recommendations of Gass have 

been implemented, and I refer to a quote from the Report of the 

Provincial Auditor, chapter 1, page 1: 

 

 During the last year, I observed the Government making 

steady progress in improving our system of public 

accountability.  Although many areas still need 

strengthening, I do believe, on the whole, our system of 

public accountability is improving. 

 

And that's from the auditor. 

 

Let me assure the members of the Assembly that our 

government is accountable and will continue to be accountable. 

 

I wish to move an amendment: 

 

 By removing all the words after "Assembly" and replacing 

with the following:  recognize the timeliness and the 

necessity of the government's determination to follow the 

recommendations of the Gass Commission, the success of 

which is recognized by the Provincial Auditor in his annual 

report and the continuation of which will restore 

accountability, openness, and clarity to the province's 

financial picture. 

 

I make that motion, Mr. Speaker, and end my remarks.  Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order.  I have looked at the amendment and I 

find the amendment out of order.  The amendment really does 

not relate to the motion that is before us, and therefore I find it 

out of order and the debate will continue on the motion that is 

before us. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, in the few minutes that are 

remaining I would like to make just a couple of remarks with 

respect to this motion.  And I want to follow in the footsteps of 

the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd who very ably and very 

clearly set out the government position with respect to 

accountability and how markedly it differed from the record of 

the government previous. 

 

And the member who spoke before us, the member from Cut 

Knife-Lloyd, pointed out what a contrast it was with the 

members speaking now through one side of their mouths with 

what the Conservatives did just one year previous when they 

secretly hid the Saskatchewan Diversification Corporation 

spending millions of dollars in secret behind closed doors.  It 

wasn't until close to the election that it was pointed out. 

And I want to mention also, Mr. Speaker, and repeat what the 

auditor has said about this government's performance and what 

the auditor has mentioned in just . . . in a report which ends 

March 31, '92 and which was tabled in this legislature just this 

week.  And right on chapter 1, Mr. Speaker, the auditor 

mentions that this year the government has made tremendous 

progress in improving the system of public accountability. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Let me quote from the auditor's report, Mr. 

Speaker.  It says here: 

 

 During the last year, I observed the Government making 

steady progress in improving our system of public 

accountability. 

 

Later on, he says: 

 

 I do believe, on the whole, our system of public 

accountability is improving. 

 

The first time we've ever seen that in an auditor's report for 10 

years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — And the auditor also says: 

 

 The Government issued, for the first time, an audited 

summary financial statement showing the financial 

conditions and results of the Government as a whole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this book speaks for itself and it speaks for the 

government and the way the government is being run right 

now.  And it's quite hypocritical for the members opposite to 

try to claim or to seek or to ask or to promote accountability 

based on their particular record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because the time is getting closer to 5 o'clock and 

I would have  a few more things I'd like to say on this — it will 

take more time — I would now ask . . . I move adjournment of 

debate on this motion. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 

 

 


