


















































Hansard: May 10, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1577 

 May 10, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Education, Training and Employment 

Vote 5 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, just quickly looking through some of the information 

you provided us earlier, on one of the pages concerned with 

advertising and communications, you have a phone 

questionnaire and focus group for $43,700.  What was that for?  

It was Tanka Research. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, unfortunately I haven't 

noticed until this moment that we have here vast quantities of 

information on sheets that are not numbered, but the member 

makes a reference to Tanka Research, and to my recollection 

that firm . . . There was a competition and that firm was 

selected to carry out a survey with respect to the high school 

review committee that's ongoing now.  There were focus 

groups.  There was a questionnaire circulated.  I think in fact 

this is probably one of the most broad consultations that's ever 

been done, and Tanka was engaged in that competition to carry 

out that review on behalf of the committee. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I wonder 

if it would be possible to get a copy of their report. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I would expect that in 

due course that at least a summary of the findings would be 

available, but it's still being used in the internal exercise by 

their review committee.  The results are still being compiled 

and reviewed by the committee so there hasn't been . . . I 

haven't even myself received a final report. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, would you give the 

commitment to supply us with the full report from Tanka 

Research once it's been used and compiled by the committee? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, my only hesitation to 

making an undertaking in response to the member's question is 

that this is an independent review committee, so the material 

that was commissioned by them would really be their property 

and I wouldn't want to undertake to release it all without their 

consent.  But with that qualifier I certainly have no hesitation.  

I think that the results of the survey will be made public in due 

course so with that proviso that the consent of the committee 

would be required, it's not a problem. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  Well 

since it's provincial money, legislative money, that went to pay 

for this survey, I feel that it's pertinent that the members of the 

legislature have 

access to it.  So I take that from your comments that you will 

try and make that available to us. 

 

I'm just wondering, Madam Minister, we see in the K to 12 

system that teachers are being asked to provide more and more 

social service-type service with their duties to provide an 

education to children.  I'm wondering if the department has 

provided any sort of a breakdown as to how much work a 

teacher would do that could be called, to some context, social 

service-type work as compared to educational-type work. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, this is ongoing, and as 

the member alludes to, it's certainly a situation where the 

classroom teacher in the K to 12 system is faced more and 

more on a daily basis with students who are affected by social 

issues that are not directly involved with education, but still has 

to deal with them in order to make sure that the students are 

ready and in a fit condition to learn. 

 

In that respect there are discussions going on and it probably 

wouldn't be appropriate for me to discuss it here now because 

it's a subject at the bargaining table with our partners, the SSTA 

(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) and STF 

(Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation), on the definition of the 

role of the teacher. 

 

But beyond that, in recognition of how things are changing at 

the classroom level, we have initiated in this past year the 

program called children first, coordinated community action.  

And it is . . . we have a number of pilot projects up and running 

and in the planning stages now, where the departments of 

Health, Social Services, Justice, together with Education, are 

working with community groups and parents' groups, using the 

school as a base to try to address the needs of students, all the 

needs of students, in a more holistic way. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I believe that we 

could use our schools a lot more efficiently than we currently 

do.  The school should not simply be a building that we utilize 

from 9 o'clock in the morning till 3:30 in the afternoon, that 

there is a lot more that we could be doing with those buildings 

and perhaps this children's first program is one of that type of 

thing. 

 

But when you talk about Education as not the only ones 

involved, does Health, Social Services, and Justice provide any 

of the funding towards this program or is all of this funding 

coming out of the Education budget? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, that's exactly the focus 

of this program. is to have recognition from broad sectors in 

our society and across government that coordinated action is 

necessary to meet the needs that are in the classroom and that 

dollars and energy in the form of manpower has to make a 

contribution at the classroom level to meet the needs of those 

students. 



1578 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

There isn't any particular additional budget for this.  What 

we're saying is that if we do work cooperatively that we should 

be able to meet the needs of students better without additional 

money. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, it's my concern 

that while the students do need the proper nutrition, proper 

social atmosphere to learn and progress, that by moving all of 

these activities into the Education budget you're actually 

masking the amount of costs that may be to Health or may be to 

Social Services and disguising the actual amount of money that 

is being spent on the educational component. 

 

I would contend that Social Services should be the vehicle to 

deliver those kind of programs within the school structure.  It 

should be in the Social Services budget and not in the 

Education budget.  If there's a breakfast program or a hot meal 

program within the educational institutions, that that should be 

provided by some other agency other than Education, that that's 

a social program and should be supplied through a social 

agency and not through Education, Madam Minister.  Is any 

consideration being given to that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I repeat that that is the 

focus of this program.  And certainly there are examples within 

these pilot projects of where, if they include a feeding program, 

then Social Services is involved in it.  There are situations . . . 

and when it's community-based obviously there's no one model 

that's right for every community, so each community defines 

their own needs based in the school. 

 

It could include such things as feeding programs where Social 

Services would cooperate.  It could include day care facilities 

so that parents who want to become volunteers in other 

programs that are being carried on at the school could bring 

their younger children to be looked after.  It could expand to . . 

. well it has in fact, in some of the pilots, to include mental 

health workers and social workers.  So there is in that respect, 

although we don't have part of the budget isolated as a dollar 

allocation for this, there is a contribution being made in terms 

of manpower and dollars from other departments for these 

initiatives. 

 

And we certainly are all on the same wavelength in terms of 

making better use of the capital and using the school as a centre 

to extend it into evening programs for parenting, for adult 

education opportunities. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I think it's very 

important that we do that, extend the school day across the 

province, not for the students but for the building; that the 

buildings be used for other issues other than simply education 

of K to 12.  There's a lot of adult education programs that can 

be carried on within the schools, in the rural communities 

especially.  The school structure, the gymnasiums, etc., can be 

used for community events.  And I think it's important that that 

be encouraged. 

 

Madam Minister, there's been a number of studies over the last 

year and projected onwards.  I'm just 

wondering how many committees, how many studies have been 

done and at what cost? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- While I'm looking for the numbers on 

the studies, Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to address the first point 

that the member made in terms of the use of facilities.  And I 

just want to highlight the changes in our capital funding 

formula for education facilities where we have highlighted and 

emphasized the importance of both multi-use facilities and 

relocatable facilities. 

 

And in the multi-use for example, just let me give you one 

example of a plan that I saw for facilities in a small town, and 

this is how ingenious people are if they can use their creativity 

at the local level.  That there is a home ec lab in the school 

being the kitchen and there was one wing on the school then 

that was the hockey rink where the home ec kitchen could serve 

as a concession in the evenings.  And then there was another 

wing that was the curling rink and a potential auditorium where 

events could be catered and the same kitchen could be used for 

that. 

 

So if people are allowed to use their creativity at the local level, 

to use their ingenuity to meet their own community needs, then 

we have said in our new formula for facilities that we want to 

encourage that kind of use.  And I hope that communities will 

do that.  I think they will. 

 

As to the studies, we have done the regional colleges review 

which is the most recent one reported on.  It was $136,342.  It 

made 41 recommendations and the cost included a number of 

public hearings which were very well attended throughout the 

province.  I think they were attended by over 1,000 people and 

more than 400 briefs were received. 

 

One of the others was the private vocational schools review at a 

cost of 69,000. The university program review, which we 

talked about earlier, was 119,228.  The SIAST (Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology) review, which 

was initiated early in 1992, the cost is at 116,000.  The student 

financial assistance review was done . . . is not quite complete. 

It's in its second phase now and it's been done mostly 

internally, but there was an external cost of 36,000.  Then there 

was the post-secondary distance education report which cost 

about $30,000.  That study or review process was actually 

initiated in 1989, I think, in your administration, so you would 

be familiar with it.  We have a number of other advisory 

committees on curriculum and that sort of area, but most of the 

people that are on those particular committees are salaried 

people and there's not a large cost associated with them. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  In the 

information you sent over to us, did you include any people 

who may have been under contract for these studies? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, I can confirm that 

those costs would include any per diems or travel expenses 

related to the studies for people 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1579 

who are contracted to do them, and review members and 

chairmen. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- They would be in the files that you sent 

over to us, would they -- the information? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't think that the . . 

. because those people were not employees and the contracts 

would be short term, and I believe each review committee was 

established by order in council so they wouldn't be included in 

the lists of employees, and the material, I think, that the 

member refers to that we provided him with a copy of.  But we 

certainly have no problem -- it's a matter of public record, 

being subject of orders in council -- in providing the names. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister, if you 

would please. 

 

I'd like to move on to some of the regional colleges, Madam 

Minister, in the Cumberland Regional College part in the year 

ending in 1992, so it'd be not part of this upcoming budget, but 

their expenditures for contractual and professional service took 

a very significant increase.  I wonder if you could explain why 

it went from 154,000 in 1991 to 296,000 in 1992. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure what page 

that's on exactly, and I wouldn't be able to confirm for the 

member at this time what it would be because they may have 

undertaken some surveys; they may have had some legal 

expenses or something of that nature.  But same situation as the 

universities, they are self-governing and as long as they operate 

within the budget then how they spend the money is not within 

our purview, it's the decision of the board of directors of the 

regional college. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  The 

only problem with them being autonomous bodies is that this is 

the only avenue we have to question their expenditures. 

 

So I really would like to know why Cumberland Regional 

College contracted professional services went up by $142,000 

in 1992.  I'm particularly interested to know if that was indeed 

legal fees.  That could have been involved in severances; that 

could have been involved in the dismissal of various 

professionals employed by that regional college. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't think I have the 

same numbers that the member does, unless he's referring to 

information from the annual report.  I can't locate it in the copy 

of the material that we gave him. 

 

But in fact . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh thank you, Mr. 

Chairman.  The member is referring to the college's annual 

report.  And I think that . . . Well I am aware that there was a 

change in management and there may have been legal expenses 

and may have 

included severance for employees. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Would the minister undertake to provide 

us with that information? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in so far as I am able to 

get the information from the regional college.  Because like the 

member opposite, we do not approve in advance in any detail 

the budgets of the regional colleges. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, these regional 

colleges operate under your authority.  And it's your 

responsibility on how the taxpayers' money is spent through the 

Department of Education.  I would think that you would want 

to know where the regional colleges were spending their money 

and accept the responsibility that comes along with being the 

Minister of Education. 

 

I would respectfully ask that you do look into this issue and 

find out exactly what that money is being spent on and provide 

that information to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it was the 

administration of the member opposite who established in 

1987, the Act respecting Regional Colleges, would set up these 

autonomous bodies.  The only other question I guess I might 

raise or point I might make is I'm not sure when we're 

discussing the estimates for '93-94 whether expenses that 

occurred in 1982 are germane to this discussion. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, we're not talking 

about 1982; we're talking about 1992 which is part of your 

administration.  And in 1987 I was not part of the previous 

administration since I was elected at the same time you were on 

October 21, '91. 

 

And I still think it's important that you, as the Minister of 

Education, know what your department is doing and how the 

agencies of your department are spending their money, Madam 

Minister.  Therefore it's up to you to know what this $142,000 

was spent on.  It's within your realm to find out because you're 

the person who signs the cheque that gives the regional 

colleges their money.  And if you're not scrutinizing that duty 

properly, well then perhaps some changes need to be made. 

 

Madam Minister, will you look in to this please and provide us 

with the information? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I can certainly do that 

to the extent that it's relevant because there was a change of 

board members.  If we're talking . . . if we're going back into 

history here and talking about 1992.  If I said '82, I'm sorry; I 

meant '92.  And there was a change of board, so the governing 

body would have changed.  And I am aware, as I have 

mentioned, that there were some problems with management.  

There were some legal fees, and there may have been a 

severance.  But I will try to define what those were. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  While 

you're looking at those, will you also look at the 



1580 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

other regional colleges and the SIAST boards to see what kind 

of monies were spent in those areas for legal fees and what 

portion of those legal fees that were spent were for severance 

packages were for litigations dealing with determination of 

employees -- employees or boards. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I won't have any 

difficulty whatsoever with the regional colleges because of the 

extensive review that has taken place so recently, and our 

analysis of their costs including their administration and 

contract costs.  And I would like to say just one word about 

SIAST . . . is that they recently held a competition or issued a 

request for proposals for accounting services, and I think that if 

my memory serves me correctly, they will be saving about 

$35,000 in this fiscal year by reviewing that area of outside 

professional advice. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  When it 

comes time to look at the legal fees occurred by the regional 

colleges and SIAST, particularly those dealing with severance, 

would it also be possible once it's all settled and done, out of 

the court system, to have you provide the names of those firms 

who did the work for the various colleges or SIAST as the case 

may be? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there aren't, to begin 

with, that many, and I don't think it's any problem to advise you 

of the names of the legal firms that were used, but I wouldn't 

have that information at hand. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  If you 

would simply supply that when the information becomes 

available, that will be fine. 

 

Madam Minister, the Department of Education recently went 

through some dramatic changes within the administrative 

structures.  There were a number of people who were let go, a 

number of other people that were hired.  Are any of the people 

who were recently hired to replace those that were terminated, 

are any of those collecting a government pension or a 

taxpayer-supported pension? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I would first like to 

clarify that although there have been a number of changes in 

the department and there were some people who were laid off, 

but there has been since that time and concurrent with those 

terminations, I think not one, single, permanent employee that 

has been hired to replace those people.  We have a few people 

that were available on short notice and for a short term who are 

in acting positions. 

 

To my knowledge there are two that are receiving pensions 

from . . . they're retired teachers or administrators.  Those are 

very short-term positions.  And in fact, you may have noticed 

on the weekend in Saturday's paper, May 8, we ran an ad 

seeking to engage two assistant deputy ministers to replace 

those who are acting in that capacity on a short term. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Those people that you recently 

hired for the short terms, are they on written contracts? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, they are on written 

contracts. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Would the minister table those contracts, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I haven't personally 

seen the contracts.  I wouldn't want to make an undertaking to 

table them without knowing whether there is an element of 

confidentiality, and certainly I wouldn't want to discuss the 

details without first having the consent of the individuals who 

are named in them. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, if I'm not 

mistaken, I believe your Premier stated that contracts -- in this 

particular case, Crown corporation contracts -- would be tabled.  

We asked for the contract of one Jack Messer as president of 

SaskPower, and the response was that that table would be 

tabled.  Unfortunately it was an oral contract and therefore 

could not be tabled at that time.  I believe that we have since 

received a copy of that.  So, Madam Minister, I think that it is 

possible to table contracts of employees and I would ask that 

you seriously consider doing so, please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I certainly haven't 

ruled it out but I would want to seek advice, and out of respect 

for the privacy of the individuals I would want to discuss it 

with them first. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I think it's very 

important, when we consider the statements being made by the 

Premier during the election, that if elected his would be an 

open, honest, and accountable government.  We've already seen 

some of the difficulties that the government has had with being 

accountable for the regional colleges and SIAST, that your 

response is that they're autonomous bodies, self-governing.  

But, Madam Minister, you supply the money; therefore they 

have to be accountable to you.  You as a representative of the 

Crown are accountable to this legislature.  Openness is a very 

important part of that accountability. 

 

The accountability that the Premier talked about during the 

election, Madam Minister, I think is very important that in this 

openness, that contracts -- written contracts as opposed to oral 

contracts or verbal contracts -- be tabled in the legislature when 

requested.  And I do think that it is possible for you to do so, 

madam. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I certainly haven't -- I 

just repeat -- ruled that out.  I've just said that I would want to 

have advice and I would want to at least inform the individuals 

who are . . . whose employment is the subject of those 

contracts, prior to doing that. 

 

And in terms of the reporting of the autonomous institutions, I 

just want to say that they do report to the legislature.  In fact the 

member earlier was reading 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1581 

from the annual report that was tabled in this legislature. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, part of the 

accountability is being able to ask questions concerning those 

annual reports also and receiving the answers.  Madam 

Minister, on the contract issue we're prepared to accept your 

word that you will supply that to us.  And until such time as 

you're prepared to do that, we're prepared to continue with 

these estimates. 

 

Madam Minister, concerning the two gentlemen that you 

mention that were on a short-term contract, are they receiving 

their retired teachers' pensions or are there some other pensions 

that they would also be receiving which would be supported by 

the taxpayer? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, these two gentlemen 

that we're speaking of -- and guess we all know who they are -- 

have had a long and distinguished career in education.  They 

have been teachers, directors of education, and so they would . . 

. I'm not exactly sure of the nature of the pensions to which 

they would now be entitled, given their service and their age.  

But we know that there are restrictions on permanent 

employment for people who are on public service pensions and 

we will make sure that the terms of employment and the time 

span doesn't violate those agreements. 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister. I was 

reviewing question period from April 7, when I asked you the 

very same questions: were these gentlemen receiving a 

pension?  I'm glad to find out now that the answer is yes 

because we had suspected that all along.  But in your answer of 

April 7 there was no indication then, Madam Minister, that they 

were indeed receiving a pension even though that was the 

questions. 

 

Madam Minister, last year during estimates you stated that 

funding for school construction would only be allowed on an 

emergency basis, and yet we found out in December that the 

Loreburn school was receiving a significant amount of funding.  

I wonder if you would mind explaining what the emergency 

was at the Loreburn school. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the situation there was 

that the local school division, the Outlook School Division, was 

in the process of making decisions of rationalizing the 

accommodation of students as between Strongfield, Elbow and 

Loreburn.  And the decision was made to consolidate the 

programs at the Loreburn school.  And I haven't got the 

numbers just exactly before me, but in brief, earlier in the year 

that decision was made.  Then an approval was given for 

funding to make some necessary repairs at Loreburn. 

 

Then it happened that there were some structural problems, and 

there were roof repairs, some occupational health issues that 

had to be addressed. 

And the amount that was required was increased, but the board 

renewed its request and wanted to proceed with that particular 

configuration.  And as far as I know, all the necessary 

approvals were given to accommodate the requests that would 

allow them to carry out their decision.  The work is proceeding 

now and I believe the movement of the students will happen in 

the fall of 1993. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, last year in 

estimates and question period at various times, you stated that 

construction would only be allowed to take place if it was an 

emergency.  In August of last year you stated that $438,000 

was going to be allocated to the Loreburn school for that 

emergency funding.  And yet at Christmas time, or during . . . 

between Christmas and New Year's, the citizens of that area 

found out that actually 1.4 million had been allocated just 

shortly before that, totalling up to 1.4 million for the additional 

construction at that school.  And yet as you've described it, I 

find it difficult to believe that that would constitute an 

emergency. 

 

Now there are other places around this province that have been 

condemned by the Fire Marshall.  I would suspect that those 

are potential emergency situations.  But the fact that the school 

division there wished to amalgamate three schools into 

Loreburn, I don't really see that as being an emergency, Madam 

Minister.  It may have saved the local school board some 

money through not running three plants, but that is not an 

emergency, Madam Minister.  So what was the real emergency 

at the Loreburn school? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, there was some 

structural damage and it was classified as emergency roof 

repairs.  So that was the portion that was approved in 1992.  

There is a project that they're requesting for in 1993, that is 

portable classrooms or relocatable classrooms.  But the 

allocation in 19 . . . in the past fiscal year all qualified under the 

heading of emergency funding. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, how much did the 

Loreburn school receive for capital funding under emergency 

funding in the 1992 budget year, 1992-93? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we have a breakdown 

that shows that it's $1.439 million.  That is the renovations that 

relates to structural repairs -- roof, ventilation, flooring 

replacement -- that sort of repair that all falls under the . . . all 

qualifies under emergency.  The relocatable classrooms request 

is in addition to that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I find flooring 

repairs as an emergency kind of difficult to swallow. 

 

The relocatable classrooms -- are they being budgeted for in the 

'93-94 year or were they under '92-93? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- The request for the relocatable 

classrooms has just been submitted in 



1582 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

1993 and it's currently under consideration but has not yet, to 

my knowledge, received approval. 

 

But the other emergency repairs that are under way, or fairly 

close to completing, all have to do with the structural problems 

-- hazards -- and occupational health and safety issues in terms 

of ventilation and that kind of thing. 

 

And we do think . . . we do consider those things emergencies 

because we feel it's very important to provide a safe and secure 

environment for the students in our province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, would you 

provide a list and the reasons why the other capital projects in 

the '92-93 year were done.  Was there anyone else who 

received an amount anywheres near what the Loreburn school 

did -- 1.4-plus million? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we can undertake to 

provide a breakdown.  I can't say at this time whether the whole 

. . . the entire allocation that was budgeted for was used, and by 

whom, at this point.  We would be referring to the fiscal year 

ending March 31, 1993.  So if there were projects in progress at 

the time, it would be too soon to be definitive about how the 

costs broke down. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  In the 

Education budget, since it's education, training, and 

employment, how much of the funds allocated would be for 

retraining?  And would any of this retraining be done under 

other government programs?  What I'm thinking of here -- is 

there anything say from Workers' Compensation that would be 

done under the Education budget? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the reorganization of 

the department, there would be . . . the things that would be the 

easiest to isolate in terms of programs would be the New 

Careers, which moved from Social Services into Education, 

Training and Employment, and I guess will be the subject of its 

own separate set of estimates later on, I hope tonight. 

 

Then there were eight people brought over . . . they were a 

labour market planning unit that was in the Department of 

Labour that was brought into the Department of Education.  

And there was the summer and student employment program, 

that we're calling Partnerships '93, that came from the 

Department of Labour into the Department of Education. 

 

And it would really be difficult to define exactly how much 

was spent on those labour areas because there are a number of 

federal programs that buy spaces directly in the post-secondary 

institutions, so those dollars and those programs wouldn't be 

part of the Education budget.  There might be some 

coordination services that we would provide, but a lot of those 

dollars would flow directly to those other institutions. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister, because 

it's one of my concerns that with the 

amalgamation of these various departments under Education 

that, again, some of the money that would seem to be allocated 

for Education will be siphoned off into other areas that should 

perhaps be earmarked as being outside of what we normally 

consider to be Education, that's the K-12 and post-secondary 

education systems. 

 

That manpower retraining, while it is an educational 

component and a very important one for adults as they move 

through life, is not under what we would normally, or have 

normally, thought of as being the educational component.  And 

I was hoping that that would be somehow earmarked or 

segregated so that people would know what the different things 

were being spent for. 

 

Is it possible to do that?  If not now, at least for the next budget 

period? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, unless the member 

opposite can clarify just exactly what it is when he talks about 

the programs, it really is very broad and it would include, I'm 

assuming his question would include, things like the number of 

seats, training seats, that the federal programs would buy in 

SIAST and the regional colleges, in the SIIT, the Saskatchewan 

Indian Institute of Technologies, and all of those programs. 

 

And some of them are funded jointly between the provincial 

and federal government.  There is sharing.  But I think contrary 

to the member's fear that money will be siphoned out of our 

regular education system through these additions of labour and 

the new focus, I think it's contrary to that, that we will be better 

positioned to make sure that we access as many of those federal 

training dollars as possible to benefit people in this province, be 

it people that are graduating from high school and entering 

post-secondary or apprenticeship training or whether it's adults 

who want to retrain. 

 

As the member may know, our average age now in SIAST and 

the university campus is 28 and rising, so we know that there is 

in this changing technology and the changing world of work 

that we live in a greater and greater need for enhanced training 

of people who are already skilled and of retraining.  So that's 

one of the reasons for the new focus in the department, is to 

make sure that we meet all of those needs. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I believe it is important 

that adults have the opportunity to retrain, that it not just simply 

be a one-time . . . education be a one-time thing, that once you 

graduate from post-secondary school or high school that you're 

no longer in the education system, that you're no longer 

learning. 

 

So it is important to carry on.  But it's also important that when 

we talk of a global budget for education of $871 million that 

people not be given the misimpression that $871 million is 

being spent on K to 12, post-secondary, and university because 

some of that money is being used for other items, such as 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1583 

manpower retraining.  So I think that type of component is 

what my concern is, is that it at least be identified as such. 

 

On the first page of the Estimates, Education, Training and 

Employment, page 33, it talks there of post-secondary 

education and skill training.  It talks of student financial 

assistance and employment.  I'm just wondering what's the 

breakdown of those: the post-secondary education versus skill 

training and the student financial assistance versus 

employment? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Now, Mr. Chairman, first I would like 

to address the member's first comments first, in his reference to 

the budget for Education being $871 million.  And that of 

course is the provincial contribution.  Then there's 

approximately another half a billion raised from property taxes 

in the province at the local level.  Then if you add to that the 

federal dollars that do come into those training programs, the 

tuitions and the revenue generated by the universities and the 

institutions, the amount that is actually invested in education in 

this province far exceeds the billion dollars.  It's probably been 

closer to two billion. 

 

On his question about the breakdown, if you would turn to . . . 

like on page 33 is the summary and on page 35 is the 

breakdown under point 5 where it says post-secondary 

education and skill training, subvote ED05 -- I think that's the 

breakdown you seek. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you talk of distance 

education in the same summary of expenses.  What kind of 

programs are delivered with distance education and how are 

they delivered? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we have inherited a 

number of different kinds of networks for carriage, and this is 

one of the challenges that we face, is that in order to make sure 

that in the future there is adequate and equal access by rural 

students to educational opportunities, distance education will 

be a very important factor in that. 

 

Right now we have the SCN (Saskatchewan Communications 

Network Corporation) which has the broadcast band and the 

satellite band with approximately 50-odd receiving sites in the 

province, which is utilized extensively by the regional colleges.  

We have some fibre optic networks that are operated with the 

cooperation of SaskTel, and we have an interagency 

committee, if you like, working on rationalizing that and trying 

to make sure that those institutions in the field that have 

invested in hardware to receive a certain kind of signal will get 

a definitive direction on which signal is the most appropriate 

and where we should concentrate our resources. 

 

Meanwhile, because we recognize it as being one of the most 

critical ways that we can deliver on our promise to the 

education community and the cornerstone of our policy being 

equality of opportunity no matter where in the province you 

live, and equity in taxation, we are doing our best in 

cooperation with the other institutions to develop the most cost 

effective and effective distance education system.  And I think 

we're already on the leading edge of that in the world, but we 

need to refine it, and we need to expand it.  And this budget 

does point towards that expansion and a further investment in 

that medium. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  With 

the funding cut-backs across the province to education, I think 

it's going to be very important that the schools have access to 

well-qualified teachers, and the ability to communicate back 

and forth, because not every school is going to be able to afford 

to have a physics teacher, or a chemistry teacher, or whatever 

one it's going to be. 

 

So I think some type of communication back and forth, as is 

being done -- I believe it's in the Elrose school division with 

their distance communication, with the telephone lines, and the 

computers, etc., TV cameras -- I think it's going to be very 

important.  And I would encourage the department to continue 

to pursue that.  Because to many schools that is going to be 

their only method to provide the proper kind of an education to 

the students in rural Saskatchewan in particular. 

 

One of the problems that is happening in rural Saskatchewan, 

because of the funding cut-backs, is the closure of a good many 

rural schools.  I've been contacted by people in the Buchanan 

area concerning their school and its closure.  Their students 

were moved from Buchanan to Canora.  And yet the front page 

of the Canora Courier, about a month ago, the director of 

education was lamenting the poor state of affairs at the Canora 

school, and how there was poor ventilation, there wasn't 

enough room for the students, there wasn't enough room for 

their books and their lunch kits, etc. 

 

Why, Madam Minister, when it came time to make the 

approval to close the Buchanan school, which the parents -- I 

have never visited the school -- but the parents tell me was a 

school that was in good condition, would you have authorized 

this school division to move the students from Buchanan over 

to Canora if that school was indeed in the deplorable shape that 

the director of education there stated it was on the front page of 

the local paper? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as the member opposite 

knows, we . . . the Department of Education and the 

government doesn't authorize the closures of schools and 

doesn't interfere in the decisions that the local board makes.  

But our facilities branch certainly would look at the state of the 

facilities.  But beyond that the local school board makes those 

decisions. 

 

The member opposite has touched on a subject that's very close 

to my heart.  Having been a parent of rural school children and 

a school bus driver, I think, and I know, that one of the 

considerations that boards take when they make these decisions 

is the distance that children have to travel, particularly young 

children. 



1584 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

 I'm assured that the division board in that area has taken these 

factors into account. 

 

I know that it's always very difficult.  The school in our rural 

area closed in 1966.  The community bought it and uses it as a 

community hall so it's still a very alive place in terms of 

neighbourhood rural events and ball games and all of that.  But 

I still get a lump in my throat every time I drive by it, so I 

certainly have some feeling after those, I guess, 27 years now 

since it's been closed.  And I know how emotional it is and how 

difficult it is for parents and children that are affected by those 

decisions and how difficult it is for division boards to make 

those decisions.  But they do have that responsibility and I 

think that . . . I know that they're handling it as well as they 

can. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, perhaps you can 

correct me if I'm wrong, but do not school closure notices come 

to you for your signature?  I know in The Education 

Amendment Act that we did last session, that you put into place 

two three-month periods of time in which the school divisions 

had to follow certain procedures.  Do you or do you not receive 

notification of those? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer is no, we do 

not.  The procedure for and the steps that a division board must 

follow in terms of consulting and the steps in making their 

decision are outlined in the Act, and as the member will 

remember, were the subject of some changes last year in the 

legislation.  But we're not consulted and in fact not even 

notified formally.  There's no requirement to formally notify us 

of a school closure.  It's entirely within the purview of the local 

rural school division. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, do you have 

department officials who go out and inspect schools to ensure 

that they're meeting the provincial standards? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we do have staff in the 

facilities branch that does monitor the conditions of schools.  

I'm not sure exactly how often they would go out on an 

inspection tour, but they would certainly respond to a call. 

 

And in addition to that, beyond our purview, there are are fire 

inspections and inspections by officers of occupational health 

and safety that would be independent of the Department of 

Education that would make such inspections of facilities. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Do you know if such inspections have 

taken place in the Canora school? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I wouldn't have 

knowledge of that now.  I certainly wouldn't have any problem 

with disclosing to the member opposite any information that we 

might have.  I do have a recollection that one of the changes 

that had to be made there, or is being made, is to accommodate 

some special needs students. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I would 

appreciate it if you would investigate that because the parents 

of the Buchanan area in particular, and reading the comments 

by the director of education for that school, feel that there is a 

problem there. 

 

I can't find my copy of the front page of the Canora Courier 

right now, but it seemed to be in the article that the concern 

was not so much the state of the school as it related to the 

students but the state of the school as it related to the 

neighbouring school divisions because it seems that there's talk 

of amalgamation taking place with Timberline and I believe 

Kamsack school divisions. 

 

And from the article one could infer that the director of 

education and perhaps the board of this school division board 

were concerned that if their school did not have the student 

population at Canora, if their school did not receive funding to 

upgrade the facilities, that they would be placed at a 

disadvantage if an amalgamation was to take place with 

Timberline and Kamsack.  And this seemed to be more the 

direction in which those officials were moving rather than 

looking after the needs of the students. 

 

So I would appreciate it, Madam Minister, if you would 

investigate that situation, investigate whether or not the 

officials have looked at that, and if they haven't, if you could 

possibly look at that. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we will be glad to look 

into that matter.  We are aware of course that there are 

discussions taking place on many levels throughout the 

province on amalgamations.  But as far as I am aware, the 

request for this particular project in Canora is not affected by 

those discussions that are going on.  But we will provide a 

report on the current situation as we find it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  On page 

33 again, just for a point of clarification for my own 

information, you have FTE staff utilization; what does FTE 

stand for? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the acronym FTE 

represents full-time equivalent, and so it converts part time and 

other employees into the equivalent full-time establishment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Under 

item 1 of the votes where it talks of salaries, how many people 

would be in the department?  Have you supplied that 

information with the pamphlet you sent over? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, on the first page on 

item 33, where the full-time equivalency is that the member 

referred to, it will show that in 1993-94 there are 457 in the 

department and in the revolving funds, 48.6. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister. Under 

accommodations and central services, item no. 2, there was a 

significant increase of almost $900,000 over the previous year.  

What were those for, Madam Minister? 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1585 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, this accommodation 

and central services and the apparent increase there simply 

reflects change in the policy of the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation whereby they used to have . . . well 

some call it a system; I would call it hocus-pocus, called a 

participation credit.  So departments found it difficult to 

estimate their costs because they sometimes got -- you could 

call it -- a dividend back. 

 

SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) has 

changed their pricing policy to simplify it.  And those 

departments and agencies that had owned space will be charged 

less, and those who are leasing will be paying . . . their costs 

will reflect the actual cost of the lease without the so-called 

participation credit. 

 

So we have virtually exactly the same facilities, but it's just a 

change in the pricing policy that affects it.  We haven't leased 

any additional space, and no prices have gone up that we're 

aware of.  That item also includes mail service, records 

management, and some other small administrative items. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Under 

item no. 3, K-12 education, total expenditures there are 421 

million, which is a drop of almost $40 million from last year.  

Have there been a significant amount of enrolment changes in 

the K to 12 system for this year, or even for next year -- 

because this budget is for '93-94 -- compared to the '92-93 

year?  Is enrolment up?  Is it down?  Has it changed 

significantly? 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to report . . 

. I guess it's a reflection of the return of prosperity to our 

province, I think, is that the enrolment in the K to 12 system 

has risen by almost 300 -- I believe 299 students.  It's an 

upward movement in the numbers for the first time in years. 

 

In rural school divisions it's gone down slightly.  In northern 

divisions it's also gone down slightly; but not because of a loss 

of population, but because of band-run schools.  And in the 

urban areas, it's increased by 300. 

 

The other dramatic difference would be with respect to the 

grants to schools, and our change to accrual accounting.  Where 

last year's budget showed 65 million, this year's budget will 

show just actual expenses, and interest on previous 

commitments.  But from now on, all capital will be fully 

expensed in the year that the project goes ahead.  So that's the 

change there. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, would you please 

supply us with a list of which schools are receiving capital 

construction grants, and for what amount, and for what 

purpose. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I would have 

to ask the member to clarify which year.  Because we would 

know for the past fiscal year what's been done.  But we're just 

in the process within the budget that's here, of talking to the 

school boards.  They're redefining their needs.  And so there is 

approval in principle for a number of projects, but it hasn't yet 

been determined exactly what the costs will be, and whether 

they will all go ahead or not. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- On what basis, Madam Minister, then 

have you allocated the $38 million for capital construction? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there's really only . . . 

There's $20 million that has been allocated for new 

construction, the provincial share of new construction.  And 

that's an estimate based upon those projects that are applied for 

that we have approved in principle. 

 

The other $18-odd million is that portion that I mentioned that 

is to service debts for construction done in previous years.  So 

there's about nine and a half million dollars again of that 38 is 

for emergency funding.  This is for roof repairs, air quality, 

things that come up.  The approval-in-principle projects are a 

portion, ten and a half million.  The post-secondary capital for 

the universities and the other post-secondary sectors is 6.1 

million.  And then interest is 12 million, for a total of 38. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, would you please 

supply us with a list of the capital construction projects for the 

last budget year?  And for those that you have given tentative 

approval to for the coming budgetary year? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we have no problem in 

undertaking to provide that information to the member. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Same 

item, under education development fund, the EDF fund, there's 

been a very significant drop there, from 6.7 million to 2.2 

million.  Just wondering, Madam Minister, what the EDF 

funding will now be available to use for, since there's such a 

dramatic cut, or are you expecting these school divisions to 

back-fill that loss of $4.5 million? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, what we're doing -- and 

again this refers partly to the change to accrual accounting -- 

where there's a carry-over commitment for those school 

divisions that didn't subscribe to the total that they might have 

accessed under EDF earlier in the program, so that the amount 

that will be paid out over a three-year period, in addition to 

what is shown here, is the past contribution to the past years of 

the program.  And it will be $5.8 million this year and $3.7 

million over the next two years.  That's the accrued liability that 

will be paid out in those three steps in addition to the portion 

that's shown in this year's estimates as being this year's 

contribution.  So it isn't decreased as much as it appears. 



1586 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

And what we want to do is revisit the principle of the EDF -- 

we think it's a very good one -- together with the 

distance-education initiatives and come up with a different kind 

of a package and approach for subsequent years. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  You said 

that there's an additional $5.8 million being spent on EDF this 

year?  And a further 3.7 for the next two years.  Where would 

this 5.8 show up in the budget? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry.  The 

amount that I said would be the 5.8 -- that includes the part 

that's shown in the Estimates.  So it's somewhat reduced from 

last year but not as dramatically as it would appear.  And then 

the other two years, the out years -- '94-95 and '95-96 -- are as I 

said, 3.7 million over those two years. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I can understand 

not having the $3.7 million in this budget because it's not 

monies that are allocated out of this fiscal year.  But I don't 

understand how you're going to spend $5.8 million on EDF 

(education development fund) funds when you're only showing 

$2.2 million as being spent this year.  Obviously some place 

within this text that other $3.6 million should be hiding here 

some place.  Now where is it? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we're not hiding it 

anywhere.  It is actually part of the deficit because it was -- of 

the accumulated deficit -- because it was a commitment made 

in past years and not paid out.  So that is a past obligation.  So 

what we're showing in the Estimates book is our current year's 

contribution from the consolidated revenue fund in this fiscal 

year. 

 

That's the 2.25 million.  And then the 3.55 -- there's a total of 

nine and a half million dollars of carry-over commitment which 

is part of the accumulated deficit, and being a commitment 

from previous fiscal periods.  So it will be paid out with 3.55 

this year and then the balance in the out years. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, are we dealing 

here with the magic of accrual accounting or why . . . If you're 

going to spend money this year, I would have to assume that it 

should be shown in the budget some place as being spent this 

year.  That if last year you budgeted $10 million for an item 

and you only spent 5, and that other $5 million didn't get spent 

but you're going to spend it this year, then it should show up in 

the budget this year as having been spent for this fiscal year 

and that you would only show in your revised budgetary 

Estimates an expenditure of $5 million last year. 

 

Now under the magic of accrual accounting I understand that 

you would show it when it's actually allocated or actually 

spent.  So you could have the $10 million spent last year and 

not show anything this year, even though you're spending all of 

the money this year.  Is that what we're dealing with in this 

case, Madam Minister? 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- My sense of it is, I think, the same as 

yours but I would come about the words in a little different way 

-- is that the obligation was . . . I mean promises had been 

made, commitments were made to projects in previous years 

but the work hadn't been done so the money wasn't paid out.  

But it was a recognized obligation and could be defined.  So 

that portion is going to be paid out over the next three years in 

addition to . . . And this year's apportionment comes to 2.25 of 

expense in this year, which is in the book, and 3.55 being part 

of what was committed to in previous years and is now being 

paid out.  But it was already accounted for in previous years 

and that means a total of $5.8 million for this year as opposed 

to $6.7 million last year. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, if I go down to 

my local credit union and I take out a loan to buy a vehicle and 

I'm going to do it over three years, and this is the second year 

of that loan, I can't say, well I budgeted for all of that money in 

the first year because I showed that I had a liability there, and I 

don't have to show anything in my budget this year because I 

did it last year.  I still have to pay for it this year.  I have to 

make my payments.  And that's what you're going to do here, is 

you're going to make a payment of $3.6 million on that EDF 

fund this year, even though it was budgeted for, or the 

commitment was made last year and not spent.  So I would 

really suggest that there should be an additional $3.6 million 

shown here some place unless we're dealing with accrual 

accounting.  Are we dealing with accrual accounting on this? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, I thought I said 

that at the outset, that the difference was because of the change 

to the accrual accounting.  And in this case, it's not so much the 

change policy-wide to accrual accounting, but that these 

commitments were made. 

 

Say a school division embarked on a project three years ago 

and it was going to be done in stages.  Before they started the 

first phase, they would want to be assured that there was 

funding available at the time of approval for completion in 

stages.  And in a number of cases that approval was given.  So 

the commitment was there that they would receive the money 

even though it wasn't spent.  But it was allowed for and there 

was a pool, the EDF pool; it was there. 

 

So it has already been committed and accounted for and 

accrued, and it will be paid out as the projects qualify. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, are you suggesting that 

there's actually a pot of cash some place called the EDF fund 

that has not been spent?  Or is this . . . you just continue to 

make the commitment from the funds allocated to the 

Department of Education. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, no, I wish accrual 

accounting was magic and that it would uncover pots of cash.  

But no there wasn't a pot of 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1587 

cash, there was just an obligation and a commitment made. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  As you 

can tell, accrual accounting is a mystery to me. 

 

I'd like to talk about the teachers' pension funds and the 

benefits.  In the auditor's report, he suggested that it was 

impossible to tell how much money should actually be 

allocated to the teachers' pension fund.  I wonder if the amount 

that the government has allocated this year meets the 

requirements for the teachers' pension fund.  Is it more than the 

legal requirement?  Is it less than the legal requirement, and 

what is the legal requirement? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure.  You 

would call it a legal requirement but it's also the teachers' 

pension plan is unique in that the provisions of the pension plan 

are the subject of provisions in the collective agreement. 

 

And last year we did spend . . . or our contribution to the 

teachers' pension plan was less than budgeted last year because 

of changes in interest rates and so forth.  I think last year for 

teachers' pensions and benefits we had budgeted, I think, a total 

of 126,000 . . . or million, and we spent considerably less than 

that because of changes in interest rates. 

 

So this year we revised our estimate to 101 million for the 

pensions alone, as you can see there.  And it's difficult to 

project because we don't know how many . . . we can estimate, 

but we can't be sure exactly how many teachers will stop 

working and go onto their pension; how many superannuated 

teachers will expire.  And so it's based on actuarial, on sound 

actuarial estimates, but it's impossible to be completely precise.  

But this year we have reduced our estimate from last year's 

estimate to bring it closer to what we actually allocated in the 

previous year. 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- How does the formula for that work, 

Madam Minister?  I wonder if you could explain that please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure whether 

this information that I have at hand is what the member wants.  

If he thinks that accrual accounting is a mystery, he should 

wade into the field of pension plans. 

 

But I think what he's asking is how the benefit formula 

operates.  And it's 2 per cent of the average of the five best 

years or highest salary years of a teacher's career, times the 

years of service.  And then there are retirement options:  at age 

65 with one year of service; age 60 with 20 years of service; 

age 60 where the sum of age, contributory service, income 

continuance plan service, and qualifying service equals 85; age 

55 where the sum of age and contributory service is 85; and 

any age where the teacher has at least 30 years of contributions. 

So the number of allowances currently being paid out to 

superannuates is 6,840; and the number of active teachers still 

contributing to the plan is 11,297.  I hope that's the information 

that the member wanted to have. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- That helps, Madam Minister.  How 

much of the funds do the teachers provide themselves and how 

much of the grant that the government provides, does that cover 

the entire amount that the pension fund is being drawn down by 

the superannuates, the 6,840 people?  Is the funds that the 

teachers supply, the 11,000 teachers that are currently paying 

into the system, and the grant that the government provides, 

does that cover off all of the money that the 6,840 teachers 

draw down? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, no, there is a large 

unfunded liability in the teachers' pension plan pursuant to 

rules prior to 1980.  Since 1980 the teachers' pension plan has 

been the subject of what is known as a money purchase plan, 

which is contributory and which is actuarially sound. 

 

But previous to that, it wasn't that way.  And that's what we're 

living with now, in terms of many teachers who would be 

retiring at this particular point would have had a large number 

of their years of service in the previous era prior to the money 

purchase plan.  And provision was not made in those earlier 

days, as with many pension plans, for it to be funded. 

 

So now as the teachers who are in that plan retire, in order to 

keep the commitment and provide them with their pensions, 

there has to be an annual contribution from the consolidated 

revenue fund, in addition to the interest that accumulates on the 

funds that are there. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  How 

much shortfall is there this year to make up for the teachers' 

pension plan? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, that would be shown in 

item 4, the 101,282,000 where it says pensions and cost of 

living.  That would be our annual contribution from the 

consolidated revenue fund.  Then the next line where it says 

13,500,000, that would be as the employer, the government as 

the employer, would be our contribution to the current plan for 

those 11,000-plus teachers that are still working. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, if all teachers were 

eligible to retire this year, what would be the shortfall in the 

teachers' pension fund?  How much is it underfunded 

currently? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, it can only be 

determined through actuarial estimates.  But the estimate at the 

current time, given the demographics of the teacher population 

and the current superannuates that were in the unfunded plan, is 

1.87 billion. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  You 

flabbergasted your colleague over there by 



1588 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

knowing the answer to that. 

 

I'd like to return to the K to 12 subvote.  What are the grants to 

local authorities and other third parties?  What do they deal 

with? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I might ask the 

member to clarify his question.  I can't find a section that's 

headed that way. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- It's under the K-12 education subvote 

ED03, under expenses by type: grants to local authorities and 

other third parties. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry, I was 

looking for a separate heading there and I wasn't looking under 

the K to 12.  That grants to local authorities and other third 

parties shown this year as being three hundred and sixty 

million, seven hundred and ninety-one, that would be the grants 

to school divisions that we would pay out as a provincial 

contribution in this year.  Then the capital grants that we've 

already dealt with are shown under that.  That 360 million 

would be the total pool that would be distributed according to 

the foundation grant formula. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I wonder if it'd be 

possible if we could have a list of the school divisions and the 

funds that were allocated to each? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we're not having a 

problem with providing that.  We just want to know because it 

really is very complex and it's a lot of paper, so if you wouldn't 

mind just defining how much detail you want it in, and then 

we'll be pleased to provide it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- I'm not just sure how much detail you 

have there, Madam Minister, but if we could have a detailed 

breakdown . . . They must submit . . . The school divisions 

have a budget, I would assume, and you pay out based on that 

budget on a portion of student population, etc.  If we could 

have that kind of a breakdown?  I have some of the 

information, Madam Minister, from the school boards 

themselves, but if you could provide what the department 

provides. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, just to clarify then.  

You want just a list of what our contribution to each . . . the 

provincial contribution to the budget of each school division in 

the province is? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Yes, Madam Minister, and if you could 

include in that the student populations because that's part of 

what that funding will be based on. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, although that's 

only one of the factors.  But we have no problem with 

providing that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  And can 

you do the same thing for post-secondary education and skill 

training? 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, if the member's 

question is, could we provide a breakdown of how much our 

contribution is in grants to third parties to each of those 

institutions, we'll certainly do that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  In 

distance education, item no. 7, there was a significant increase 

in Saskatchewan Communications Network.  I wonder if you'd 

mind explaining why the increase there. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as you know, the 

Saskatchewan Communications Network when it was 

established had a . . . SCN had a five-year agreement with the 

federal government which delivered a total over that five-year 

period of I believe it was $18 million as the federal contribution 

towards that initiative.  This will be the final year and it's been 

on a declining balance.  I think their contribution this year is 

about . . . is 3.2 million as opposed to a somewhat larger 

amount last year. 

 

So while we did reduce the total budget of SCN, I guess the 

answer is that we have replaced with a provincial contribution 

the declining federal funding in order to keep it operating and 

provide the services to the regional colleges and universities 

and the parts of the system that are using it until . . . to give us a 

year so that we can rationalize it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The 

Report of the Provincial Auditor discusses the Department of 

Education and it has a number of questions here about the 

various regional colleges: the correspondence school revolving 

fund, the Saskatchewan book bureau, Indian college, and 

SIAST, etc.  He seems to have some questions here dealing 

with that. 

 

One of the questions or items that he has in here deals with the 

funding for the official minority language office.  And for the 

year ending in 1992, the estimates were originally $1 million 

for that service, and yet it ended up being $10 million.  I 

wonder if you could explain that, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we wouldn't find that 

kind of information in the estimates.  I think the member is 

referring to numbers in the auditor's report.  What we have to 

understand is that that program, where there is federal funding, 

where we have to spend the money and then recover it from the 

federal government, in most cases or very many cases for 

French immersion programs and that sort of programing, it's 

100 per cent recoverable from the federal government.  So what 

we show in estimates, or in our program expense estimates, 

would be the net cost.  And there never was an increase in the 

total net amount.  There might have been some timing of the 

grants or some timing of recovery from the federal government 

but there was never that discrepancy between the budget and 

what was actually spent. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  One last 

question on the teachers' pension.  How 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1589 

much do the teachers contribute towards their own pension?  

I'm thinking of what percentage of their personal income. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer to that 

question is it would vary slightly but it would be approximately 

7 per cent of a teacher's salary. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Does the 

taxpayer match that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, that is matched by 

the Consolidated Fund, or the government, being the employer, 

and that would be represented in that 13 million, $13.5 million 

figure there.  In addition to that, there is an agreement . . . well 

as I said before, part of the collective agreement, of which the 

pension plan is a subject, that certain interest that accrues on 

funds that are contributed also stays in the plan for the benefit 

of teachers. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, that 13 million that 

actually goes into the pot along with the funds contributed by 

the province, do they not . . . set up into a separate account or 

does it go into the Consolidated Fund? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the . . . let's call it the 

old plan -- the one that shows the $101 million -- that is 

administered by the teachers' superannuation fund, which is a 

separate unit within the department.  And the other one, the 

Saskatchewan teachers' retirement plan -- where we as an 

employer contribute thirteen-and-a-half million -- that is 

administered by the teachers' federation, the Saskatchewan 

Teachers' Federation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I have 

here a newspaper article from the P.A. (Prince Albert) Herald 

of January 14, '93, where it's quoting you, Madam Minister: 

"But . . ." it says here: 

 

 But keeping divisions viable by shifting students to still-open 

schools may not be the answer. 

 

They're talking about the closure of schools.  And you've said 

here: 

 

 You can't expect an elementary school student to be at par 

with his peers in a classroom if he's already spent an hour and 

a half on the bus and he's been out of bed for three hours 

before he even gets to school. 

 

Madam Minister, I agree with those sentiments, that it is very 

difficult particularly for the younger students when they have to 

travel a great distance to get to their school.  But how do you 

square that with the funding cuts that you're imposing on rural 

school divisions? 

 

(2030) 

 

I've received quite a number of letters from school divisions 

around this province and in a good enough number of those, 

there are school closures actually 

taking place.  I mentioned Buchanan already.  We've talked 

about Elbow and Strongfield; Wood Mountain is another one, 

in the far south, right along the border.  And there's quite a 

number of schools across this province that, if they have not 

already closed, are being threatened with closure, or will be 

closed over the next year or two. 

 

How do you square that, Madam Minister, with your own 

statements that students should not be expected to travel great 

distances for a long period of time and still perform up to par 

within the education system? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I would think that I 

was expressing whoever was quoting me there -- I don't know 

the origin of the article -- was expressing the same sentiments 

that I did earlier in terms of my experience of being a parent of 

rural children and the driver of a school bus.  And I know that 

many school boards have . . . your school divisions have 

already consolidated almost as much as they can without 

resulting in moves that provide long bus rides for kids and not a 

good quality of life for them. 

 

But this year, we project that there will be 16 schools closed 

this year.  There were only seven in 1992, and there were 20 in 

the last year of your former administration.  So I think what 

we're trying to do is, by putting emphasis on the 

distance-education option, by setting up a committee within the 

department which consists of people from our Department of 

Finance, STF, SSTA, LEADS (League of Educational 

Administrators, Directors and Superintendents), and now 

SASBO (Saskatchewan Association of School Business 

Officials) since we amended the Act the other day, that we're 

looking at the utilization of resources and finances to try to 

make some changes.  Well we will make some changes with 

their agreement, I'm sure, in the foundation grant to ensure 

good outcomes for rural students in so far as possible. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'll go back to 

the situation up at Canora where it seems to be in the best 

interest of the school division, or at least the major town in that 

school division, to close some of the other schools in that 

division, to move the students into their own school because at 

some point in time amalgamation will take place with the 

various school divisions around them, and they wish to be in a 

stronger bargaining position. 

 

While capital projects are being approved, do you look at those 

types of local political considerations when it comes time to 

close a school and renovate another or provide capital funding 

for another? Because I can see that happening in a number of 

locations, Madam Minister, where local small "p" politics plays 

a part in the decisions that are made, where one community 

because of its size, its lack of political power within the local 

process, is closed to provide a benefit for another community. 

 

And that may not necessarily provide the best educational 

opportunities for 



1590 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

the students.  If their school closes, they don't have the 

opportunities for distance education.  Madam Minister, do you 

look at any of that type of incident when you're considering 

capital construction? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we certainly would 

take into account not the local decision-making process, but 

whether or not the request for capital, if one came, was in 

keeping with the well-being of the whole school division; and 

in our new capital proposal, takes into account as well facilities 

in neighbouring divisions because sometimes you have schools 

that, while they're fairly close together, are in different school 

divisions, so that the application, for instance, of the 

small-schools factor is somewhat skewed. 

 

And there are those considerations.  But I certainly overall have 

confidence -- although some school boards obviously manage 

better than others, all being human beings -- but I do have 

confidence overall in the integrity of the local school boards 

and the division boards who are elected by the local people to 

serve their best interests, to be above that kind of consideration, 

and for their primary objective to be the very best possible 

outcome for the students that they're serving in their local 

division. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I have 

another question, or set of questions, on renovations.  And this 

deals with the William Grayson school.  And this comes out of 

the Moose Jaw Times-Herald.  The department approved 

$223,000 to renovations for the basement in that particular 

structure, but when it came time to do the work or as the work 

was proceeding, it was found that there was a need for 

$525,000 to complete the work. 

 

When a school board comes to you and applies for capital 

construction, do you review that application to ensure that the 

numbers are accurate, that the dollar figures that they give you 

will meet the requirements to complete the facility as designed?  

Or do you allow them the ability to say, well we only need 

$223,000; we'll put up our share of the money compared; start 

to proceed with the project and then find out that they need 

twice as much money.  What accountability is there? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I can't comment 

specifically on the Grayson project at this time, but I certainly 

am aware of a number of instances where, although it's been 

examined as closely as possible from the exterior, that once 

they actually get into the project that other factors are found.  

And for instance, consider the incident that happened in 

Saskatoon last year or the year before at the John Dolan 

School, where it appeared to be perfectly structurally sound and 

it actually collapsed.  So I mean there are areas where you can't 

test for the complete structural soundness or the costing of the 

project until you actually begin doing the renovations.  I don't 

think there . . . well I know there are not very many instances 

where there is a great deviation, but certainly there is a 

potential for it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I think 

it's one of the areas that perhaps the department needs to 

consider reviewing to ensure that when applications on B1s 

come forward that the numbers and the projects are actually 

what is required in those locations and that the proper funding 

is being requested. 

 

Madam Minister, standardized testing has been an ongoing 

saga in this province, the requests for it by various groups.  

Across the country, it's come and gone.  Most provinces are 

now in it.  Ontario had withdrawn and has come back in to the 

national standards testing again. 

 

Where is Saskatchewan in this process?  Are we giving it any 

consideration?  I realize that we're not in it at the present time.  

There's a good many parents who believe that we should be 

involved in this program.  There was some newspaper articles 

from students in April of this year stating that they felt that it 

would be best for them if standardized testing was in place, that 

they would feel more competent being judged against their 

peers across the province than not knowing where they stood 

compared to the rest of the country.  What is the current policy?  

Is the government reviewing that with an objective of seriously 

looking at starting or becoming part of the national testing? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I think there are about 

three parts to the answer, the first one being that we are 

certainly not opposed to testing in any way.  We did take place 

. . . or we did take part, I should say, in the international 

assessment of education programs which was . . . there was one 

in 1991 and one in 1992.  The one in 1991 was from 19 

countries and 8 Canadian provinces, and Saskatchewan tested 

in 9- and 13-year-olds significantly higher than any of the 

participants, including all the other Canadian provinces, except 

Korea and Taiwan in science.  So we were second of all from 

19 countries and 8 provinces. 

 

In spring of 1992, we did take part in another one where our 

students, Saskatchewan students, outperformed other provinces 

in almost all of the test areas which was reading, spelling, 

language, study skills, and mathematics.  So it's been 

demonstrated that we do perform well.  However because we 

are implementing a new curriculum, as you know, we feel it's 

important to establish some benchmarks in terms of our own 

indicators and our own testing program based on that 

curriculum so that as it develops we can do the test on a 

continual basis to measure the appropriateness and the 

effectiveness of our own curriculum. 

 

Now on the national test, the SAIP (school achievement 

indicators program), that is the one where we took a decision in 

December of 1991 . . . was sort of D-day; you have to decide 

whether you're in or you're out.  And at that point the test was 

not well developed yet.  There was very poor provisions for its 

funding, and we were concerned about its effectiveness.  We 

still have some of those concerns, and we are monitoring it.  

We have not ruled out that we would ever do it, but we think 

it's very important 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1591 

that the test be constructed in such a way that we will learn 

something about how we do things from the test and that there 

will be real comparisons between students and types of schools 

and that kind of thing. 

 

And a lot of the people who are saying, and the editorial writers 

who are saying, oh Saskatchewan should be in this particular 

national test have expectations from the results of it that are not 

realistic.  If only they would take the time to discover the 

nature of that particular test and what the results will show, it 

will not show them what they want.  Like the chamber of 

commerce, for instance, says they want comparisons between 

schools, comparisons between teachers, comparisons between 

provinces.  This particular test is not set up to do that.  And so 

we think that before they berate us for not being in it, they 

should discover what the nature of it is. 

 

So we are monitoring it.  If we ever have a national test which 

we think will be effective and that we can all learn something 

from rather than just doing it for the sake of being on board, 

then we'll certainly be there.  But in the meantime, we want to 

concentrate on our own provincial indicators. 

 

And we have a committee working on that that is partly 

internal.  We have invited representatives of the business 

community, the chamber of commerce and the Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business, as well as parents and 

students and educators to help us develop those.  They will be . 

. . instead of being administered at the age groups that the 

national test is, they'll be a grade 5, grade 8, and grade 11, and 

there will be a report published and made public every year on 

the results of that test, so that people can compare, and so that 

they can have the accountability they feel, and we feel, that 

they're entitled to. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  When 

you stay outside of the process though, across the country when 

it comes to standardized testing, then you have no ability to 

have input into insuring that the tests are of a manner that suit 

the needs of Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan students. 

 

If you were to enter into discussions to build that kind of a test, 

then perhaps across Canada you could develop the kind of a 

test that would suit your purposes, and suit the purposes of the 

other provinces. 

 

You talk about our curriculum, that the test you designed for 

the province matches the curriculum that we provide within this 

province.  Madam Minister, when students graduate from grade 

12 in Saskatchewan, they don't all go to university or 

post-secondary education in Saskatchewan.  They fan out 

across the province, across the country in a lot of cases. 

 

So our curriculum has to provide those students with the 

educational base to meet the needs of those other universities.  

And that's part of what a standardized test would indicate to 

those students, to those parents that are paying, where those 

students stand in relationship 

to other students across the province, across the country. 

 

One of the things that you mention, the independent business, 

the chamber of commerce, what they're looking for in part, 

Madam Minister, is value for the dollars that are spent on 

education.  They seem to . . . they want to know that the dollars 

that are being spent provide the proper return -- not in dollars 

but in educated students.  And they would like to be able to see 

a comparison between Saskatchewan and the other provinces in 

Canada. 

 

(2045) 

 

And that is part of the reason why they want to see 

standardized testing implemented across the country and not 

just piecemeal, bit by bit.  And it seems Saskatchewan is one of 

those provinces that is very, very reluctant to get involved in 

this process for some reason.  And I'm not entirely sure of the 

reason. 

 

You can say that our curriculum is somewhat different, and the 

test that you have designed suits the needs as you see it, as the 

department sees it within Saskatchewan.  But other 

departments, other provinces must have similar concerns when 

they enter into this kind of a test.  But they have gone forward 

and become part of the process that developed that test. 

 

And, Madam Minister, I think that Saskatchewan should 

become involved, not necessarily this budget year or next 

budget year, but become part of the process in developing the 

tests that would meet the requirements of Saskatchewan as well 

as the other provinces.  And this type of test may very well suit 

the needs of the chamber of commerce and the independent 

business, or it may not.  But if it suits the needs of the 

provinces and the parents, of the students and the parents across 

Canada, well then I think it would be well served. 

 

One of the items that has come up over a good period of time, 

and it's coming forward every year through the SSTA, is the 

bargaining position . . . not the bargaining position, the 

bargaining structure, with the government, the SSTA, and the 

teachers' unions. The SSTA is very interested -- they passed 

resolutions at their last convention -- that the bargaining 

committee be structured as four, four, and one: four provincial, 

four SSTA, and one independent.  What is the government's 

policy on that, Madam Minister?  Are you reconsidering this 

position? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to go back 

for a moment to my hon. friend's comments on testing before I 

talk about bargaining.  I wanted to assure him that we have 

been part of the design of the tests.  We have been involved.  In 

fact it was our concern at the very outset when it was being 

designed that cultural differences in students be paid attention 

to and that students weren't disadvantaged in the test because 

they were Northerners or aboriginals or rural people.  So we 

have been involved in the design and we continue to monitor 

that. 



1592 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

Also, I did point out that we do take part in the international 

tests, which includes all the other . . . a number of other 

countries as well as all the other provinces.  And we think that 

really when we're talking about operating in a global context -- 

and you're talking about our students leaving Saskatchewan; 

they go all over the world, not just to other provinces -- that 

that is a very good test.  And I just don't know how many times 

or how much energy you use at this time when teachers and 

students are so pressed and short of resources, to keep on 

testing over and over again.  I mean we've done it once a year 

for the last number of years on the international basis, and I 

think that's why the design is so important.  Because you can 

take a driver's test, a written driver's test, every week and pass 

it and still go out and drive into a tree, you know.  So I mean I 

think there are limits. 

 

On the bargaining, I don't want to say a lot about it.  The hon. 

member will understand because the parties are at the 

bargaining table right now.  But what I can say and we have 

discussed and committed to our education partners is that -- 

because the current bargaining structure was established some 

20 years ago when perhaps the issues were somewhat different 

-- that when the current round of bargaining is complete, that 

we will sit down with our education partners and we will 

seriously take a look at the structure.  We haven't made 

commitments to change it but we will certainly review it with 

them, and we have made that commitment to them. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister. The school 

trustees feel that because they provide better than 50 per cent of 

the funding for the K to 12 system, that within that system they 

should at least have an equal voice at the bargaining committee, 

and that another member, the ninth member of that bargaining 

structure, should be chosen at large by both groups.  And I 

think that's only a reasonable request. 

 

One of their other concerns deals with, in the foundation grant, 

the inabilities of that grant to reflect changes to local economic 

conditions.  As we have seen in the last good number of years, 

the drop in grain prices, the drop in oil revenues, and this has 

had a dramatic effect on a good number of different school 

divisions, but that's not reflected in any manner in the 

foundation grants. 

 

The school boards, because they still have that tax base on 

which the foundation grants reflects that volume, is not taken 

into account, that they're perhaps not gathering those taxes that 

that tax base should represent.  Has any considerations been 

given to making some accommodations for local economic 

conditions within the foundation grant? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as I mentioned earlier 

that's one of the things that we are doing, is we have a 

committee working with finance people in the department, with 

the STF, the SSTA, LEADS and SASBO, in terms of looking 

at the distribution of the funding pool and making some fairly 

fundamental changes in it. 

Because as the member points out, and property tax has the 

very same shortcoming in that it's not responsive either to 

economic conditions.  I mean once the assessment is there, it 

doesn't matter whether you're old or you're sick or you're 

unemployed, the tax on your property is not affected by those 

circumstances. 

 

So it does make for an inflexible system when you take those 

two together, the inflexibility of the property tax and the 

inflexibility of the foundation grant.  So those are the issues 

that we will be looking at with the education partners.  And 

hopefully we can come up with a system that's more refined 

and take some of those factors into account. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, under the capital 

construction projects last year, the member from Thunder 

Creek discussed a school in one of his divisions, the Mortlach 

school, because of its potential fire hazards that the Fire 

Marshall was leaning towards condemning the school because 

of its inadequacies.  Has any consideration been given to that 

school when it comes to the capital construction projects? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the school at Mortlach 

is the subject of the list of projects that were given approval in 

principle.  I just have the press release here that's dated March 

24, where it talks about the total amount of capital and provides 

a list of the projects that had approval in principle, of which the 

Mortlach school in Thunder Creek School Division No. 78 is 

one. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister, I'm sure 

my colleague will be very pleased to hear that. 

 

I have a news release dated May 10, today, which deals with 

the Education Council.  It lists a number of people that have 

been appointed to this council.  Madam Minister, are these 

people receiving any per diems, any expenses, anything along 

that line, or is this being done free and gratis? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the people who were 

appointed to the Education Council will receive the standard 

per diem for the status of the committee.  I'm sorry I don't have 

the numbers with me.  It's not a lot of money but the chairman 

receives a slightly larger per diem and there will be travel 

expenses where that's applicable.  We don't expect it to be a 

very costly exercise but the persons that are giving of their time 

in this very important work will certainly be compensated. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, would you 

commit to providing us with that information, what they will 

receive for per diems, what they will receive for expense 

allowances? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we'll be glad to 

undertake to provide that information. 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1593 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just a couple of 

questions with respect to how things are going at the 

universities.  Could the minister let me know what the tuition 

increases have been in the last two years? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in terms of 

percentages, I just can't remember off the top of my head.  I 

know the news story in . . . and I don't have the details of the U 

of S (University of Saskatchewan) budget yet because they just 

held their budget meeting on last Thursday and Friday, so I 

haven't had an opportunity to review it in detail. 

 

All I know is the press reports that I saw where they said 10 per 

cent, and I'm not even sure whether that's across the board or 

whether it's a total generation of increase in their . . . 10 per 

cent in their whole revenue pool.  Because what they did last 

year, as the member from Estevan may recall, is they graduated 

the tuition fees quite a bit last year in terms of raising the 

professional colleges a larger percentage. 

 

So I'm sorry I haven't got the details on the U of S one.  But last 

year they increased -- and I'll lump them together globally -- 

they had different ranges of increase but altogether it was 13 

per cent.  That was last year, the both together.  This year the U 

of R (University of Regina) raised theirs globally 

approximately 9 per cent. 

 

But I would like to point out -- I think we did say earlier -- that 

last year we reduced the size of the pool that we . . . a portion to 

the universities by 1.78 million, that's to both of them, the 

reduction.  And they responded by raising an additional $5 

million through their tuition fee.  So they actually had 3.2 

million more than the year before by the time it was all added 

together. 

 

And this year they've done the same thing.  The U of R had a 

reduction in their funding this year of $900,000, and they 

responded by raising their tuition fee an amount which will 

yield 1.7 million.  So in response to what they consider a 

shortfall in the provincial contribution, they have raised their 

tuition fee to cover that off and then some by a considerable 

amount. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well that sounded pretty fancy.  If I have this 

right, you have said that the university has raised the tuition last 

year, 9 per cent in Regina, perhaps 10 per cent in Saskatoon.  

Tuition went up another 10 per cent this year according to the 

University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon, and approximately 

that here.  So in the last 16 months you've contributed to the 

students paying approximately 19 to 20 per cent increase in 

tuition, if that's correct. 

 

And you have also cut back on . . . or as a result of your 

cut-backs and pressure on the universities they've had to cancel 

either programs or departments and Ivany, president Ivany says 

that as many as a hundred faculty positions could be eliminated 

under these cuts. 

 

So are you satisfied that the students are going to get 

the proper accessibility to education, with a 20 per cent 

increase in tuition, and that the faculties and the departments 

and the university staff will be able to have sufficient funds to 

provide first-class or at least competitive education in the 

province as a result of your last two budgets that have resulted 

in approximately a 20 per cent increase in tuition for students? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I know that the member 

opposite knows that the tuition fees that are charged by 

Saskatchewan universities are still very competitive as 

compared with other universities and extremely so when 

compared with American universities and some of the other 

destinations that students choose for their education. 

 

Actually in relative terms, tuition has not really gone up.  In the 

last couple of years there have been some percentage increases, 

I did say 13 per cent last year totally, and then 9 at the U of R, 

and 10 at the U of S this year. 

 

(2100) 

 

But I know that when I went to university that the cost, the 

tuition and the cost of books and the other cash outlay that you 

had to make at the beginning of the year, was actually much 

larger relative to what your salary would be when you got out 

into the workforce in the first year, for example, than it is now.  

And also at that time there was nothing like student loan 

programs and assistance for access. 

 

So I think that I have confidence in the university board of 

governors and the administration to make sure that within the 

fiscal realities that we all face, that they continue to provide 

good accessibility and high quality programing.  And we will 

certainly do our best through the student loan fund to make sure 

that in spite of the increases in tuition, that no student is denied 

access to a college that they have the ability and qualifications 

to enter because they don't have the means. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Madam Minister, the facts being put 

forward by the students and by the university and now by 

women that are attending universities, don't jibe with what 

you've just said. 

 

This Star-Phoenix article recently -- and I'm sure you've seen it 

-- said university funding cuts hurt women.  It goes on to say 

that recent funding cuts in Canadian universities, including the 

University of Saskatchewan, are going to hurt all students 

including women.  It says: the president of the Canadian 

Federation of University Women, quote: were concerned that in 

many cases university positions are being cut.  There are 

students who would like to go to universities, but there are 

fewer and fewer positions available, or students don't have the 

chance to get the courses they want, said Peggy Matheson.  

This will make it even more difficult to get a core of educated 

women who are prepared to take a leadership role in the future, 

she said; currently about half of the university students are 

women.  But with increased 



1594 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

tuition, cut-backs in grants and scholarships, and increased 

difficulty getting a student loan, getting a university degree is 

going to be tougher for all students, she said. 

 

Then she went on to point out why it's particularly difficult in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now you've raised the tuition rates . . . or caused the tuition 

rates to go up approximately 20 per cent; you've cut 

departments; you've added a great deal of difficulty in the face 

of students here who now have to pay something in the 

neighbourhood of . . . it took about 77 per cent of disposable 

income to pay for room and board, tuition, and books, at the 

University of Saskatchewan for a student.  And that's 

increasing very, very rapidly -- 77 per cent of disposable 

income. 

 

And then if you look across the page, Madam Minister, the 

reason it's difficult is when they go out into the economy to 

find work, you find that . . . you get headlines -- and I'll talk to 

the Minister of Economic Development about this tonight -- 

"Saskatchewan economy is regressing," says StatsCanada.  

We're the only province to suffer in terms of a decline in actual 

economic activity.  B.C. (British Columbia) and the Yukon are 

best performers. 

 

And I don't know if you can see the graph, Madam Minister, 

but only Saskatchewan has negative growth -- only 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So we have experienced a combination of policies that have 

caused the economy to stagnate.  Only the province of 

Saskatchewan is experiencing this negative growth.  And the 

young people, particularly students who want to go to 

university, are faced with the double whammy -- where you 

have cut funding to the university, then you've turned around 

and you've caused them to raise the tuition fees at the 

university so that students are facing rapid increases.  And this 

is way beyond inflation.  Inflation in Saskatchewan is virtually 

nil.  I think it's 1.1 per cent because the population is going 

down and because of the stagnated economy. 

 

So does the minister have any words of encouragement at all to 

university women, students at the university, who are facing in 

the neighbourhood of tenfold the rate of inflation tuition 

increases year after year.  Increases in taxes, increases in 

utilities, increases in the tax on clothes, increases in gasoline 

tax, facing an economy that is the bottom of the barrel.  The 

credit rating in the province has dropped to a BBB under the 

new plan, Madam Minister, that you're involved with. 

 

Do you have any words of encouragement for students who are 

now complaining to the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, who are 

saying that we just can't make it; it's now going to cost us 77 

per cent of our disposable income to go to the U of S, and 

you're raising the rates again and raising tuition?  Do you have 

any words of encouragement, or could you better explain why 

this is the only thing that you can 

do to the young people in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we fully recognize that 

spending on education is an investment in our young people 

and in the social and economic renewal of this province. 

 

What we're dealing with in terms of the numbers you're talking 

about in the economy is . . . and the graphs that you show are 

the fallout from the debt that your administration racked up.  

And I wish that you had had so much concern for the future of 

the youth of this province while you were ringing that up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- I do have words of encouragement for 

the young people in this province -- is that now this 

administration is in the hands of open and accountable people 

who will be fiscally responsible, who have a plan to balance the 

budget and reduce the deficit. 

 

And speaking of double whammies, perhaps the university 

could save some money in terms of not paying professors who 

are also collecting salary as an MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Madam Minister, the flippant responses 

are not going to sit well with students. 

 

The real facts of life are that the university students are 

suffering, quitting university, not finding access to the 

university they would like to have, can't afford the tuition rate 

increases, can't afford the tax increases, and you're saying, well 

there's nothing we can do; the province is in a lot of difficulty.  

And it looks like the only province in the country that is 

suffering like this under the new NDP plan. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, you promised students full funding of 

university.  You promised students and your ministers 

promised students that you would not raise tuition fees 

anywhere above inflation.  You say that's all we have to do. 

 

And you are quoted in the paper and ministers are quoted in the 

paper, you would protect university students; you'd protect the 

university; you'd protect health care; you would not raise taxes; 

you would balance the budget, and you'd stimulate the 

economy. 

 

Well the students are looking at you now and saying, Madam 

Minister, you are cutting into the very essence and the core of 

the universities.  You're raising tuition rates 10 times the rate of 

inflation.  And you are now dealing blows to the economy 

where the business community, whether it's the housing and 

construction industry, the chamber of commerce, or others, are 

coming back and saying: we don't see any plan.  It's 

discouraging.  It's dismal. 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1595 

Well I think, Madam Minister, I mean you can be as flippant as 

you like but the chart that I showed you here, where 

Saskatchewan under your administration, is not only suffering 

in education, but if you look at this, in all of these provinces 

across Canada, everybody is experiencing growth, except the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the students are saying: you'd better come forward with a 

plan.  Pretty soon they're going to call for an education summit.  

The university presidents are going to say: why don't you let us 

in on some of your ideas.  Maybe we can work something out 

together.  Because the students can't stand 10 per cent increases 

a year, year after year, on top of rate increases, utility increases, 

gas tax increases and utility increases. 

 

So, Madam Minister, you can be flippant and say it's 

particularly easy for you to sit in here with your staff, when 

you've been caught, and ministers have been caught paying for 

their staff in Crown corporations -- which you promised you'd 

never do -- and all of the other broken promises you have. 

 

I would just like to know if you have anything positive and 

encouraging to say to students, having put them through this 

and leaving them with an economic picture like this, where 

you've added to the deficit by one and a half billion dollars, 

you've increased taxes, you increased tuition fees and now 

people are leaving the province to get work.  Do you have 

anything encouraging to say to young people in the province of 

Saskatchewan that they could use at the university or take to 

their parents or take to their friends, some positive 

encouragement about what you're going . . . at the university 

and for education here in the province? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier, we 

have every kind of encouragement to give the young people of 

our province.  And we have great faith in their ability to deal 

with the current circumstances that have been left to them by 

people who should have been wiser as they were older, and 

weren't. 

 

I think if you refer in one of those articles, the Star-Phoenix 

article that I think I recognized there when you were holding it 

up, the comments of the president of the student's union at the 

U of S, who said -- I can't quote because I haven't got it in front 

of me -- but in effect said, we're not happy about increases in 

tuition, but we realize the fiscal situation of the province and 

we know there are trade-offs to be made. 

 

So those students are intelligent people who understand that we 

have to play with the hand that we've been dealt. And we 

haven't left them with anything; we're with them and they're 

with us, and they still will be when they graduate and when 

they're looking for work in the province that has the highest 

construction starts in the country and the lowest unemployment 

rate in any province in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Devine: -- Madam Minister, the students are quoted as 

saying that when they go out to look for a job, they can't find 

one in the province of Saskatchewan, and you're bragging 

about the unemployment rate.  The population is going down; 

people are leaving the province; and statistic after statistics are 

saying Saskatchewan's economy is regressing.  Now the 

students are voting with their feet.  They're saying, I can't 

afford your tuition; I can't get a job in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The NDP is raising taxes and violating every promise that they 

made.  They campaigned on the $14.5 billion deficit, saying, 

it's okay; we won't raise taxes but we'll protect you.  When they 

get in power, they say, oh well, surprise, surprise; we have to 

do all these mean things.  There's no plan at all. 

 

The plan is, you got elected and you're going to try to survive 

by taking it out on the backs of the poor.  Food banks are up 

450 per cent.  Farmers' income is down by 50 per cent.  You're 

closing 52 rural hospitals.  You're taking it out on the hides of 

people, real people, because you campaigned on falsehoods to 

get elected.  And now you're saying, well I guess we'll have to 

raise tuition fees another 10 per cent, and we raised them 10 per 

cent last year. 

 

I'm just asking, could you better justify what's going on?  Does 

everything have to get worse under the NDP administration?  

Isn't there some positive encouragement for work, for jobs, for 

students, for tax relief, for credit ratings, for something? 

 

I mean the only thing that we've heard of is the Premier in New 

York talking about Crown Life coming here; the fertilizer 

plants are here, the paper mills are here, Cargill and 

Weyerhaeuser.  In New York, he says that's really positive.  

Well it isn't exactly what he said when he was campaigning but 

I mean that's about it. 

 

Housing starts are up in Regina because Crown Life is here and 

FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) is here.  What's the other 

reason?  What new, exciting ventures are going on in 

Saskatoon and Regina that are increasing housing starts? 

 

Well the members make fun of the students and of the people 

who are losing their hospitals, and of the people who are facing 

increased taxes and tuition.  You can laugh about it but the 

people aren't laughing.  The editorials and just the general 

result is that people are increasingly upset with you because 

you didn't know what you were talking about when you said 

you'd make it all better.  Not at all. 

 

So I'm just asking you one more time, Madam Minister, have 

you got any positive, good news that students can take home to 

their parents, or take to the university, take to their colleagues, 

or take to the professors; and say yes, the Minister of Education 

and the NDP administration of Saskatchewan really is doing 

the right thing for education, and there's a bright future for 

people -- young people -- in Saskatchewan despite these dismal 

statistics and the rapidly rising 



1596 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

tuition. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

knows that we don't set tuition fees; that the universities are 

self-governing bodies and they are responsible for arranging 

their affairs in a way that they feel is appropriate.  And we 

didn't make undertakings that we wouldn't adjust tuition fees 

because we don't adjust tuition fees. 

 

The good news that we have, as I said before, is that we have 

the lowest unemployment rate of any province in Canada, 

about 5 points lower than the national rate.  And we have the 

highest construction starts in many years.  And there are a great 

many promising signs in the economy. 

 

There are a great many signs that the people in Saskatchewan -- 

whether it's through personal contacts or through news releases 

and editorials -- that people are supportive of the actions that 

we're taking, that we're open and accountable.  We were before 

the election and we are now.  And it's giving people confidence 

and hope for the future -- that there is somebody in charge for a 

change. 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- One more point, Madam Minister.  You can't, 

with a straight face, say that you don't have a direct impact on 

tuition rates.  What alternative does the university have, if 

you've cut their funding, but to further cut their departments or 

raise tuitions for students? 

 

That's their only source of income -- the students or the 

Government of Saskatchewan.  And you standing there and 

saying, well it's not our fault that they raised tuition -- Madam 

Minister, it's a direct result of what you're doing.  Any student 

or professor watching you say that tonight is just going to 

shake their head and say well, well, well, as if the provincial 

government hasn't got anything to do with the way the 

university operates. 

 

Of course they're autonomous.  If you don't have the kind of 

support for them, then they have to either cut or raise fees to 

students, which has a negative impact on students -- very 

negative impact.  And now you've hit them 20 per cent increase 

in the last 16 months.  And you expect to say, well it's not our 

fault, it must have been the darn university.  Is that what you're 

saying? 

 

Well it doesn't wash and I . . . I don't think that you should say 

that to bright young people who are scraping money together; 

trying to get a summer job; trying to survive at university, and 

telling them that you have no impact on tuition rates. 

 

Secondly, Madam Minister, let me just read you this.  All the 

territories and provinces except Saskatchewan recorded 

increased economic growth over the year before.  The 

Saskatchewan economy contracted -- that is went down -- by 

3.5 per cent because of the huge decline in farm income.  That 

graph says 

Saskatchewan is regressing.  Farm income, not as the Premier 

says in New York, is not going up; farm income is going down.  

And StatsCanada and students and professors and other people 

know that the whole economy is going down the tube with it as 

taxes go up and tuition go up. 

 

And next you're going to say, but that's nothing to do with the 

government; that's the international commodity prices or 

something else.  Well if you don't take responsibility for 

something . . . you've got to take responsibility now for the 

added deficit, for the increased taxes, for the increased tuition, 

for 450 per cent increase in food bank numbers. 

 

Why don't you talk about the food bank in Saskatoon?  How 

many students go to the food bank since you came to power?  

Four hundred and fifty per cent increase in the number of 

people going to the food banks in Regina and Saskatoon in the 

last few months, and you're talking about or trying to say, well 

I have nothing to do with tuition, and it's not my fault. 

 

You are government.  You have raised the taxes.  You made all 

the promises.  You have now cut the rural hospitals.  You have 

increased the taxes on individuals, and now you're picking on 

students.  You pick on the poor.  You pick on the sick.  And 

now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And a member stands from 

the back and says, well they pick on politicians like me.  Is that 

it?  Is that your claim to fame?  Is that all you've got to say in 

this Legislative Assembly? 

 

The students and the people expect more.  Madam Minister, 

one more time, can't you tell them something else other than it's 

not your responsibility to have a financial impact on the 

universities or that you don't have any impact on tuition fees or 

whether they're going to cut costs.  Did you give them . . . 

Could you just enlighten the students how it's not your fault, 

one more time. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I find it passing strange 

if not astonishing that the member opposite can be so 

sanctimonious about the economic conditions in our province 

while his administration spent a billion dollars more than it 

took in for 10 years running.  All these bright young students 

that are in universities can budget much more effectively than 

that, I am sure.  I have confidence in that.  And I know that we 

had last year, in addition to the debt that we inherited, a disaster 

in the agricultural industry.  It's been a long time since we had a 

general frost in the middle of August.  And I think there are a 

number of factors that are beyond anyone's control, but the $15 

billion debt was within your control.  And I wish that you had 

displayed the same kind of concern for the future of our bright 

young students, in the days when you were racking up the 

deficit, as you pretend to have now. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Madam Minister, I have to just raise it one 

more time.  I'm going to bring in here for, if not these 

estimates, another time, every time we increased funding to the 

university, increased funding to health care, increased funding 

to agriculture, the 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1597 

NDP, you and your colleagues, stood in the legislature and 

complained because it wasn't enough.  Every single, solitary 

time -- every time. 

 

So we would go and say we'd help farmers because of drought, 

there's 22 per cent interest rates, we'd help people because 

they're suffering, help create economic activity, and every time 

we did, you'd say, not enough, not enough for students, not 

enough for health care.  If you raise these prescription drug fees 

they'll have to substitute food for drugs, and on and on.  Every 

year, year after year, from 1982 to '91, you and your seat mates 

complained because it wasn't enough. 

 

Now you're in power, and what do you say?  What do you say?  

You say, the Premier today says, oh my gosh, I may have to 

bring in balanced budget legislation because after all his 

complaining for years and years and years it wasn't enough, 

now he figures it out, well maybe it was or maybe he has to 

change his tune. 

 

Madam Minister, don't forget, every single time we increased 

spending to the university and to health care you and your 

colleagues complained because it wasn't enough.  So don't let 

the students believe -- or don't let anybody else, and I'm sure 

that they won't -- that in this situation, when you are raising 

their tuition, cutting their funds, raising their taxes, making it 

more miserable on the economy, that you are doing it just 

because you've got some fancy plan. 

 

The result, Madam Minister, is you had no idea what you were 

going to do when you got elected and now the people have 

really figured it out.  And the people are suffering, particularly 

young people, students, women, seniors, and those that are ill.  

And you can go through all of society, find them at the food 

bank.  Now I'm just pointing out, Madam Minister, that it takes 

more than a couple of flippant answers from you to set the 

record straight with respect to what you're doing to families in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I guess I would just 

like to observe that I certainly hope that the member from 

Estevan watched the W5 program on the economy of 

Saskatchewan, and that perhaps if there had been a few less 

programs during his administration to panel rumpus rooms and 

put saunas and oak kitchens in the houses of rich people, we 

wouldn't have so many poor people lined up at food banks. 

 

I want to say that, I guess people realize that we have to pay for 

the follies of their administration, that everyone has to pay, that 

$847 million in our budget that goes to service the debt is only 

$24 million short of the whole education budget -- $871 million 

for education; 847 million for interest on the debt that you 

racked up -- only $24 million difference.  Without having to 

pay the interest on the debt, we could have another whole 

parallel education system.  We could have a lot of benefits for 

students, but now we have to pay for the follies of the years 

that you spent the money and were responsible for the budget. 

So I know that the students in this province have got 

confidence now that there are people in charge that will use 

good fiscal management and that they will have a future that 

they otherwise could have never looked forward to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I had a 

different series of questions that I wanted to ask but I don't 

think I can let a tirade like that go unchallenged, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And talking about that W5 program, which is the most twisted, 

unfair, unscrupulous piece of journalism that I've ever had the 

misfortune of hearing about . . . I only watched a few minutes 

of it and after using the washroom, I could not bring myself to 

repeat watching that.  But of course that's a trademark of the 

program.  And I noticed that as I'm speaking, Mr. Chairman, 

members opposite cannot contain their iration and their 

upsetting kind of an attitude towards what I'm saying. 

 

Mr. Chairman, when the Madam Minister picks up the blame 

thrower and lights the blame thrower like her colleague, the 

Minister of Health, we find out that there are very, very many 

similarities, that both ministers are singing out of the same 

songbook here, Mr. Chairman. 

 

First of all, we have an unprecedented amount of downloading 

or offloading, cutting of funding, in other words, and telling the 

people in the health field to look after themselves.  Now you're 

telling the universities to look after themselves, Madam 

Minister.  Let's not forget what you have done, and I just came 

across, while the member from Estevan was asking you some 

questions, I came across in the annual report from the 

University of Saskatchewan, and I'll show you what you're 

doing, just one, and then there's lots of examples like this but 

one example.  Under the utilities, we find out that in utilities 

have gone up from '91 to '92, from 8,399,000 to $8,869,000 

and that is mostly because of SaskPower's rate increases, 

Madam Minister.  So in other words we have, in my 

calculations, the university paying $470,000 more for their 

power bill to SaskPower which is one of the biggest money 

makers that the Crown corporations have.  And the university is 

footing that extra bill. 

 

And not only are you decreasing the funding to university but 

you're causing them to pay half a million dollars more in power 

alone.  So you're offloading, increasing their costs and what 

other alternative does the university have but to turn to the 

students and increase the fees.  And now you are saying that 

you are concerned. 

 

Twice you have said that finally Saskatchewan has got 

somebody that's in control, Madam Minister; that type of 

control is not required by or wanted by anyone whatsoever.  

Madam Minister, I think what your display here . . . has just 

been atrocious and it's not a kind of a display from a minister of 

any government, 



1598 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

that the people of this province, first of all want and secondly, 

certainly cannot afford.  So, Madam Minister, I think that's just 

a good example of how your control is wreaking devastation 

and havoc not only in the field of health, but now we're finding 

out that the same thing is happening in education. 

 

Madam Minister, now to get on with what I really wanted to 

get up and ask about.  I find out, Madam Minister, and what I 

want to talk about for a few moments because I'm getting a fair 

number of phone calls on this issue, and that is on home 

schooling as far as education is concerned.  I know that in 1980 

. . . 1989 the then minister of Education, which I believe was 

Lorne Hepworth at the time, set up an advisory board to study 

the independent school situation.  And I think a year later in 

October '92 that report was finished and presented. 

 

And subsequent to that he set up another advisory committee to 

look at the home schooling situation to help develop some 

types of provincial regulation so on, on the home schooling.  

Now I know home schooling has been with the province for 

many, many years.  Historically it was with us and I can recall 

back in my days when I took my grade 9 and 10.  I did not take 

my grade 9 and 10 in any kind of a formal institution; that was 

rather through home schooling.  In other words, at the time, 

which was basically correspondence.  And the correspondence 

schools were more, I think, distance education than they were 

anything else. 

 

But today when we talk about home schooling, the whole 

situation has changed and we find the people are now taking 

home schooling not because of distance education as much as 

for philosophical and perhaps even religious reasons. 

 

So what I would like to do now, Madam Minister, is just ask 

you a few questions on the report that was just presented from 

the Advisory Committee on Home-Based Education.  Could 

you give me an update?  When did you first of all get that 

report, and what have you done with it, and where does it stand 

as far as your department is concerned right now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could 

have leave to introduce guests? 

 

The Chair: -- The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests.  Is leave granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, it's my pleasure to 

introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, in the 

Speaker's gallery, my daughter Sacha and her friend Dania 

Garchinski who are with us tonight listening to this very 

interesting debate on education. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Education, Training and Employment 

Vote 5 

 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

member's question on the home schooling.  At the risk of 

compromising -- from some of the comments from my 

colleagues here -- the value of my own education, I also was a 

correspondence school student back in the days when we didn't 

even have power, and it wasn't done by computer.  It was done 

in brown envelopes that went on the . . . it was sorted out in the 

mail car of the train.  But those were interesting times and I 

don't think we really suffered for it.  We certainly learned some 

good study habits. 

 

But with respect to the home schooling, I haven't got the dates 

exactly at hand, but the hon. member may not have been in the 

legislature the day last week, I think, that we gave second 

reading to the legislation outlining the changes in The 

Education Act which will accommodate all of the 

recommendations of the committee that reported on home 

schooling -- I think it was either late last fall or very early this 

year that I was actually in receipt of the report.  I think it was 

an excellently done report. 

 

(2130) 

 

I'm given to understand that the recommendations were all 

unanimously agreed to by the members of the committee, even 

though it was a fairly large and broad-based committee.  To my 

knowledge the people that have opted for home schooling, 

some of them for moral and religious reasons, but some for 

other reasons, all very valid, are very dedicated people. 

 

It's a difficult undertaking to do a good job of, and I certainly 

have a high degree of admiration for those people who are able 

to be successful and who are very dedicated in doing this.  And 

we intend to support them through the legislation and in 

support of their recommendations in the report in so far as we 

can. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I hope that Madam Minister doesn't consider 

this a low blow, but when I took my correspondence school we 

did have power. 

 

Madam Minister, the report that I have in my hands states that 

there have been some guiding principles.  The first guiding 

principle is that every child has a right to an education and that 

education is the very foundation of good citizenship.  And I 

think certainly that we would all agree with that. 

 

The second point, and here I want to ask you a question on.  It 

continues on and says, parents have the responsibility to 

provide for the education of their children and the right to 

direct their children's education at and from their home in 

accordance with their conscientious beliefs, subject only to 

such 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1599 

reasonable limits prescribed by law that can be demonstrably 

justified in a free and democratic society. 

 

And the question that I would like to ask you, which is 

basically response to questions that I have been asked: what are 

those limits?  What do you have in mind in terms of the 

reasonable limits prescribed by law that can be demonstrably 

justified?  There is some concern out there.  I suppose in a 

nutshell what it is doing is the people are asking what type of 

limitations, what are the parameters under which we will be 

able to continue the home-based education program before the 

government will step in and say, hey, you're not meeting the 

minimum set of standards that have been set up. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

member's question about the parents having the responsibility 

and the other principles that he raised, is simply a reflection of 

the background material in the report which leads to the 

recommendation where there would be certain standards set.  

For instance, if children, students, are home-based at the 

elementary level, they may be intending to gain admission to a 

post-secondary institution so there would be some mechanism 

for evaluating what the entry level would be following their 

home-based education. 

 

And there would be provision for school boards to provide 

resources in terms of textbooks and support materials which are 

equal and standard to what children . . . the student population 

that's in a school has.  It's basically standardization and 

supervision to a level that is acceptable in order to ensure those 

kind of outcomes. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The 

Government of Saskatchewan will not repeal the compulsory 

attendance sections of The Education Act that says:  Children 

of compulsory school age who are not attending a public or an 

independent school will be required to be under a program of 

instruction at home or elsewhere. 

 

This program of instruction, could you elaborate upon that?  

Does it mean that you have to be following a specific program, 

like ACE (accelerated Christian education program) as an 

example?  I know some of the parents that are using that.  Can 

they develop their own program?  Does it have to be agreed to 

by the director of education, or can it simply be a program that 

the parents themselves have devised and a program that they 

are following themselves?  What are your thoughts on that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, what that describes is 

simply this: that there is a great deal of flexibility in terms of 

what program the parents can use.  They're just required to 

submit their plan to the directors of education in their 

appropriate areas so that it's known what they're doing.  And 

it's a way of making sure . . . As you're aware now, in the Act 

there are provisions . . . 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- That can be their own plan, Carol? 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Yes, there are provisions that unless a 

child is enrolled in a school or a registered program that's 

recognized, that they're truant.  You know, they're not at 

school.  So they can't just stay away and say, well we're being 

home-schooled.  They have to submit an education plan which 

can be their own plan and in many cases is and that would be 

permitted to continue. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Just a couple of questions, and I'll roll them all 

into one here.  In a previous answer you make a comment that 

the school division might be able to supply textbooks and so 

forth for these children.  I know when the independent school 

started there was no resources available for them at all at one 

stage, and then gradually resources are there, busing is there -- 

all of these kinds of things have developed over a period of 

time.  And some view it as being duplication because the 

existing schools could handle those same number of students. 

 

But now in your previous answer, you said that there would be 

access to textbooks which would be paid for them by the 

taxpayer through their boards of education.  Is that correct, and 

how far are the resources of the boards of education going to be 

available to the home-based students?  That's my first question. 

 

My other question, I don't know if you will have the answers 

for it at this point, but I'll take your commitment to answer 

them.  And that is, how many home-based students are being 

taught now?  How many were taught last year, now, and in 

anticipated following year?  In other words, what I'm trying to 

get at is a kind of a trend as to what's been happening as far as 

home based is concerned. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- In terms of the resources of the school 

division, as the member opposite knows that some school 

divisions have much better relationships with their home-based 

schoolers then others at the present time.  Some are cooperating 

very well, and the member from Rosthern and I are both . . . I 

might as well mention the name of the school division, the 

Saskatchewan Valley School Division that does a very good 

job of liaison with people who wish to home-school their 

students. 

 

And they . . . some school divisions now make books from the 

library and other resources, as they're available from the 

school, available to those students.  Others do not cooperate so 

well.  So with the changes in the legislation, we're trying to 

encourage that kind of cooperation.  And we're moving towards 

providing funding to school divisions in recognition of the 

numbers of students that we have. 

 

And to the last part of the question where you said the numbers.  

To my knowledge it's approximately 500.  And we don't have a 

really long history to track a progression.  I would assume that 

it would increase slightly.  There has been some growth since 

the legal rights of parents who wish to avail themselves of this 

kind of education have been clearly established by the 



1600 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1993 

courts -- there has been some growth.  But as I said before, it is 

very difficult.  It's not easy for parents to home-school and only 

those who are really dedicated can be successful at it.  So I 

certainly don't expect that the change in the legislation will be a 

great encouragement.  We'll probably see some growth in the 

numbers but we don't expect it to be dramatic. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Speaker, just 

a couple questions regarding the financing of home schooling, 

and also . . . or Madam Minister through the Chairman, you had 

mentioned that in the legislation you were going to be allowing 

for some funding or allocation of funding to students in private 

or home schools, is that right? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the recommendation of 

the committee was that there be a per pupil grant paid to the 

school division -- I make it clear, there is no recommendation 

that it be paid to the parents; it will be paid to the school 

division -- the full per pupil grant for the first five students in 

each school division, and after the first five that it be paid on a 

graduated scale.  We haven't made a commitment to that 

funding yet. 

 

We are changing the legislation.  The regulations pursuant to 

the legislation have yet to be drafted and completed.  We're 

hoping that they'll all be in place by this fall.  And we certainly 

do intend, in the long run, to support in the same, in the manner 

that was recommended, home school or with funding to the 

school division. At the most I think right now we can promise 

or commit to a phasing in.  We don't have allowance in the 

budget for this coming fiscal year, the estimates we're 

considering here, for the full level of funding that is 

recommended but we want to move in that direction. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- What about the taxation, the educational taxation 

that each property owner in the province puts towards 

education.  That goes into the global funding for the local board 

to administer.  Has there been any thought given to allowing 

the parent to put that taxation, tax dollar toward the educational 

facility that they would like to educate their child in or even to 

allow them to use that tax dollar to purchase the necessary 

books and information they need to home-school their child? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, no we haven't given 

any consideration to that option.  The report of the committee 

doesn't even recommend that option and as the member is 

aware, this is a long-established principle in Saskatchewan that 

there is that local provision to raise taxes locally even from 

people who have no children, who have never had any children 

in school, and our treatment of home school, I think, as an 

option is consistent with that principle. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, one other question.  When 

you're looking at the subsidies, is it true that when a student 

leaves a school system and is schooled at home, that subsidy 

then doesn't go to that school board?  The school boards, that 

local board, is funded based on the number of students within 

the school. 

Let's say five students are taken out of a school system put into 

a home school or sent to a private school, those five students 

then, are not on . . . the funding isn't allocated to that school 

board for those five students because they're not counted as the 

numbers, is that true? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  What the member 

describes is . . . it describes the case right now. 

 

If there are . . . just say there is 10 students in a school division 

that are being home schooled, those students are not counted in 

the enrolment of the division for the purposes of the grant.  So 

what's recommended in the report and what we want to move 

towards -- we're not committed for this year -- but we want to 

move towards, is that the first five students who are being 

home schooled who are not in this system, will be counted.  

And that the local . . . the school board would get the per-pupil 

grant for those five, and a portion thereafter for the incremental 

numbers. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 5 agreed to. 

 

(2145) 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Education, Training and Employment 

Vote 141 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 141 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, just as the officials 

depart, I would like to express my thanks to the deputy minister 

and the director of finance, Arleen Hynd and Robin Johnson, 

for their able assistance. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would also 

like to thank the minister's officials and the minister herself for 

her cooperation and answers. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

New Careers Corporation 

Vote 59 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, was the New Careers one of those corporations whose 

board was eliminated? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer to the 

disposition of the board, if you like, or the status, is that the 

board wasn't eliminated.  It was simply replaced by one person 

who, being the associate deputy minister in the Department of 

Education, and it was deemed to be a reasonable thing to do in 

that we were looking at the role of the corporation and how it 



May 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1601 

fits within the Department of Education. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The 

purpose of New Careers, I believe, is to train people to better fit 

within the economic structures of society, to train them -- they 

may have been doing one type of work -- to retrain them.  I 

believe most of them are probably receiving social assistance.  

Is this the case, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, that has been the case.  

That has been the recent tradition of this program.  What we're 

hoping to do in moving it into the . . . in close collaboration 

with the Department of Education in which the provincial 

apprenticeship board is housed, is to turn New Careers into a 

more positive education experience and have any of the work 

that is done that is apprenticeable, be supervised so that it will 

count towards a certification in a trade so that it will become 

less of a revolving door where people come in, go on UIC 

(Unemployment Insurance Commission), back on social 

services.  We want it to become a laddering process for people 

to access permanent employment and meaningful skills 

training. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, do people voluntarily 

come forward to enter this program or are they referred to the 

New Careers Corporation? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, it's voluntary in terms 

of participation.  But I guess as a sign that people would rather 

have meaningful work than be on welfare, there are many 

people who approach our counselling service at the counselling 

centres and volunteer, and there are others who are voluntarily 

referred by a Social Services worker to the counselling 

program. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I wonder if you could 

define voluntarily referred by Social Services? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in terms of their . . . 

people's participation in New Careers, it is certainly voluntary 

and doesn't affect the status of the individual.  However, when 

it comes to a work placement following an experience with 

New Careers, if an able-bodied person declines to take that 

kind of a job, then they do lose their social assistance benefits. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I believe 

that the New Careers concept is a very worthwhile project 

because people who find themselves trapped on welfare need 

some assistance to get off; they need some additional training 

that is pertinent to society today, and New Careers does provide 

that. 

 

One of the things that we've had lacking in our education 

system has indeed been an apprenticeship program.  It seems to 

be . . . it's very prominent in Europe, but in the North American 

continent it does not seem to be the manner in which people 

wanted to move.  And yet there are a lot of opportunities 

available for people who, with the training skills that they could 

receive through an apprenticeship program . . . And I believe 

that the use of the apprenticeship program within this 

corporation may very well become a very significant part of it.  

And I would encourage you to continue along that way. 

 

It's also very important, Madam Minister, that those within the 

social service system that can perform the functions necessary 

to participate in this program do so, that they be encouraged 

strongly to participate and to upgrade themselves as the 

programs become available.  I'd like to encourage you, Madam 

Minister, to pursue this matter.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, all I can say, to the 

member opposite, to that is amen; we certainly concur with that 

approach.  And we feel that the marriage between the 

apprenticeship branch and the Department of Education 

previously was not as good as it could have been and we hope 

that by adding those components from the Department of 

Labour and the New Careers program that we can build them 

all into something positive. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I just want to apologize.  I failed to introduce 

when we had a change of officials, Stuart Kramer, who is the 

acting CEO (chief executive officer), and Tony Antonini who 

is the manager of finance and administration for New Careers. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 59 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank 

the officials, and I'd like to thank all of the members opposite 

for both their questions on both sides of estimates tonight for 

Education, Training and Employment and New Careers and 

thank them for their cooperation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We would 

like to thank the minister's officials for coming in and for 

aiding her tonight and we'd like to thank the minister for her 

cooperation. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:55 p.m. 

 


