




















































Hansard: March 31, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 741 

 March 31, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Draper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir. I'd like to 

introduce to you, and through you to the members of this 

legislature, three people from Gravelbourg. They're members 

of the Gravelbourg School Board. Keith Brown, the chairman; 

M. Armand Martin, a member; and Mrs. Marion Piché who's 

the director. They've been in Regina here meeting with the 

education local government committee. And I'd like to ask you 

to join with me in welcoming them to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

echo the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg's invitation to 

the people from the Gravelbourg School Board. And I'd like to 

thank them for having joined me for lunch today. I'd ask the 

members to welcome them to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, 

following the precedent set yesterday by the member from 

Moosomin, I'd like to take this opportunity to introduce to this 

Assembly a well-known Saskatchewan senior citizen who lives 

in the riding of Regina Elphinstone, Catherine Berry, who is 

watching the proceedings at home today. I know that Catherine 

is watching these proceedings because she has apparently been 

able to pick up on the antics of the members opposite, and her 

remarks are quoted in the Leader-Post in today's edition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, protocol prevents me from echoing Catherine's 

sentiments in this Assembly, but I . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I do believe that I don't have to 

remind the member from Saskatoon Broadway that she was 

totally out of order. Order. The Government House Leader, 

please come to order. Order. Are there any further 

introductions? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like today 

to introduce to you, and through you, Mr. Speaker, visitors 

from all around the province who are here to express their 

opposition to Bill 38. They are the people in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, who are wearing the large, white ribbons, symbolic of 

their cause. And I would invite the members to join with me in 

welcoming them today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to 

introduce, on behalf of my colleague, the Minister of Health, 

the member for Hillsdale, Regina Hillsdale, a group of 45 

students from Massey School in Regina from the constituency 

of Regina Hillsdale. They're grade 4 students. 

 

I understand that the minister will be joining them after the 

question period. And I know that I speak for her in welcoming 

all of you here today, and in asking all members, Mr. Speaker, 

to join with me to welcome the students here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Purchase of VLTs 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 

responsible for the Gaming Commission. The NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government opposite have refused to table a 

security report which was apparently conducted by two 

members of the security branch of the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation. A letter referring to the report says 

that the investigation, and I quote: 

 

 . . . was directed at issues which . . . (would) cause 

embarrassment or reflect poorly on the integrity and 

credibility of the government . . . 

 

That's an interesting mandate, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, 

and I'm sure it made for an interesting report, a report which is 

being kept secret by the members opposite. My question to the 

minister responsible for gaming is not an onerous one. Can you 

supply me the names of the two individuals from SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) who were 

responsible for that investigation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 

response to the member's question, I think he's quite well aware 

of the fact that Mr. Egan, who was the former superintendent of 

the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) in this province, 

headed up the investigation on behalf of the Property 

Management Corporation and I am satisfied, to reiterate, that 

what I have said before, that Mr. Egan has done a competent 

job. 

 

I would just want to say, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 

member's question, I think he would want to acquaint himself 

of the process with respect to freedom of information. It's open 

for any person to ask the Gaming Commission, the chair of the 

Gaming Commission, for a copy of the report. I understand that 

that process is available to the member. I would also want to 

indicate to you, sir, that I have contacted the Department of 

Justice with respect to whether or whether not this report would 

or may be released by the commission and it is indicated to me 

that their understanding is the commission would not be willing 



742 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1993 

to release the report for the reasons that I have outlined to you 

on many occasions in the past. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well that, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, is 

a very interesting observation. And I want to ask you: would 

you supply the names to this Assembly of those two 

individuals who were asked by SPMC to do the investigation 

on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan? Would you 

supply those two names for me? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I would be more than 

willing to put together a list of people who have been involved 

in the investigation and pass them on to the member opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, will that list 

specify, as it says here in the document you tabled: 

 

 The security review was completed with the assistance of two 

members from the security branch of SPMC and was directed 

at issues which . . . (would) cause embarrassment . . . (to the 

Government, etc., as I quoted earlier.) 

 

Will you provide those two names of those two individuals 

specifically? I don't want all of the others; I want those two 

names. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in the spirit of 

openness I have indicated to him that I will supply a list of all 

of the names of the people who were involved in the 

investigation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 

you told me that . . . or you told the media outside of this 

Assembly on Monday that you had not personally seen this 

report. That's what you indicated to the media. I wonder then, 

Mr. Minister, what report you referred to in this House when 

you were avoiding questions on Monday. 

 

Why don't you table that report for us today as outlined . . . 

Why did you have to go to the Minister of Justice and ask him 

whether that was reviewed and could be let . . . by the 

commission to this House or to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan? We want to know, as a member of the 

opposition, why you won't provide that document to us today. 

We want to know why you don't want to supply that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, I 

would share the names of the people who were involved in the 

investigation on behalf of the Property Management 

Corporation. I intend to do 

that. As a matter of fact, I'll do that now: Colleen Galenzoski 

and Doug Porter, along with Mr. Egan. I want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, that I believe it is the prerogative of the member 

opposite to ask the Gaming Commission for a copy of the 

report. And I ask him to do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I want to 

know, if you did not see the report, who gave the authorization 

in cabinet to allow the Gaming Commission to proceed with 

the purchase of the video lottery terminals from these two 

companies? Which one of the ministers gave that authority, 

that authorization to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in answer to 

the member's question, I'm not sure if he's familiar with The 

Saskatchewan Gaming Commission Act, but under that Act, 

the responsibility of administering the Act is quite clearly the 

responsibility of the commission. And in doing so, they have 

the ability to employ staff, to acquire property, to enter into 

contracts, and do other business arrangements and other 

business things, and I believe that that's exactly what the 

commission has done. It's within the purview of their mandate. 

That's what they have done. 

 

If you're interested in information with respect to the 

investigation, perhaps you would do what I have asked you to 

do, is contact the chairman of the Gaming Commission and ask 

for a copy of the investigation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I want to ask 

you whose responsibility was the Gaming Commission the day 

the order was given to have VLT (Video Lottery Technologies 

Inc.) and GTECH supply the machines for the province of 

Saskatchewan? Who was the minister of the four that have 

been there since you took over; which one of the ministers was 

responsible for that decision? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the 

member's question, I'm not sure who was the minister at the 

time that the Gaming Commission embarked upon this, but I 

can find out what the time was and find out for you who the 

minister in charge of the Gaming Commission was at that time. 

 

Future of Rural Health Care 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Health. Madam Minister, last night the member 

from Moosomin and I attended a joint meeting of the Moose 

Mountain Health Steering Committee and the Estevan Steering 

Committee. This group was made up of representatives from 

Maryfield, Wawota, Arcola, Oxbow, Gainsborough, 

Moosomin, Redvers, Lampman, Estevan, Benson, Stoughton, 



March 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 743 

Fillmore, Bienfait, and Carlyle. 

 

These people are extremely concerned about the systematic 

dismantling of rural health care by your government, and they 

are afraid of the devastating impact your so-called wellness 

plan will have on their communities. 

 

Madam Minister, you keep saying that communities are free to 

make their own decisions on the health care districts. However, 

based on the comments of the health official at last night's 

meeting, a Mr. Rus Duncombe, it is clear that your government 

has its own hidden agenda and you are prepared to impose your 

destructive plan on anyone who doesn't play ball with you. 

 

Madam Minister, the communities I have just listed want to 

form their own health care districts, but they were told by Mr. 

Duncombe that the new districts should consist of at least 

40,000 people, and he pushed them to join the Estevan district. 

 

Madam Minister, it's becoming more and more apparent that 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Does the member have a 

question? I want the member to put his question. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, my 

question is: will you bring forward your hidden agenda for 

Saskatchewan health care, bring out the map that you have 

drawn, bring out the list of hospitals that you intend to close, 

and quit trying to get the local people, the local hospital boards, 

to do your dirty work for you? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, there is no hidden agenda. 

And if the member opposite had followed health reform over 

the last seven or eight months with a legitimate concern to 

determine what is occurring, he would be saying different 

things today, instead of being involved in meetings for totally 

political purposes, which obviously he is. 

 

The member opposite knows that the department and the 

government have put out guidelines for forming districts. There 

are 25 to 30 planning groups in the province that are now 

working and talking about districts. We have set out some very 

specific guidelines as to the amount that should be in the 

district, and we have recommended basically 12,000. 

 

The districts can be larger. They can have 20,000; they can 

have 40,000 if they want to associate with a larger centre. 

That's okay. But we're hoping they will be at least 12,000. And 

there is no other criteria with respect to the size of those 

districts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he's asked me a whole range of questions here 

and I want to deal with them. Now with respect to a map and 

boundaries being set out, that has not been predetermined. We 

are waiting to see what the planning groups want to do out 

there. 

Now because this has been in process for several months, we 

are getting a better idea as to where the lines are going to be 

because the groups have been telling us since last August, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, at least I 

am going out and meeting with the public at these hearings, 

which is more than you're doing. And the people are asking, 

have we not been wasting our time for the last seven or eight 

months? Madam Minister, this charade that you're carrying on 

is just an elaborate public relations gimmick designed to deflect 

responsibility from you for the dismantling of rural health care. 

 

The comments made by your official last night prove beyond a 

shadow of a doubt that there is a plan in place for the 

destruction of rural hospitals. It's all but decided, Madam 

Minister, and you continue to say that the local boards have the 

right to determine their own fate. This is like giving a 

condemned man the choice between the gas chamber and the 

firing squad and claiming he has the right to determine his own 

fate. 

 

Will the minister, the Dr. Kevorkian of health care, bring the 

plan into the open and tell the people who attended the meeting 

last night which hospitals have been targeted for your 

government-assisted suicide program? Is it Wawota, Oxbow, 

Lampman, Gainsborough, Stoughton? For once and for all, 

Madam Minister, give us a straight answer. Which one is it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — The members opposite try so hard to be 

mean and witty, Mr. Speaker, that it's rather hilarious 

sometimes. The members opposite know that what we did a 

couple weeks ago was put out an institutional package that set 

bed targets for the province. It was open; we spoke to the press 

about it; we sent it out to all the boards. It's not hidden; it's not 

in secret. It is open and it is all there as to what the bed targets 

are for the province. We are asking people so . . . 

 

And the other interesting thing is the inconsistency in the 

members opposite who have been saying all spring: you've got 

to give more guidelines, you've got to give more directions, 

people don't know what they're doing. And as soon as we do 

that, they say: you've got a plan, and you're doing this and 

you're doing that, and don't give us guidelines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, boards will have the opportunity to make 

decisions in the context of a district. The government will set 

the funding. We will set guidelines for getting into districts. 

We will set provincial standards. We will set bed targets, and 

we will provide districts with an evaluation system as they 

deliver heath care services. 



744 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1993 

But it will be a partnership of more control and flexibility in 

communities than what has happened in the past, but a 

partnership with government working towards a better health 

care system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, your targets for beds 

and your funding cuts don't amount to much of a partnership 

for rural Saskatchewan. Madam Minister, your official, Mr. 

Duncombe, made one more comment on behalf of the 

government that the people in the meeting found very 

disturbing. He said that there are two classes of citizens in 

Saskatchewan when it comes to health care — one rural, one 

urban. 

 

This is what he said, Madam Minister, and this shocking 

statement. But I at least give him credit for being upfront and 

honest and open, which is more than can be said for yourself. 

 

Madam Minister, if you implement your master plan for 

destroying rural health care in this province, it will be easy to 

tell the difference between those two classes. The people in 

rural Saskatchewan will have a much lower life expectancy. 

 

Madam Minister, do you support the comments of your 

official? Do you intend to create two classes of health service 

in this province? And how do you justify this complete betrayal 

of rural Saskatchewan on the issue of health care delivery? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, right now in rural 

Saskatchewan we have an average rate of something like five 

beds per thousand for primary care. In urban Saskatchewan we 

have 1 to 1.5 beds per thousand for primary care. 

 

It is therefore necessary — And also in addition to that, rural 

Saskatchewan residents have access to city hospitals and use 

the base hospitals to a large extent — it is therefore necessary, 

since we are facing a $15 billion debt in this province that was 

left to us by the members opposite and their mismanagement 

and incompetence, because this province is in such a dire 

financial situation, it has to take a look at the institutional 

sector and put money where there are needs. 

 

No longer can we fund wants. We have to fund needs and 

health care needs. And our dollars have to result in positive 

health outcomes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, the 

people in urban Saskatchewan are only minutes away from 

their hospitals. Under your proposal the people in rural 

Saskatchewan will be hours away from a hospital. 

 

Madam Minister, you say that you are giving the health 

districts the right to determine their own fate. But everyone at 

the meeting last night said that the process was moving too 

fast. They're saying they need 

more time. They're saying August 17 deadline for district 

formation is much too soon for such a dramatic change. These 

people are making decisions that involve the very viability of 

their communities and you are giving them only a few short 

months to do it in. 

 

Madam Minister, will you extend the August 17 deadline or is 

this deadline just another part of your hidden agenda? Has this 

hasty deadline been put in place to allow you to impose your 

master plan on the destruction of Saskatchewan health care 

before the local communities get the opportunity to become 

organized? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the local communities have 

been organizing since last August and they've been given a 

year within which to do it, and many of them are saying it's not 

moving fast enough. They wanted it to move faster. Now I 

know there's some communities that are not as far ahead as 

other communities. That I'm aware of, and we're prepared to 

help. 

 

Now with respect to being hours away — hours away — from 

hospitals. That is simply not true. There will be accessible 

acute care services within a district that are reachable within a 

period of time that's safe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There will also be emergency . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I want to ask the 

member from Souris-Cannington, he had lots of time to ask his 

question; he should at least give the minister the courtesy of 

listening to her answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the bed target . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, it's very important for 

communities to get organized on a district basis — it is very 

important because the bed targets that we're moving towards 

will be implemented on a district basis and on a 

provincial-wide basis. It's not going to be a question of looking 

at each institution and each community. It will be done in the 

context of a much larger community. There will be emergency 

acute care services for people in every community in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, a short 

question: how many minutes will people in rural Saskatchewan 

be away from their local hospital? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, we are asking district 

boards to do needs assessment and to look at those precise 

issues within the context of the health reform and the bed 

targets that are set. So it is urgent for communities at this time, 

not for these members 



March 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 745 

opposite to try and scare the people in their communities, 

because that's what they're doing. They're trying to scare people 

and get them upset when there's no need to be upset. 

 

What has to happen here is people have to come together on a 

district basis, look at it in a rational way, and provide 

high-quality health care services within the context of their 

district. And we will make sure that people are looked after 

properly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is also for 

the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, people all over this 

province want to know which rural hospitals you intend to 

close down. 

 

Last Friday I attended a meeting in Leader in which 500 people 

were there to protest your changes to the health care delivery in 

this province, Madam Minister. At that meeting people wanted 

answers, Madam Minister. They wanted to know if their 

hospital was going to close. 

 

Madam Minister, I ask you today on behalf of the people of 

Leader, Saskatchewan, do you intend to close their hospital? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the people from the Leader 

area and surrounding area are having ongoing discussions right 

now with respect to health reform and the need to get into a 

district. These people will get themselves involved into a 

district. I'm not sure just how large the district will be, whether 

they will be interested in being a part of Swift Current or 

whether it's Shaunavon, Leader, and Gull Lake — I don't know 

that. They will make that determination, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then they'll do a needs assessment. They will take the bed 

targets that we've set out and the funding levels, and in the 

context of that they will be making a determination as to what 

sort of acute care services they will provide within their 

district. 

 

With respect to funding, we will be setting out what the 

funding is for each hospital in the days and weeks to come. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Madam Minister, people all over this province 

are concerned about your wellness plan. In Melfort the other 

evening 35 people stormed the Minister of Community 

Services annual NDP meeting, concerned about the health care 

situation in Melfort, the Parkland Regional Care Centre. 

 

Madam Minister, on behalf of the people of Melfort, do you 

intend to close that hospital in Melfort? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — You know, Mr. Speaker, if the members 

opposite had had a little foresight in the last 10 years, some of 

the measures that we are taking today would not have been 

done as urgently as we are now having to do them. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is we can't spend money we don't 

have, and this province is in such a difficult financial situation 

that we are having to make some very tough decisions, very 

urgently. 

 

And the members opposite can get up and they can say, are you 

doing this or are you doing that, and make all kinds of 

accusation. But let the public remember that they never showed 

one shred, not one shred of responsibility in the last 10 years. 

They have put our future and the future of our children in such 

jeopardy that the people of Saskatchewan will not forget for 

decades and decades to come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

people all over this province are concerned about health care. 

Rallies in Leader, Weyburn, Prince Albert, Melfort, all over 

this province, are concerned that you're going to close their 

hospital, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, I ask you this very simple question: will you 

delay passage of your damaging legislation until the 

government undertakes a complete series of public meetings all 

over this province? Will you commit to that, Madam Minister, 

this day? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, we have had public 

meetings all over the place. I've met with some 20,000 people 

in the last six or seven months across this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — I've been to communities like 

Langenburg and Star City. I've been to communities throughout 

the entire province and talked to people. And they want this 

legislation and they want it now. Because unlike the members 

opposite, they have a vision for a future health care system that 

is going to improve the quality of health care services. They 

know we're going through tough times. They know what we're 

facing with respect to the debt. And they are rising above 

vested interests. And they are rising above petty politics, unlike 

the members opposite. And they are working with us to get 

districts in place so we can provide a more rational system that 

meets health care needs and not health care wants. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Madam 

Minister says that she has been to health care meetings all over 

this province. Well, Madam Minister, I'd like to bring one to 

your attention right 



746 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1993 

now. Tomorrow evening in Eatonia, Saskatchewan, there will 

be a public meeting. And they have called your office and 

asked you to attend. Madam Minister, will you commit to those 

people in Eatonia for their meeting tomorrow, as well as Brock, 

Saskatchewan, for their meeting on Monday evening, that you 

will attend those meetings and hear the concerns of rural 

Saskatchewan and not close their hospital? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the fact is, is that we have 

been meeting with people throughout Saskatchewan and we 

will continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. We will continue to do 

that. 

 

But I want to set the members opposite straight. There are 

many people in this province who recognize the need for 

change, who recognize the need to be able to move towards a 

health care system that they can afford. The people of this 

province have a vision of where we are heading and what has 

to be done. And they know that there are some tough decisions; 

they know that. And many of them want to participate in 

making those decisions and they want the right to make them 

themselves; others would choose the department and the 

government to make those. And we can work with both parties 

through this health care reform. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 42 — An Act respecting the Creation and 

Supervision of certain Crown Corporations 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Speaker, I move an Act respecting 

the Creation and Supervision of certain Crown Corporations be 

now introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 

a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — What is the member's point of order? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, earlier today before 

question period, you sat me down when I introduced guests. 

And as I understand it, Mr. Speaker, I was just following a 

process that was entered into yesterday by the Conservative 

member opposite, the member from Moosomin. 

 

And I'm wondering, Mr. Speaker, given that you did not sit him 

down when he chose to introduce his guest yesterday, I'm 

wondering why you chose to sit down myself. 

The Speaker: — Order. I think the member does make a very 

valid point. The reason . . . I think the member yesterday was 

out of order when he chose to introduce somebody . . . when he 

chose somebody that was not in this House. That is not a 

precedent, but I did set the member down today because she 

got into political debate. 

 

The member got into political debate whereas I believe the 

member did not yesterday, but both members were out of 

order. 

 

Order. I do want to draw the attention to the Government 

House Leader that debate, political debate, during introduction 

of guests has never been tolerated in this House. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I have 

a point of order. 

 

Mr. Minister, I will take the time to explain it. And the point of 

order is this: on March 29 the minister responsible for 

gambling directly quoted a document which is recorded on 

page 660 of Hansard. On that day the Opposition House 

Leader raised a point of order to have the quoted document 

tabled pursuant to the rules and practices of the Assembly, on 

which point you ruled the minister should indeed table the 

document. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have examined what the minister tabled 

and taken the time to consult the appropriate authorities and 

have come to the conclusion that this further point of order 

must be raised. Mr. Speaker, when you examine what the 

minister tabled, you will see at the top of the page it is clearly 

labelled as appendix B. This label conclusively proves that 

there is in fact an appendix A and indeed the rest of the 

document to which these are appendices. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Will the members please let the 

member make his point of order. 

 

Mr. Martens: — The point, Mr. Speaker, is that the rules and 

practices of the Assembly do not allow a minister to table only 

a portion of a quoted document. The rules do not say that a 

minister must table only the page from which he quoted, but 

that indeed must table the entire document. 

 

If this attempt to circumvent the rules is allowed, Mr. Speaker, 

then what is to stop a minister from simply clipping out the 

paragraph or the sentence that is quoted? So for example, Mr. 

Speaker, if you look on page 660, if you look on page 660 of 

Hansard, Mr. Speaker, you will see the text of the minister's 

quote. 

 

Allowing him to table only an appendix, claiming that he only 

quoted that appendix, would be the equivalent of allowing him 

to table a paragraph on page 660. Literally, Mr. Speaker, what 

this would mean is that the act of quoting is itself sufficient 

documentation, making the tabling rule completely 

meaningless. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not a trivial point. The minister 



March 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 747 

clearly tabled only a portion of the document he actually 

quoted and that is conclusively proven by the content of the 

tabled material itself. I therefore ask you to review the 

document and the authorities and come back with an order for 

the minister to table the rest of the document. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would want to go 

back and check Hansard, but my understanding is is that the 

document that the minister had in his presence and quoted from 

was in fact tabled as indicated. These briefing notes that the 

minister was using were tabled here in the Assembly, as per the 

requirements of the rules of the Assembly. We'll go back and 

review Hansard again, but my understanding is that the 

documents were already tabled and that the requirements were 

in fact met. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I do remember yesterday asking 

the minister to table the page that he was quoting from. I do 

want to refer members to Beauchesne: 

 

 Only the document cited need be tabled by a Minister. A 

complete file need not be tabled because one document in it 

has been cited. 

 

I asked the minister yesterday to table the information from 

which he was citing and I would assume that he tabled the page 

from which he was citing. Therefore I don't find the point of 

order well taken. I have to assume that the minister filed the 

page from which he was quoting, and he does not have to file 

the whole file or the complete document, but only that from 

which he was quoting. 

 

Order, order. 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

question 92, I would request it be converted to motions for 

returns (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: — Motions for returns (debatable). 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

The Chair: — Order. I would ask the minister to introduce the 

officials who are here with her today. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, I'd like to introduce the deputy 

minister of Finance, John Wright on my right; associate deputy 

minister of Finance, Craig Dotson; executive director of the 

Treasury Board branch, Rae Haverstock; and at the back, Al 

Dennett, director of operations, Treasury Board branch. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would propose to make a few brief 

comments about the general purpose of 

interim supply and about this particular interim supply Bill. 

 

Each year the annual budget tabled in the legislature is to 

provide funding for the entire fiscal year. The Assembly then 

reviews the details of the budget, department by department, 

and the whole budget is ultimately passed by means of The 

Appropriation Act. 

 

That period of legislative review of the individual departmental 

estimates may take several months however, and in the period 

before that, expenditures are required. Provisions are therefore 

in place for the Legislative Assembly to approve interim supply 

by means of an interim appropriation Act otherwise known as 

the interim supply Bill. 

 

In Saskatchewan the tradition and practice over the past 30 

years has been for the first interim supply Bill each year to 

provide for one month's expenditures and therefore to provide 

one-twelfth of the total budgeted amounts. 

 

In fact in the 33 years since 1960, there have only been three 

occasions when the first interim supply Bill was for some 

amount other than a straight one-twelfth of the budgeted 

amount. 

 

The interim supply Bill being introduced today is, therefore, 

consistent with the tradition and practice in the legislature over 

the past 30 years; provides a straight one-twelfth of all the 

funds to be voted contained in the Estimates for the whole 

year. This one-twelfth amount will be provided to departments 

for the month of April in order for them to meet the urgent 

obligations and to make timely payments. 

 

If members of the Assembly wish to review the details of 

expenditures in a particular department, they will of course 

have the opportunity in the Committee of Finance when that 

department's minister and officials are present to answer 

detailed questions. 

 

In short, we have a budget before the Assembly. The budget 

has not been passed but there are agencies in the province who 

require money for the month of April. And so we have to pass 

interim supply to provide them with that money, and the debate 

is on that issue rather than on the Estimates of the government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move: 

 

 That a sum not exceeding $340,881,000 be granted to Her 

Majesty on account for the twelve months ending March 31, 

1994. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 

think it's appropriate that I make a few remarks before asking 

the Finance minister a few questions regarding interim supply. 

 

I expected as much of the Finance minister, to come in here 

and give the opposition a little lecture on what 



748 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1993 

we can ask and what we can't ask her in this particular 

committee. But I say to the minister that there is ample 

precedent in the past to be quite wide and broad-ranging in this 

particular motion. And indeed, interim supply in the past has 

gone on for, in fact, days until there were certain answers 

provided to the opposition. So I can assure Madam Minister 

that the opposition members will probably all be prepared to 

ask her questions during this particular debate. 

 

Madam Minister, your budget recently brought down in this 

province, every day has another piece pop up to the surface 

which Saskatchewan people are finding very disquieting. It was 

bad enough on budget day, Madam Minister, when you 

proceeded to tax the living daylights out of them, when you 

and your Premier had promised them in the past that you 

wouldn't do that. 

 

Madam Minister, I'm not going to go back through the dozens 

of quotes which have been entered into debate in this 

legislature by your Premier and by others in your political 

party, saying that you wouldn't go to these extremes with 

Saskatchewan taxpayers, that you wouldn't offload on them, 

that you wouldn't up sales tax, that you wouldn't drive the 

Saskatchewan economy to its knees. No, I'm going to not do 

that at this time, Madam Minister. 

 

But I can say to you that each and every day more and more 

people are starting to figure out exactly what is going on out 

there. And I think that's why you're seeing all around this 

province, you're seeing people in the health care community 

banding together because they're finally starting to figure out 

exactly what's here for them. And what's here for them is just a 

whole lot of pain. 

 

What isn't here is a $4.5 billion budget that you were going to 

manage in this province and you were going to manage 

smarter, and you were to cut out the waste and 

mismanagement, and you were going to keep our health and 

educational systems, those very basic structures of our society, 

in place and functioning. And what they're finding out now, 

Madam Minister, is each and every day that there are cost 

implications that these taxpayers are going to have to pick up. 

 

Health is only the tip of the iceberg, Madam Minister. We 

know that education will be next. And probably the very 

structure of government, of local government, will be next on 

the chopping block once you've got done with education. 

 

We know, Madam Minister, that the agricultural community in 

the time since the budget is beginning to assess the damage that 

you and your party have done in the short time that you've been 

in power. This second budget of your government has only 

further emphasized to everybody in rural Saskatchewan that 

there's nothing but hurt and pain in store for them in the future. 

 

That with the increases in utility rates, with increases in taxes, 

with the offloading — the half a billion dollars in offloading 

which they're going to face 

because of your budget over the next four years — that the 

property tax base of this province and particularly the property 

tax base of our towns and villages and our farms, is going to be 

under incredible pressure, pressure which your government has 

not attempted to alleviate in any way. 

 

You know, Madam Minister, it's really surprising that you 

would come in here with a motion and say to the opposition 

that we should simply allow this to go through, when last year 

your colleague, the member from Dewdney, stood in this 

legislature and said that the use of special warrants was 

something that would never occur again in the legislature of 

Saskatchewan under a New Democratic Party government. 

 

And what do we find when we get to the end of the previous 

fiscal year? We find your government going for special 

warrants for one-sixth of the entire budget of the province of 

Saskatchewan. Two whole months — two whole months under 

special warrants. 

 

And, Madam Minister, it only shows that promises made by 

New Democrats are promises to be broken. That nothing that 

you people said in the 1991 election campaign meant anything. 

Nothing at all. They were simply promises made in order to 

achieve some political ends that the member from Riversdale 

wanted. 

 

Well I can tell you, Madam Minister, that your days of being 

able to fudge the numbers, of blame others, are rapidly drawing 

to a close. I've got to hand it to you, Madam Minister, it was a 

very opportune time to switch from the way the Government of 

Saskatchewan accounted for its books to accrual accounting. 

People are starting to figure out, Madam Minister, exactly how 

that process works. It was a very, very opportune time. 

 

It's interesting when one sits down with the heads of some of 

the major accounting firms around town and goes through this 

process. And quite frankly, they haven't all figured it out quite 

yet. But it was a very, very opportune time. I would say it was 

a political time. It had more to do with politics than it had to do 

with the financial well-being of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I have to hand it to you, Madam Minister, and to your 

colleagues and to your department. It's very well crafted. And 

it's going to take people a while to figure out exactly what was 

going on — how that sort of $800 million once, one time over, 

works. 

 

But people are starting to figure it out, just like they're figuring 

out all of your broken promises; how they're starting to figure 

out how their monthly budget as individuals is being affected; 

how their monthly budgets when it comes to their health care 

needs, their transportation needs, the needs of clothing and 

feeding their families — all of those things that you, Madam 

Minister, that your party promised wouldn't happen, are now 

happening. And they're happening in spades. 



March 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 749 

We're seeing school boards coming back to us, civic 

administrations talking about the increase in gasoline costs, 

how much extra it's going to be — 300, 400, $500,000? Over 

and over again what we see is a pattern of offloading, 

downloading when you and your colleagues stand in your seats 

and decry that Ottawa, decry that Ottawa is unloading on the 

provinces. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, just think what would have happened if 

that $106 million in transfer payments would have had to be 

paid back this year instead of being able to use your new 

accounting method and put it off? Just think what your budget 

numbers would have looked like, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, we have 9,000 less jobs in the province of 

Saskatchewan today than we had a year ago. Your minister, 

your previous minister of Finance stood in here in this 

Assembly in interim supply last year and talked about creating 

jobs, talked about creating thousands of jobs, and in fact, he 

came forward and said that because of the dropping of 

harmonization these jobs and this activity was going to occur in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And when we pressed him to bring forth the studies and the 

analysis that he claimed was done, that showed that that in fact 

was going to happen, he wouldn't produce it. And the end 

result, Madam Minister, instead of creating those jobs, was that 

we went the opposite way. We see the city of Medicine Hat and 

they tell me that there are more building permits for the city of 

Medicine Hat than the entire province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Do you know why that is, Madam Minister? That's because 

Saskatchewan people are fleeing this province because there is 

no opportunity. They're fleeing because they don't trust you 

people. They're fleeing because you don't live up to your word, 

that the promises that you make, that the figures you quote 

don't come true. 

 

And now, Madam Minister, you would have us believe, you 

would have us believe in this Assembly and around this 

province that the manufacturing and processing industry is 

going to jump-start our economy because you're going to 

harmonize their sector at 9 per cent instead of 7. And that for 

the next eight months that particular sector of our economy is 

going to grow by leaps and bounds because you have done that, 

but by the same token if you did that for the rest of our sector 

that they wouldn't grow. 

 

And you refuse to provide the analysis, to provide the 

documents, that will show how this job creation is going to 

work; how you're going to stop out-migration; how you're 

going to stop this job loss. And you refuse, and your 

government refuses to provide that. You just tell us that by 

increasing taxes, by offloading on people all over this province, 

that we're going to get an economic turnaround and that our 

retail sector, for instance, is going to do better than 4 per cent. 

Madam Minister, that's a joke. It's a joke. 

You know what's going on around Canada. It means that your 

projections for this year will be as badly out as they were for 

last year. Your budget deficit was out over nearly $80 million 

last year. And why would anyone in the province of 

Saskatchewan, given the projections you made, think that it's 

going to be any different this year. 

 

And you've had your one-time-only shot at accrual, Madam 

Minister. Next year you won't be able to change the numbers 

again. You won't be able to do it again. You've had your 

one-time shot. 

 

Madam Minister, there is nothing in this budget process to give 

anyone, anyone at all, the kind of hope, the kind of confidence 

that they need to turn the economy around in this province. 

 

Madam Minister, within a month, within a month in this 

province there's a megaproject that's supposed to occur. It's 

called spring seeding. It's supposed to occur. 

 

There is not one thing, Madam Minister, in this budget that 

says that that process, which usually turns about a billion 

dollars in the Saskatchewan economy, is going to occur with 

any confidence at all. Those people don't know how they're 

going to put fuel in their tractor. They don't know how they're 

going to buy their fertilizer. And they don't know how they're 

going to go to their suppliers in the small towns and cities of 

this province and ask those suppliers to give them the credit 

that's absolutely necessary to put that megaproject in place. 

 

Instead they look down the list, Madam Minister, and they see 

agriculture, they see agriculture cut by $60 million. They see 

many of the support programs that were in place, cut. And they 

look to this government for leadership and direction, and there 

is none forthcoming. They see a task force put together by the 

Minister of Agriculture, running around this province asking, 

what should we do? But there are no solutions coming from the 

government. They keep saying that the federal government has 

to come up with the money, but they don't offer to be a partner. 

When the federal government comes forward and offers 

money, they simply turn it down. They turn it down because it 

might interfere with their political agenda. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, I say to you today: a federal election 

isn't going to save your bacon. Your federal counterparts are so 

low in the polls they're starting to look under the carpet for 

them. Audrey McLaughlin is not going to come to your 

salvation, Madam Minister. And the member from Riversdale's 

friend, Mr. Chretien, isn't either. So you might as well forget, 

Madam Minister, about waiting for a federal election to solve 

your problems for you. 

 

What you've got to do is start showing some leadership and 

direction on the economic side in this province. And it means 

far more than simply offloading on someone else, blaming 

someone else. It means that you have to put the economic tools 

and levers in place — the tools in place so that people can 



750 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1993 

grab a hold of them and pull themselves up by the bootstraps. 

 

(1500) 

 

Madam Minister, you had an opportunity in this province to 

show some leadership on budget day. You had an opportunity, 

your Premier had an opportunity, to start at the top, to cut down 

the size of his cabinet, to do away with some of these associate 

ministers that we've got hanging around — associate ministers 

that the member from Riversdale, the whole time he was in 

opposition said shouldn't be there, that they were simply 

appendages. 

 

He had an opportunity to start at the top with the Deputy 

Premier. And I appreciate that they're old friends, that they've 

been together as colleagues for a long time, but I don't know 

how you justify $800,000, Madam Minister, to the member 

from Dewdney, from Regina Dewdney, to be the keeper of the 

provincial seal and the keeper of the political machinery for the 

Government of Saskatchewan — the political machinery which 

you're hoping you can put to the best use for your federal 

counterparts in the province in the upcoming federal election. I 

don't think the taxpayers of this province appreciate, Madam 

Minister, that $800,000. 

 

The member from Dewdney doesn't have a job, Madam 

Minister, that qualifies, in my view, for cabinet status any more 

in a province that is so cash strapped as you're always 

reminding us, that you can justify increasing his portfolio by 

person-years and $800,000 simply to look after the political 

well-being of the New Democratic Party in this province. 

 

Madam Minister, what we're afraid of, what we're afraid of in 

trusting you with another $340 million for the month of April is 

that we're going to see more things happen like we saw in the 

ag research area where you had the gall to stand in this 

legislature and read into your budget speech that you were 

increasing R&D (research and development) in the agricultural 

side when in fact what you were doing was cutting it from 17 

million to 12. 

 

Reading that into the speech, from the budget speech, as if you 

had come up with brand-new money, Madam Minister. It's just 

like telling seniors in this province that on budget day you were 

giving them another 5 per cent. And as was pointed out 

yesterday, Madam Minister, that was sheer fallacy. Sheer 

fallacy. 

 

And seniors all over this province, Madam Minister, are 

figuring it out. More pieces of the iceberg are floating to the 

surface. More chips are coming off. And every time one of 

those chips floats up to the surface, more people figure it out. 

More people figure out it's going to cost me more; that the 

party of medicare is now the party of I don't care. The party of I 

don't care because, Madam Minister, health costs are now part 

and parcel of our everyday lives in this province on an 

individual basis — part and parcel. 

 

Madam Minister, you're not fooling the people in 

private health insurance. They're busy putting their packages 

together and lining up because they know now that 

Saskatchewan people are going to have to pay beyond their 

taxes for a great deal of their health care. And you know what, 

Madam Minister? A lot of people probably would agree with 

that approach if you had done it in an upfront manner; if you 

had said before the last provincial election, we are going to 

have you paying for certain parts of the health care system 

directly through private insurance, or directly upfront. 

 

And you know what, Madam Minister? I think a lot of people 

would have agreed with you. But you didn't have the political 

courage to do that. You didn't have the political courage to do 

that. 

 

And today, Madam Minister, you come to this House and you 

ask for $340 million-plus, knowing full well that seniors, 

families with small children, are now going out and having to 

pay directly over and above, over and above what you're taxing 

out of their hides on a weekly and a monthly and a yearly basis. 

 

Madam Minister, if you and your party had had the political 

courage to tell the truth to Saskatchewan electors a short time 

ago, I think people wouldn't be so cynical of the political 

process. The people wouldn't have to band together by the 

hundreds. And I'll prophesy to you, Madam Minister, they will 

band together by the thousands in health and education. That 

there will be a tax revolt in this province because you would 

sooner look after your political needs than you would look after 

the economic well-being of this province. 

 

That everything with you people is subverted to that very 

bottom level and it is politics, politics, politics, and nothing 

else. That's the only conclusion, Madam Minister, that they can 

come to as more chips off of this iceberg budget of yours float 

up to the surface. Every chip, every chip turns into a chit that 

the taxpayer of this province has to handle. And they're getting 

sick and tired, Madam Minister, of having so many chits to pay 

up. 

 

Madam Minister, one of the questions that we're going to be 

asking you in this interim supply, as we did last year for the 

member from Dewdney, is we would like you to provide the 

analysis, provide the analysis on how the Saskatchewan 

economy is going to grow, how the Saskatchewan economy is 

going to prosper, how cross-border shopping is going to 

decrease by having the sales tax at 9 per cent and the gasoline 

tax up to 10 cents. 

 

And I think those are fair and legitimate questions, Madam 

Minister. Because they fly directly in the face of what you 

promised Saskatchewan people. They dramatically affect every 

household in this province and now that you've expanded the 

provincial sales tax base to include clothing, except in the case 

of children, I think it's only proper, Madam Minister, that you 

be able to come to this legislature when you come here and 

demand, when you come here and demand over $340 million, 

that you can show every retailer in 



March 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 751 

this province, every retailer in this province how increasing 

sales tax to 9 per cent is going to make their business better, 

how it's going to make their business able to employ more 

people, how it's going to make their business capable, capable 

of handling those offloaded taxes that are going to come down 

on them from high in the next four years. 

 

They're going to want to know, Madam Minister, when the mill 

rates for education in their community start jumping by three, 

four, five — as the head of the trustees association said, we 

could be into double digits here before we know it — they 

want you to show them the analysis, Madam Minister, of when 

those mill rate increases start to happen, how their business is 

going to be better off because you've increased the sales tax to 

help them pay, help them pay, Madam Minister, those extra 

mills. 

 

And they want to know, Madam Minister, how they're going to 

pay those extra property taxes when their cities and their towns 

and their villages have to pick up the increases on fuel, when 

they have to pick up the increases that are being proposed with 

labour legislation. They want to know how they're going to 

pick up the increases that will show up on the health care side 

because you upped the sales tax to 9 per cent. 

 

Madam Minister, your political party produced three 

documents while in opposition, three documents condemning 

harmonization of our sales tax with the federal tax system. And 

you did that with the research capability of an opposition party. 

And we expect, Madam Minister, now that you not only have 

the research capability of the government caucus, but have the 

research capability of the entire Department of Finance and the 

entire Department of Economic Development at your disposal, 

that you can put together the kind of studies, put together the 

kind of fact-finding material that can conclusively prove to 

Saskatchewan people how an increase in the sales tax from not 

just 7 per cent to 8 per cent to 9 per cent is going to benefit 

Saskatchewan families and Saskatchewan small-business 

people. 

 

And we expect, Madam Minister, if you could do it in 

opposition with very limited resources and say to 

Saskatchewan people, these are believable documents that we 

have put together, that these documents are true, that the 

figures in them are reasonable and just, that with all of the 

people and resources and material available to you today as the 

Minister of Finance in the province of Saskatchewan that you 

will be able to table in this legislature that conclusive proof. 

 

And we're going to be asking you about that, Madam Minister. 

I think every member of the opposition will probably be asking 

you for those kind of details. And unlike the member from 

Dewdney last year who claimed, well I just got here and I 

really don't know what's going on yet and I haven't had the 

opportunity to put that material together, that you're going to be 

able to provide that. And by providing that, you're going to be 

able to answer those questions. 

Madam Minister, the same goes for the issue of cross-border 

shopping. While you people were in opposition, you stood in 

this legislature day after day and said that the issue of 

cross-border shopping, whether it be in Alberta which doesn't 

have a sales tax, or the province of Manitoba which has a lower 

sales tax, or along the U.S. (United States) border, that the tax 

policies of the former government were out of whack, they 

were out of reality, they were out of sync with what was going 

on in western Canada. 

 

And now, Madam Minister, we're going to want you to 

conclusively prove to this Assembly and to the taxpayers of 

this province how the changes that you have made are going to 

stop that outflow of dollars, are going to conclusively prove to 

Saskatchewan people that they shouldn't go to the new 

Superstore in Medicine Hat, conclusively prove to anyone that 

lives within a hundred miles of the United States border that 

they shouldn't buy their clothing in the United States. Because 

if you take a little tour through southern Saskatchewan right 

now, Madam Minister, like I did last weekend in places like 

Oxbow, places like Glen Ewen, places like Estevan, that's what 

they are saying — that there will be no clothing bought in the 

province of Saskatchewan in any of those places any more, that 

you have simply left no alternative. 

 

And if there's no clothing bought, Madam Minister, because 

there is so much cross-border shopping going on, how in the 

world do you expect those retailers in those communities to be 

able to pay, to pay the taxes that you have loaded on their 

shoulders? How are they going to pay over the next four years 

that half a billion dollars in offloading? 

 

Well, Madam Minister, those are the questions that are going to 

be asked and those are the questions that we expect to be 

answered if we're to give you another $340 million for the 

month of April. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I'm going to run through a series of 

questions here, and a simple yes or no will be sufficient and 

then we can go back and discuss them. So if you would take 

note of them and then if you wish at any time to interject on a 

particular one, just signal and I'll be quite happy to take my seat 

and you can go at some length on them, if you wish. 

 

Madam Minister, does this supply motion provide tax money to 

fund the Department of the Provincial Secretary? 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — It's one-twelfth. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Does this motion provide more money, 

compared with the same period last year, for the Premier's 

office, also called Executive Council? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — It provides one-twelfth for 

Executive Council as well. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Does this motion provide for money 



752 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1993 

that will end up funding the gambling partnership which you 

have with the organizations known as VLT and GTECH? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — It provides one-twelfth 

non-budgetary for the Gaming Commission. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Does this motion provide money for 

ministerial travel in any different amount than it did in the 

same period last year? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The budget provides for 

one-twelfth of the amounts to be voted for each department. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Could you be more specific on that, Madam 

Minister? Ministerial travel is not a department. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — It is included in the budget of each 

department. It is not broken down; it is just part of the budget 

of the particular departments. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Does this motion include monies that would 

be for severance or for pay-outs resulting from job terminations 

by your government? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — No it does not. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Does this money provide for government 

advertising . . . money for government advertising? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The answer is the same as with 

respect to travel. Each department has items with respect to 

advertising. It's not broken down in the interim supply Bills, so 

it's just one-twelfth for each department. Included in that is the 

particular appropriation with respect to travel. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Does this motion provide for monies going 

to non-governmental organizations? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes it does. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Does this motion include money that will be 

going to organizations such as SEDCO (Saskatchewan 

Economic Development Corporation) which are then 

redistributed to other areas? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — No. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — There are a number of areas in the area of 

health that I would like to ask you, and I'll lump them together. 

Does this motion include funding for chiropractic care, 

optometric care, diabetics and their insulin program? Does this 

provide funding for abortion procedures and the children's 

dental program? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The answer is the same as with 

respect to travel and advertising. One-twelfth of the 

Department of Health's budget is being voted and so some 

funds will be directed in the areas that you mention, but it's not 

broken down separately. 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 

Minister, there are a number of things which you responded to 

which I find difficult to accept. 

 

I'm wondering why you would include the advertising for 

departments and agencies in a one-twelfth appropriation. I 

mean surely, Madam Minister, the advertising allotments for 

departments could wait until the budget had been passed; the 

departments and agencies would be prepared to organize their 

spending in such a way that you wouldn't have to come to this 

House on an appropriation Bill to ask for advertising dollars; 

that that can't be handled after the normal budgetary process 

has gone through, that estimates for each department . . . don't 

you find that a little unusual, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I would say to the member 

opposite, no, this is standard practice. This has been done in 

precisely this way for years and years and years. Because there 

is an appropriation given to a department, we do not have any 

discretion in this process of interim supply as to how that 

department spends that money. This is, as I said at the 

beginning, standard practice, the way it has always been done. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, I don't agree with 

that. You do have the discretion; you're the Finance minister. 

And when you come to this House for interim supply, I would 

think that you would want to keep that request to the absolute 

bare bones, that you're simply coming in here to get enough 

money to pay some very basic bills, that there are pay cheques 

that have to be met, and that's about it. 

 

You've got some very basic commitments for the Government 

of Saskatchewan, and looking after your friends in the 

advertising business aren't particularly necessities, Madam 

Minister. 

 

That's why you go through the process of estimates, so that we 

can ask questions of the departments about their advertising 

and about their friends. And you, Madam Minister, are saying 

that we should, that we should accept that as part and parcel of 

an interim supply motion. 

 

One of the reasons, Madam Minister, it takes so long to get 

interim supply done with you people is that you don't stick to 

the basics, that you have to throw in all of this other stuff. 

 

I don't think it's appropriate at all, Madam Minister, that you 

come in here and ask for interim supply to fund ministerial 

travel. And sure, I know that's part of every department, but I 

think those departments should be prepared to come into this 

Assembly, come to you as the Finance minister, with a real 

bare-bones request. 

 

Because we haven't had the opportunity, Madam Minister, to 

go through estimates and ask the minister of department A how 

he spends his money on ministerial travel. 

 

We don't have that opportunity. And if we ask you for 



March 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 753 

any of those details, you say: well, Mr. Chairman, it's not up to 

me to provide those details; you're going to have to wait until 

estimates come along so I can ask the minister. 

 

Well I don't think that's the kind of process, Madam Minister, 

that we should go through when we go to interim supply. 

Interim supply should be the very basics. It's not about 

advertising; it's not about ministerial travel; it's not about some 

of the third-party organizations that come to government for 

money. A lot of those organizations can come later in the year. 

It doesn't have to be in the month of April for interim supply. 

 

And as I go through this list of responses that you have given 

me, I see here that there is no money put aside for severance or 

pay-outs resulting from job termination and that is absolutely 

right, Madam Minister. You made the right choice because 

those departments and agencies, rightly so, have said it isn't 

proper for us to come to the Department of Finance and ask for 

interim supply to handle those things. Those are things that we 

can budget for after we've had our estimates done. 

 

And you, rightly so, Madam Minister, said no, there is no 

money here for severance or pay-outs or from terminations. 

And that's the correct approach. And I applaud you for getting 

1 out of 15. But in all the rest of these areas you, as the Finance 

minister, have the responsibility to say to the ministers and say, 

lookit, we're only going to the legislature for the bare 

minimums here; that things like our advertising budget and our 

travel budgets aren't part and parcel of the bare minimum; that 

maybe for the month of April we either won't do those things 

or we will budget in a different way to handle them. 

 

Madam Minister, I'm going to go back to one of the questions 

that I asked earlier. Are you prepared now, at this time, to table 

in this Assembly the analysis that you have done in the 

Department of Finance to show how raising the rate on sales 

tax from 8 per cent to 9 per cent is going to achieve the result 

of having a growth factor of over 4 per cent in the retail sector 

of this province. Are you prepared, Madam Minister, at this 

time to give that information? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, just one final 

comment on the comments made by the member opposite. If he 

has difficulty with the process that is in place today, I would 

remind him that it is exactly the process that was used with 

respect to the budgets in 1983-84, in 1984-85, 1985-86, 

1986-87, and the list goes on. So if he has concerns, he has 

concerns about what he and his colleagues on the opposite side 

of the House did when they were government. 

 

I would also add that if he is so interested in getting the details 

of what this spending is about, the way to do that is to expedite 

this process so that we can get on to the estimates and we can 

look into the details. 

 

He has a specific question about studies. I would say 

that this government in our budget and the appended 

documents to the budget address has more detail, a more 

comprehensive plan for the future of the province of 

Saskatchewan, than any government in the history of the 

province of Saskatchewan. So I would ask him to read the 

appendices and he will see the projections upon which this 

budget was based. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, I have not only been 

reading them, I've had to go out and seek help from people who 

are professionals in the field of accounting to also help me read 

them. And after many, many hours, after many, many hours 

with people who are very, very learned in the profession, we 

still haven't been able to get through all of the material, Madam 

Minister, nor get to the bottom of it. 

 

I mean, as I complimented you earlier, you have been very 

crafty politically in how you have done your budgeting 

process. And you, I suspect, Madam Minister, have pulled the 

wool over the eyes of a lot of Saskatchewan taxpayers who 

don't have access to accountants and specialized people in the 

field, because it's very, very difficult, Madam Minister, for the 

lay person in this province to understand the changes that you 

made in the accounting process for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And if you wish to stand up in this legislature and tell me or 

any other ordinary taxpayer in this province that it's very 

simple and that there aren't things there that are quite different 

from what they're used to, I'd like you to explain that to them, 

if that's the way you feel about it. 

 

And the fact, Madam Minister, that some things were done in 

the past, I don't believe is legitimate at all for you to hold up as 

an excuse. 

 

You and your political party sat in these benches for nine years, 

and you criticized that process every step of the way and said 

that it wasn't applicable to the new-found Democrats in this 

province, that it wasn't applicable. That you didn't need excuses 

from the past; that you were going to do it totally different; that 

you were going to be totally upfront. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, no more hiding behind the past. Live 

up to your campaign promises. No excuses. No blame 

throwing. Just stand up and come clean. Talk about your 

process, your process only. 

 

And when I say to you that Saskatchewan taxpayers would 

have expected you to come into this Assembly asking for 

interim supply in a bare-bones way and not with the frills of 

government attached to it, not with one-twelfth, not with 

one-twelfth of the $800,000 increase for the Provincial 

Secretary attached to this interim supply motion so he can keep 

his political machinery running smoothly, then you would have 

had some credibility. Then you would have had some 

credibility, Madam Minister. 

 

But instead you tell me that yes, there is one-twelfth for the 

increase for the Provincial Secretary so that he can . . . I 

presume he's going to use that $800,000 to 



754 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1993 

figure out a way to . . . a new way to carry the provincial seal 

around with him, as I understand that that's the only job he's 

got beyond politics, is carry the . . . 

 

(1530) 

 

Maybe what he's going to do, Madam Minister, is he's going to 

have a system of a bag situated around the province so he can 

pop the provincial seal in and throw it over his shoulder and 

carry it around with him. Like I don't know how he's going to 

spend $800,000 being the keeper of the provincial seal. You 

see, that's the problem, Madam Minister. You promised so 

much in opposition and then you deliver so little in 

government. 

 

Now, back to the bigger question, Madam Minister. I asked 

you, in all fairness, seeing as that you're giving one-twelfth to 

just about every Tom, Dick, and Harry that wished it, where 

are the analyses and the studies that are going to show the 

Saskatchewan retailers that they are justified into digging into 

their pockets and coming up with the taxes to pay this 

one-twelfth, based on the fact that you have upped the sales tax 

rates from 8 per cent to 9. You're asking the citizen of this 

province today to come up with one-twelfth of their taxes — 

one-twelfth of their taxes not yours, Madam Minister — and 

they want to know how this is going to help them come up with 

the other eleven-twelfths later on in the year so that they can 

meet their tax commitments to you. You've asked them for 

one-twelfth today. They want to know how they're going to 

come up with the other eleven-twelfths. Are you ready to do 

that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Unfortunately my patience at listening to the criticism of the 

practice has ran out, and I will have to remind the member 

opposite that he was part of the government that had a budget 

that was presented to the legislature but never even passed by 

the legislature, and special warrants had to be used until the 

government changed and the new government had to bring in a 

budget. So please let's move on to another issue because there 

has to be credibility in the questions being asked. 

 

I have no desire to focus on the past, and I would ask people 

who have been observing this dialogue so far to ask themselves 

who has been focusing on the past? I have been talking about 

what our plan is for the future and what our budget is about. 

The members opposite have been talking about the past, and I 

guess I would just caution them. If we want to stand here and 

go through several hours or several days or whatever it is that 

is your pleasure and talking about the past, I'd be quite pleased 

to do that because I think it will be very disadvantageous to the 

members opposite for the public to be reminded again and 

again of their particular past. If instead we want to talk about 

the future and what the interim supply is about, that I think 

could be more productive. But the decision is really yours. 

 

Again with respect to the information, the budget 

address has appendices. In those appendices is outlined in great 

detail all of the assumptions upon which this budget has been 

based. And I would again ask the member opposite to look at 

the appendices. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, I don't mind talking about 

the past at all. That's why in interim supply last year we asked a 

lot of questions of the member from Regina Dewdney about 

the past, about harmonization, and about his analysis while in 

opposition, his analysis while in government. 

 

And it was really strange, Madam Minister, that he was quite 

willing to talk about the past but never about the present as the 

Finance minister. And it appears you're in the same vein, the 

same mode. And you're quite willing to say one thing in 

opposition, put together all sorts of numbers, throw them out 

there to the public and say: here it is, this is factual 

information. You get into government, where you've actually 

got some trained, intelligent people to help you, and you don't 

want to come up with anything. I mean I think that's a bit of a 

contradiction, Madam Minister. I mean you had no trouble 

putting document after document after document together in 

the past, and then you've got all of these learned people around 

you whose sole responsibility in life is doing that sort of thing, 

but you never want to talk about the future. 

 

And I just find that a little bit strange, Madam Minister. I'd like 

to talk about the past. I wouldn't mind talking at all with 

Saskatchewan business people and retailers about a 7 per cent 

sales tax. I wouldn't mind it at all. As I said, I think I could go 

out to a Saskatchewan retailer today and I could talk about a 7 

per cent sales tax with him when he's talking about digging into 

his pocket for enough taxes to pay your one-twelfth. And he 

says, you know what, I think I can do it at 7 per cent a heck of 

a lot better that I can at 9. 

 

And when he's talking about the other eleven-twelfths that 

you're going to come in here and ask for, I suspect if I went out 

to that retailer and I said, how about we compare a 7 per cent 

sales tax to a 9 per cent sales tax and how he's going to come 

up with that other eleven-twelfths to pay you, and I suspect he 

would come to some conclusions, Madam Minister. You know 

what he'd say? He said, I think I can do it at 7 per cent easier 

than I can at 9. I think that's what he'd say. I think I can go on 

to Main Street, Saskatchewan, and ask that question just about 

anywhere I wanted to. 

 

And, Madam Minister, all of the other things that you've done 

to him since 7 per cent, as far as all his utilities and his taxes, 

his other taxes, and the offloading that he's going to feel over 

the next four years, and I suspect he'd say, I could really make 

it at 7 per cent a lot better than I could at 9, with everything 

else loaded on top of it. I just suspect that's what he's going to 

say. 

 

So I don't mind talking about the past at all, Madam Minister. 

What I want you to do is show me that he's wrong and I'm 

wrong for asking that question; that he's wrong to suspect that 

when you come in here and ask him or her for one-twelfth of 

his taxes on a yearly 



March 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 755 

basis in order to fund your government. 

 

So I think it would be fairly incumbent upon you, given that 

you said so much in opposition about how detrimental 7 per 

cent was on that business person or that family member, how 

you would be very pleased to show them how your 9 per cent 

and everything else is going to make it easier for that person to 

come up with the twelfth today and the other eleven-twelfths 

down the road. I think that would be a pleasure for you. You 

would take a great deal of excitement in doing that because you 

certainly did it in the past where you said, uh uh, it won't work 

at 7, it won't work at 7. Madam Minister, show us how it works 

at 9. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm 

saying to the member opposite, the choice will be his. If he 

wants to stand here and he wants to go through the past, I will 

read into the record again what happened in 1982 when the 

members opposite promised to get rid of the sales tax. 

 

In the course of their term, what they managed to do was to 

bump the sales tax up two points. They promised to reduce 

income tax by 10 per cent. Instead what they added was a flat 

tax. They promised to get rid of the gas tax. By the time they 

had finished, the gas tax was increased. So as I say, I have files 

of information here and if you want to go through this, we can 

carry on in exactly this vein. 

 

Now what I'm suggesting is that this government's real desire is 

to be more forward looking, to look to the future, and to be less 

petty in our politics and less partisan, and let's talk about the 

plan that this government has for the future of the province. 

 

But again it will be the member opposite who will decide the 

tone of this debate, whether we want to take a high road or 

whether we want to get down into the low road. 

 

He says that he would like to know the information upon which 

these decisions were made. What I would say to him is that this 

government has laid out what its projections are for real growth 

in the provincial economy for the next four years, and the next 

four years, assuming all of the changes that are involved in this 

budget. 

 

And what we have projected is that in 1993 there will be real 

growth of 2.8 per cent. In 1994 there will be real growth of 1.6 

per cent. In 1995 there will be real growth of 2.7 per cent. And 

in 1996 there will be real growth of 2.2 per cent. 

 

The process by which those figures were arrived at was taking 

external agencies' projections for the growth of the province, 

factoring in the changes that result from this budget and laying 

before the people of Saskatchewan something quite 

unprecedented. No government in the history of this province 

has ever laid out projections across the piece. I've only read one 

set of the projections. 

 

Here's our budget; here's the effect it's going to have 

on the economy of the province; here's the growth we project. 

 

So we've been open, upfront, absolutely thorough in laying 

before the people of the province a plan for their future. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

don't stand in here and lecture me about political ethics. Every 

time you get the opportunity outside of this legislature to be 

partisan as can be, you do it. 

 

You did it on Barry Burgess's phone-in last week and you got 

caught at it. I mean you had the gall to go on there and say that 

Saskferco was a total write-off. That the Saskatchewan 

taxpayer was down the tube for 360-some million bucks. And 

you wouldn't explain the rest of the deal until I happened to 

come on the line, Madam Minister. 

 

You didn't want to talk about the hundred-plus jobs; you didn't 

want to talk about 20 per cent of all the natural gas in the 

province being used in the royalties that you were getting; you 

didn't want to say that you had less than 60 million bucks in 

cash in the deal and that after two years time you can take the 

rest of your share and sell it to whoever. 

 

But you get on a radio phone-in show with Saskatchewan 

taxpayers and out and tell them that the whole thing is a 

write-off, that it's shot. So don't stand in here, Madam Minister, 

and lecture me about political ethics. Every time you get the 

opportunity out of this building you're in it up to your hips. 

 

And if that's going to be the attitude that we're going to have in 

interim supply, yes we probably will be here for a long, long 

time. Because, Madam Minister, you play in it, I play in it, we 

all play in it, we're all politicians. 

 

At the bottom, at the end of the day, what the taxpayers of this 

province want are some reasonable answers. You're the one in 

charge of the provincial economy; I'm not. 

 

I'm asking on behalf of the people out there that tell me that 

they are ready to revolt; that they feel they are taxed to the 

limit. So you go out there and start telling the truth about 

Saskferco, I'll be very happy to stand in here, Madam Minister, 

in a reasonable way and debate economic issues with you. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, once again I'm going to give you the 

opportunity to tell the taxpayers of this province how they are 

going to meet their requirements at 9 per cent rather than 7 per 

cent. You told me that you have some growth projections. 

Well, Madam Minister, there are a lot of people around the 

piece that take a great deal of issue with those projections. 

 

Maybe we'll just start real small here. You said that there were 

a number of outside agencies and groups that gave you those 

projections. Okay? Let's assume 



756 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1993 

that no one in your department does that sort of thing. Let's go 

out to those outside agencies, let's start at square one, and you 

just give me a list of who those people were that gave you 

those projections. Let's just start there. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, as it says in 

the material provided with the budget address, the main 

external estimate that we relied on were the Conference Board 

of Canada estimates. So I would turn the member's attention to 

the material and he would find written there the agency that we 

relied on. 

 

But I would say that we also took into account other 

projections for the future growth prospects for the province. 

Conference Board's projections were somewhat more 

optimistic than ours; we scaled them down some. We also 

relied on the Royal Bank estimates and other financial 

agencies, but the key one was the Conference Board. And as I 

say, that's quite upfront in the material that is included with the 

budget address. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Swenson: — I'm sorry, Madam Minister, I couldn't hear. 

Beyond the Conference Board, you said there were other 

agencies that gave you information, and I would just like you 

to table the commitment that you'll table in the Assembly that 

list of people that you consulted with in setting those 

projections. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Certainly we will be sure that the 

information is tabled. They're public forecasts available to any 

member of the public. Banks come out with forecasts, 

Conference Board of Canada comes out with forecasts, Burns 

Fry, Wood Gundy — they all come out with forecasts about the 

growth prospects for Canada and particular provinces within 

Canada. 

 

We looked at all of them. But as we say quite upfront in our 

information, the one we relied on was the Conference Board of 

Canada as the main indicator. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, did those same agencies 

say to you that unless certain things performed at a level, that 

you were going to have difficulty, that you were going to have 

difficulty in meeting your projections? 

 

Are those the same agencies that say to you, Madam Minister, 

unless you get your deficit below a certain figure, we're going 

to downgrade you? Or unless you do certain things in the 

housing industry, we aren't going to agree with you? Are those 

the same agencies that provide also the downside information, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, no. The 

Conference Board of Canada has given us no advice about our 

deficit or what we should do in housing. The Conference Board 

of Canada makes projections about economic growth across 

Canada and in particular provinces. 

But now that you have mentioned the agencies, I would like to 

read some comments into the record about what the agencies 

have said about the prospects for the province and for our 

budget. 

 

I notice that Burns Fry, in analysing our budget, had said that, 

with respect to our deficit reduction program, it appears 

attainable. 

 

I also would note that Burns Fry . . . the president of Burns Fry 

last Friday when in Saskatoon told a group of business people 

that this budget was a leadership budget. He said it's a 

leadership budget within Saskatchewan because it has shown 

leadership in Saskatchewan and it's a leadership budget 

because it'll be seen across Canada as something to follow. 

 

You would like some more information? I will quote from 

Wood Gundy's analysis of our budget: 

 

 Given the limited capacity of the province to raise the 

personal income tax rate further, the Government of 

Saskatchewan did well to raise the retail sales tax and fuel 

tax. 

 

With respect to the projections and the success of the strategy, 

the plan that we've outlined and the reliability of our revenue 

forecast, they say this: 

 

 The success of Saskatchewan's medium-term strategy hinges 

on its ability to generate sufficient revenues over the next 

three to four years. The province's forecast of reasonably 

strong growth, average real gross domestic product of 2.3 per 

cent over the next four years, should be enough to generate 

the necessary revenues. Saskatchewan's balanced budget 

efforts send a strong positive signal to financial market 

participants. 

 

A Canadian Bond Rating Service says the province has taken 

stern but positive measures in order to cut both its deficit and 

its debt. 

 

And the list goes on. This article in the Regina Leader-Post . . . 

no, Financial Post, March 20, saying that bond raters back 

Regina. So the message from outside the province is quite clear 

from financial agencies. It's a model budget. It's a budget that 

shows leadership. It's a budget that looks toward the future. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — I'm glad, Madam Minister, that you did read 

those in, because almost in each and every instance they are 

talking about the ability to generate new income. They are 

saying that your government has a very stern task in front of it, 

and that is to provide the tools to Saskatchewan people to 

generate that new income. And the Conference Board is 

forecasting real economic growth: 1993, 3.5 per cent; 1994, 3.8 

per cent; 1995, 2.8 per cent. 

 

Madam Minister, given where the Canadian economy is today 

and the fact that the whole entire agricultural sector of this 

province is wondering how they're going to put the seed in the 

ground, I would say those are 



March 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 757 

pretty heady figures that you're going to have to come up with. 

That means that there's going to have to be a real incentive for 

Saskatchewan people to go out and provide employment, to 

invest new money, invest new money in capital projects, job 

creation, in order to achieve these figures. 

 

These figures, Madam Minister, haven't been seen in this 

country of ours in probably four or five years. This is heady 

stuff here that you're projecting in order to meet your 

requirements. Each and every agency — and I've read them all, 

Madam Minister — every agency is saying to you that if those 

tools aren't in place to meet these projections, then we're not 

going to come close. 

 

Now what we're saying to you, Madam Minister, is that we're 

finding some inconsistencies. You're saying this is where 

you're going, and by going there you're going to satisfy your 

creditors, and that this rosy picture that you have painted is all 

going to come to pass. 

 

But in order to get there, people like Isabel Anderson are 

saying to you, you've got to provide the people that are going to 

generate the growth with some tools — not take them away. 

Don't take their tools away. I mean it's what you've done to 

every farmer in this province. You've basically taken his tools 

away. Now the rest of the people in the province are saying, 

don't take our tools away, let us try and come somewhere close 

to these figures. 

 

Most people don't believe you, quite frankly, if you go out to 

Main Street, Saskatchewan, and say there's going to be that 

kind of growth, but they're going to give you the benefit of the 

doubt for a little while. 

 

Madam Minister, we just asked some simple questions about 

analysis on a very, very narrow part of your budget, that 

narrow part being the sales tax sector. And given what you said 

in opposition about 7 per cent and what reality is today, I want 

to know how those sales tax projections mesh with growth 

projected by the Conference Board of 3.5, 3.8, and 2.8. 

 

I mean there's a lot of other stuff here, Madam Minister. 

You've got, I understand, a long-term interest figure of 9 per 

cent set on all of your long-term borrowing. About what? — 

60, 70 per cent of your borrowing in the province, I think it'd 

be in that range somewhere. You've set that at 9 per cent and 

the rest of it would be a little lighter. 

 

I mean, Madam Minister, you've got some real heady stuff 

here. We just want to know about one very narrow part of that 

game plan. And I don't know why there is so much reluctance 

to throw that out there to Saskatchewan people when they 

come in here and you ask for one-twelfth of their tax dollar and 

they're wondering how they're going to get to the other eleven. 

It's very academic. 

 

Madam Minister, would you try and give it another shot? 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask 

the member opposite to read the right figures. He unfortunately 

is reading the Canadian forecast, not the Saskatchewan 

forecast. So he may want to adjust his line there; he's on the 

wrong line. 

 

But to get back to his question: of course we have provided 

incentives in this budget to small business and co-ops, reduced 

their tax rates over the next few years by 20 per cent. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes, but if you tax them before they can 

get a profit, how are you going to get any benefit out of having 

a profit? You don't get a profit that way. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The member from Morse is talking 

about the budget. I would remind him that the measures taken 

in this budget are necessary because of the financial situation in 

which your previous government left the province. 

 

Now to move on to your question. What we have done is we 

have projected what will the real growth of the Saskatchewan 

economy will be with all of the changes in the budget taken 

into account. We did not break them down individually, so the 

information that you request does not exist. There is no 

individual study about what this particular . . . what decreasing 

the small business, the tax for small business and co-ops, what 

effect that will have on the growth of the Saskatchewan 

economy. Did not break that down separately. 

 

So we didn't do it line by line because as you can imagine that's 

not a realistic way to approach it. What we did was we took the 

projections for the growth of the economy, factored in the 

changes that this budget represents in total, and had come out 

with a plan for the people of Saskatchewan. We've laid out the 

assumptions, growth in the real GDP (gross domestic product) 

over the next four years, as I've outlined to you previously. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, if I remember back 

to my days of doing budget deliberations with the same 

gentleman that you have there with you today, there used to be 

this explanation on most things called diminishing returns. 

There was always lots of data on the various sin taxes, like if 

you take the price of cigarettes up to here, it'll be the law of 

diminishing returns and your revenue will drop off. If you take 

the price of alcohol up to here, and then it'll start to tail off 

because people will do other things. And there was always that 

sort of information available because that's part of the 

budgeting process, and cabinet has to make a decision to 

increase the price of cigarettes and alcohol. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I think that there's a law of diminishing 

returns as far as how far you can take sales tax. And I suspect, 

as part of your deliberations, that that number was arrived at, 

Madam Minister, because once you hit a certain figure it starts 

to evaporate on you. Cross-border shopping comes into effect, 



758 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1993 

consumer resistance comes into effect, how much inventory 

people put in place comes into effect. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I strongly suspect that during your 

budget deliberations the law of diminishing returns was talked 

about when we talk about sales tax. Are you going to stand 

here in this legislature and tell me that that wasn't talked about, 

that there weren't numbers set by your department officials on 

exactly where you sort of max out on sales tax. Or was it 

simply because you were hidebound by some political 

decisions that you couldn't move in other directions that would 

have been a little more comfortable. Which was it? Was it the 

political considerations or was there still room on the law of 

diminishing returns as far as sales tax? Does that mean that we 

can expect it to go to 10 per cent next year, or 11, or 12? Is 

there some place where it tops out, Madam Minister, where 

there'll be less coming in because of your onerous schedule? I 

suspect that there is. 

 

Maybe you should share that information with Saskatchewan 

taxpayers, so that they know where the law of diminishing 

return starts to take effect, as far as sales taxes go. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess I 

would ask the member opposite what precisely this has to do 

with interim supply. 

 

But to answer your question, what we did is we did a 

comprehensive analysis of what all of the budget changes 

would mean for the province of Saskatchewan — what it 

would mean for growth in the economy, what it would mean 

for inflation, what it would mean for job creation. 

 

And we have laid before the people of Saskatchewan that 

analysis. No individual analysis exists with respect to the sales 

tax measure or with respect to the fact that we didn't put a tax 

on cigarettes. What we did was in this budget we took the 

long-term overview and provided a comprehensive analysis. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Madam Minister, I wasn't in the House for question period 

today, but I was listening to question period from my office. 

And I was very upset with the attitude of the Minister of Health 

today when she was talking about these rural hospitals, and 

there was a lot of questioning going on about it. 

 

And it's a sad story out there, Madam Minister. People are 

talking about schools closing, and farmers losing their land, 

and the hospitals closing. And all we've heard from you people 

is balanced budgets, which is a great idea if you can do it. But 

on the backs of whom? 

 

But I'd like to . . . I want to ask you a direct question. It's a very 

. . . I'm not going to ask many questions today. I'll be back in 

tomorrow, Friday, Monday. We'll see how long this lasts — 

depends on how you answer questions. 

And the question I'd like to ask, that I understand — and I've 

been in 45 to 50 interim requests for money since 1978, so I 

know how it works — and in Department of Health, you've got 

a reduction. And I'd like to ask you, how much of this 

one-twelfth will be going towards balancing the budget? Could 

you answer me that question, Madam Minister. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess I 

would make one general comment. If the members opposite are 

saying they want the people of Saskatchewan to have the facts 

about this budget and the details, what I would remind them 

and the people of Saskatchewan is that if the members opposite 

really do want that, they would expedite this process — 

because this is not a detailed process — so that we would get 

on to the other process. 

 

I'm prepared to stand here as long as you want. But please don't 

say to me then that I'm not being open and upfront with the 

people of Saskatchewan. I would like to be open and upfront 

with them because I would like to get into the detailed 

estimates in which we can go through the kind of detailed 

questions that people want. But again, it's your choice. You 

will decide how quickly the people of Saskatchewan will be 

allowed to move to that process. 

 

With respect to the deficit, this is expenditures that we're 

approving today. So these expenditures bear no relationship to 

the deficit. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Madam Minister, I don't know what you 

take me for, but you're having . . . the Department of Health has 

lowered their budget and their estimates. And in this you're 

going to be one-twelfth — that's what you're asking for — so a 

percentage of the one-twelfth must be going to try to balance 

that budget, towards that deficit. It has to be or otherwise it 

would be more money. It can be no other way. 

 

If you'd come in here and they were going to be building 

hospitals and building schools and giving money to farmers 

instead of giving them nothing, then you'd be asking for a 

larger figure of that one-twelfth. It'd be more money, wouldn't 

it? Would there not be, Madam Minister, be the one-twelfth be 

a larger figure? So the one-twelfth — how much of that money 

that you're . . . on the Department of Health is going to go to 

the deficit? Now that's very simple. You should be able to 

answer that. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I would 

say to the member opposite is the way that we are reducing the 

deficit of the province is by reducing operating expenditures. 

Last year we were the only government in Canada to reduce 

operating expenditures by 3 per cent. We're reducing them 

again by another 3 per cent. 

 

Now with respect to the Department of Health, all we're 

providing for here is $124,665 so that this department can pay 

only the expenditures required for one month. And the process 

is simple. It's because 



March 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 759 

they have a budget before the House, but the budget hasn't been 

passed yet, yet the operations of government have to continue. 

And I think the people out there watching this or reading this 

want the operations of the government to continue. They don't 

want the government to grind to a halt until the budget is 

passed. And that's what this interim supply is about. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I 

understand what it's all about all right. So when you . . . I went 

through the book, through the Estimates quite carefully. And 

approximately — it's not right on, but approximately — that'll 

be what she'll be asking for is likely one-twelfth of these 

estimates. 

 

So let's assume that it's twelve-twelfths, that we're at the end, 

12 months. It would be the same thing. You're just asking for 

interim supply for one month. 

 

Well the twelfth month would be exactly the same, or very 

close to being the same, so there must be a ratio here some 

place that relates back to cutting down in the Department of 

Health, Education, Agriculture, all the departments. So unless 

you can . . . There has to be. Your operating money is going to 

be . . . Unless you people are going to do exactly the same 

thing as you did in 1982. You come in with a balanced budget 

and told everybody it was a balanced budget and hid all your 

debts in the Crowns. We're going to get into that later on. And 

that's what you did then; maybe you're doing that again. 

 

But you must know, you must be some figure. I don't think you 

do know. But I think you've got some people around you that 

should be able to tell you. How much was one-twelfth of the 

Department of Health one year ago when . . . one year ago right 

now? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I'm sure the information can be 

gotten for the member opposite, but we don't have it right here. 

The point is a simple one: we're reducing the expenditures of 

the operations of the government by more than 3 per cent. That 

will be reflected across the piece in the different departments. 

 

If you would like to get into this, what I would suggest is that 

we move to the estimates and then we will be able to go 

through the Department of Health in great detail and show to 

the people of Saskatchewan where the expenditure reductions 

are occurring, why they are occurring in that particular area, 

and why they're not occurring in other areas. And that process 

is one that we welcome. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Madam Minister, you're doing the same 

thing as the minister of Finance did a year ago: oh, let's just 

move to estimates for all the answers. Of course, we're not 

going to go through estimates with you, but we're entitled to 

ask some pretty broad questions. Because if you had've sat in 

this House from 1982 when we were in government to 1991, 

which you were not here, and go back and look at Hansard and 

see how much our ministers had to stand up here and ask 

questions. 

One year ago, I was the one standing right in about this same 

place when I read right out of Hansard where your now 

Premier of the province, the then . . . the member from 

Saskatoon, the now Premier, was asking in 1991 to Lorne 

Hepworth, the minister of Agriculture, every detail about the 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) program — pages 

and pages. Because how I fooled you and what we did is I 

started asking the same questions to you. Oh you can't do that. 

You can't do that. Then the questions turned out to be the ones 

that the Premier was asking a year ago. 

 

So I want you to give me some . . . 3 per cent, you at least 

moved on a little bit. When I started out you didn't know 

anything. So you're getting a little bit better. I want the dollars 

and cents that you're estimating that Department of Health will 

be going towards balancing your budget in so many years or 

whatever. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would 

remind the member opposite what the minister of Finance of 

the day, Lorne Hepworth, responded when that issue was 

raised. His response was, let's get on to estimates so that we 

can deal with these issues. 

 

The reduction in the Department of Health will probably be 

somewhat less than the overall reduction. It will probably be in 

the nature of exactly 3 per cent, and when we get to the 

estimates, we will be able to go over that in detail with you and 

you can ask your specific questions. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Yes it's easy for somebody to tell you that 

. . . how Mr. Hepworth answered the questions when I have 

Hansard. Just looked through it again this morning in my 

office. We went on for pages of Hansard, answering questions 

in detail about the GRIP program. So don't you stand up and 

tell me that he said, oh we'll just move on and get your answers 

from estimates. He might have said it, but you people wouldn't 

let him do it. So he had to keep on answering, because we 

weren't like you people. If you demanded answers, we gave 

them to you. 

 

Now I got Department of Health, Department of Education, 

and Social Services, and Agriculture. I want those approximate 

figures, not just the 3 per cent, because it varies. Because in 

Health . . . you didn't abolish Health 100 per cent. Agriculture, 

you abolished it. So I want know, is that money that you 

abolished Agriculture and said to heck with the farmers in 

Saskatchewan, is that money that's for Agriculture that's not 

here for a one-twelfth . . . There's no one 

_twelfth for Agriculture in here, only to pay the department 

people. But there's no money for farmers. And I want to know 

if that money's going to go to balancing the deficit. 

 

So there's going to be a difference. You can't tell me that it's 3 

per cent from Health and 3 per cent from Education and Social 

Services. We got to get in some details here. And you have to 

know them. You must know them. If you don't know, you have 

no idea where you're going. If you don't know what 



760 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1993 

one-twelfth of your spending is and where it's going, you have 

no plan and no idea where you're going. 

 

So you may as well make up your mind that I want a figure and 

it had better be right. It better not be four days and four hours it 

took your minister of Finance last year to tell us what the 

deficit was. 

 

And it shouldn't be very difficult for you to tell him . . . I'm not 

going to go through all the departments. I want it in Health and 

Education and Social Services and Agriculture: how much 

money in the cut-back of this one-twelfth is going to balance 

your budget? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, just with 

respect to the process. The Associate Minister of Finance and I 

are quite prepared to stand here for as long as you want, days 

or whatever. But please be aware that the people of 

Saskatchewan then have to know that they're not going to get 

the detailed information about the budget that they require. 

 

With respect to your question, all of the savings that occur 

from reducing government expenditures go to the deficit. You 

want detailed numbers; they exist. They are in the material that 

was handed out budget day. On page 77 are all of the different 

expenditures of the departments done in a comparative way 

with the estimates and the forecasts and the estimates for 1992 

as well. 

 

So I would refer the member to page 77 where the information 

is laid out. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Come on, Madam Minister. You're saying 

all the money, that's where it goes. Then where is your money 

coming in? You've raised taxes; you raised the price of 

everything in this province of Saskatchewan. There's got to be 

a balance some place. There has to be a balance. 

 

You've raised everything. Absolutely everything you could 

possibly raise has been raised. You've gouged every taxpayer 

in the province of Saskatchewan. You've taken pretty near 

everything away from them that pertains to life. That's going a 

little too far to say everything, but you've sure gouged into their 

lives and you've changed the whole format of this province 

around. 

 

And what you do is to try to say every time . . . I've been away 

from here quite a bit, and every time I've had that radio on or 

this television I'm watching, all I heard is this sickening story 

about: we have to do it because the Tories left this province in 

such a mess. And we heard the Minister of Social Services 

stand up here yesterday and said that we came in in 1982 and 

we left the Tories with a plus figure. 

 

Boy, we all know better than that. We know there was a deficit, 

and we're going to get into that later on. But I want you to give 

me the figures after you've got . . . You must, your people in 

Finance must be working this all out or you couldn't tell the 

people in Saskatchewan, you could not say to all the 

individuals in the province of Saskatchewan, in four years 

we're 

going to balance the budget, without having some figuring 

done. 

 

And you should have it right now when it comes to the 

one-twelfth, how much it's going to do. In dollars and cents you 

should be able to stood up and told me right in the very 

beginning one answer for all the departments; that of the 

one-twelfth we're asking for here today on this here Bill, that 

here's how many millions of dollars is going toward balancing 

that budget. It should have been all figured out in your 

department right down to the dollar and cents. Otherwise how 

could you put it in your budget speech and how could you tell 

them when you go throughout Saskatchewan . . . How do you 

possibly go out and inform all the people that we're going to do 

this, exactly so many dollars each year, and we're going to do it 

by cutting back here and we're going to cut back on this 

hospital and we're going to cut back on this school; we're going 

to cut back on approximately everything — cut back, cut back. 

 

Now you should know. So can you or can you not give me a 

figure. Can your people — if I just left it — can your people 

come back tomorrow with an approximate figure about what 

one-twelfth of this, what you're asking for here, what 

one-twelfth will do towards balancing that budget? Or are we 

just having less money for every department just for laughs and 

fun, or is it really going to do the job? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's very 

difficult to understand exactly what the member opposite is 

asking. If he wants to ask the Finance officials for information, 

they are quite willing to meet with him and discuss the 

information. But of all the experts we have here, we cannot 

figure out exactly what your question is. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Well I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, and 

Madam Minister, I can tell you one thing, I'm not going to meet 

with your officials. That's up to you to meet with your officials. 

You're with them every day; that's your job. 

 

I'm asking you very simple — and don't sit there and smirk at 

me in that there smirky manner of yours. Because that's what 

you do. You think you're really something, Madam Minister. 

You come in off the street and you're an MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) in 1991 and you're the Minister of 

Finance in 1992. Well I feel sorry for you because there is 

nobody in all of Canada or the United States can walk in off the 

street, regardless of how clever you are — which I give you 

that credit, you're an intelligent individual — but you could not 

possibly be . . . do a good job as the Minister of Finance in this 

province when you've only been an MLA for one year, a little 

over a year. 

 

(1615) 

 

Now let's get serious. You don't understand what this is all 

about. Your officials can tell you by tomorrow exactly what 

this one-twelfth . . . how much in all the departments together 

. . . They should be able to have 



March 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 761 

a calculation from every department and say how much money 

is going towards balancing this here budget, and that's what I 

want. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm really 

disappointed in the member opposite. You know, I really don't 

think these sorts of personal comments are necessary. The 

people of Saskatchewan will judge the job that I'm doing. But 

you know, when we have to descend to this level it really 

doesn't do a great service to the legislature. 

 

Your question is very difficult to understand. I can give you the 

deficit of the province in 1992-93 was $593 million. We're 

projecting a deficit of 296 million, a reduction of 50 per cent, 

about 50 per cent. If you wanted to take the reduction, divide it 

by 12, that would give you 24.8 million in savings for this 

particular year. 

 

But when you say, how much of the savings is going to the 

deficit, well obviously, all of the savings is going to the deficit. 

 

I would also point out to the member opposite, because of what 

happened to this province in the 1980s, interest costs have gone 

from 735 million last year to a projected 847 million next year. 

And so some of the money will also have to go to pay interest. 

 

But please, Mr. Member, let's try to elevate this beyond 

personal remarks. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, you're 

finally giving me some answers. Why didn't you do that the 

first time? 

 

But going back to the personal remarks, I thought I was quite 

nice to you, saying you're a very intelligent person. And you 

came in off the street being an MLA for one year, somebody's 

asked you to do the impossible — to be a Minister of Finance. 

The people that's against you will soon tell you that. But that's 

nothing against you as an individual. 

 

I gave you the benefit of the doubt that you're a very clever 

individual. You're even nice looking, Madam Minister. So I'm 

being very nice to you. 

 

I'm just saying that it is impossible. You've never known it in 

any place and you won't find it in United States or Canada 

where someone is an MLA — if you can find me that, and 

we're not going to get into that — is an MLA for a little over a 

year, and the Minister of Finance. You won't find a province in 

Saskatchewan or United States. So you've got a big job. You've 

got to depend on the people around you. 

 

And one of the reasons why I wanted to get into this here 

department by department, because a year ago in estimates we 

couldn't get the proper information. 

 

I sit here and argue with the Minister of Education for day after 

day after day about the Loreburn and Elbow school. And 

there's a new school being built right now, or additions to the 

school in Loreburn. And this 

is going to come right into this, Mr. Chairman. This will fit 

right into what we're talking about here today. 

 

The critic for Education and myself argued with the Minister of 

Education that they could not rebuild the Loreburn School for 

$438,000. 

 

And I'm going to quote, Mr. Chairman, with your permission, 

is what the hon. minister says, and this is after days and days 

and days. And then I'll have a question pertaining to what we're 

talking about here today. 

 

 Mr. Chairman, the estimate of the facilities branch was that 

for a capital project for the Loreburn School — I repeat — to 

repair the roof and provide relocateable class-rooms which 

would accommodate . . . (and) transfer the K to 6 students 

from Strongfield, Loreburn, and Elbow, if this was the wish 

of the school division, the cost would be $438,000. Whether 

someone else came and said that to build a whole new school, 

which didn't include relocateables or whatever the . . . 

(hypocrites) are, would cost more than that, I have no idea. 

 

So she admitted that's what it would take. 

 

Well now they are building at Loreburn and somehow or other 

. . . That's why we can't wait till estimates, because they've got 

a contract out for exactly that same . . . not exactly that same 

job, for 1.4 or 5 million dollars. The Loreburn School has a 

contract out for 1.4 or 5 million dollars, some place in there. 

And it doesn't include . . . they have to have something in this 

here budget, some more money, to even handle Elbow because 

they have to have more relocateables. 

 

So how much of this . . . Hammers and nails are going now, 

Madam Minister, at Loreburn. How much of this one-twelfth 

is, in Education, going towards that extra million dollars that 

was spent on us? It was never asked permission; it was never in 

last year's budget. The minister said we could do it for 

$438,000. We took her word. The people from Loreburn took 

her word. The people from the whole community took their 

word. Even the people in Loreburn that wanted the school 

thought it was going to cost us 438. 

 

Well you ought to be on my telephone now and have to listen 

to the complaints from that area. The whole line, when it's a 

contract given out with nobody knowing about it, for 1.4 or 5 

. . . I haven't got the exact figures, Madam Minister, but 1.4 or 

5 million. So you can understand why we can't wait till 

estimates, because we don't get the right answers there. 

 

How much money? Does anybody know? Any way of finding 

out? Is this here one-twelfth have anything to do with that extra 

million dollars that's being spent there today and . . . 

(inaudible) . . . Elbow School. Is there anything to do with it 

whatsoever? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would say to 

you that in this interim supply, $72,591,000 is going to the 

Department of Education. 



762 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1993 

The question the member opposite answers is exactly the kind 

of question that we are very anxious to answer for the people of 

Saskatchewan. It's this sort of information we want to lay 

before them. And there's a process by which that will occur, 

and that process is when we go through the detailed estimates. 

So if in fact you really do want that sort of question answered, 

what I would say is that you move through this process so we 

can get on to the estimates, which is where that question can be 

answered. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — But, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, it 

would be nice if that's the way it could be but that's what you 

did to us last year. The Minister of Finance wouldn't answer 

our questions. We finally, after a few days of it, he gave in and 

did give some proper answers. But then when we got to the 

ministers and the estimates, we didn't get these answers. We 

had many, many things like the Elbow School giving us wrong 

information, absolutely false information — $438,000 — it's 

right here. There's pages of it, I'm not going through it. But 

$438,000 said by a minister and a contract goes out for one 

million four, and doesn't even house Elbow School. 

 

So then if we let you go, we don't get you back until the closing 

days of the House. We won't get your estimates back here until 

the closing days of the House and then you're going to say: oh, 

you should have asked that in the Minister of Education's 

estimates, or all the ministers. 

 

That's why we're trying to get some answers out of you in 

interim supply. We want to know. We've got to start right now, 

whether it be interim supply or estimates or back to you in your 

own estimates. We've got to start asking questions because 

we've got to ask and ask because it takes a long time out of you 

people to get answers. It takes a long, long time. 

 

Somehow or other before we leave this Bill, you're going to 

have to explain what the minister of Finance said a year ago in 

June — that's the first time this here Bill went through the 

House — when we talked about the deficit and how much it 

was in 1982, and then we have to have the minister stand up 

here and say that all of our problems were the Tory's big deficit 

in 1982. 

 

So that's why we have to have answers straight because we 

don't get them straight in the street, we don't get them straight 

in this House. And your ministers day after day after day . . . 

that's all we hear, that that's the reason why we have to close 

the facility in Weyburn; that's the reason why we have to close 

these hospitals; that's why there's something supposed to be 

closing in Estevan. And they're talking about they're scared 

they're going to close the hospital in Davidson. Well that's all 

we hear. And probably Craik, Outlook, Imperial — they talk 

about it all over the province. 

 

Well we've got to start asking you questions and we've got to 

get answers. Because if we don't get them here, all the way 

through from interim supply to the ministers in estimates back 

to you, on the closing day 

of this House that's when you'll come back. We'll get you back 

and you're going to say: well why didn't you get the answer 

from the minister. 

 

So you're the minister, and you're responsible. Can you come 

back with the exact figure tomorrow . . . not exact, but a pretty 

good approximate figure in dollars and cents, tomorrow, telling 

me what all departments . . . never mind this here what's 

written in that such and such a page. Give us a dollar figure, so 

it's on Hansard, the people of Saskatchewan to know that this 

here interim supply is cut down this much, so the people say, 

yes, that's how many dollars and cents goes towards balancing 

that budget. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just quoted 

to you the number — $24.8 million. If you want to break it 

down on a one-twelfth basis, that's what the deficit reduction 

number would be. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — In the Department of Agriculture, let's take 

the Department of Agriculture where there was . . . there's still 

a Department of Agriculture, thank goodness; but they're not 

spending any money on farmers, so there has to be more 

money in the Department of Agriculture than there is in some 

other departments. 

 

Like in the Deputy Premier's department, he had an increase of 

pretty near a million dollars. Now his department is not going 

to be the same. His one-twelfth is going to be a little different, 

isn't it? His one-twelfth isn't going to have nothing to do with 

helping to balance a budget. 

 

So can they not give a breakdown of the departments that the 

twelfth is down. If even, Madam Minister, I'd be satisfied if 

you'd even say, this department is down this X amount of 

dollars and cents going towards the deficit; and this department 

is up, and it will be going to make the deficit higher. I want a 

department-to-department answer. And I'll be satisfied if you 

can bring it in tomorrow. 

 

Bring me in something that will satisfy us a little bit on where 

are we going, so the people in Saskatchewan know where this 

interim supply is going to, and how much it's going to help the 

people of Saskatchewan be able to sleep at night, when they 

know they're losing their schools, and losing their hospitals, 

and losing their farms. And they're going to have their health in 

jeopardy because you've taken some life-threatening things 

away. When you start talking about taking . . . people got to 

pay for insulin, have to go without, and they do. It's happening 

all over. And you've got to pay for drugs. And people are not 

buying drugs. In the drugstore in Davidson, he said, soon as 

your budget came out, his drugs just went down. And that'll be 

all over Saskatchewan. People are going to go without. 

 

So for goodness sakes, tell us the figure, department by 

department. Which department is going to be sacrificing to 

help balance this budget you say you're going to balance in 

several years. 

 

The Chair: — Order. Why is the member for Biggar on 



March 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 763 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask for leave 

to introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce a guest 

today that we have in our gallery, Mr. Roy Atkinson, a very 

prominent member and distinguished member of many farm 

organizations in Saskatchewan and also the father of our 

Minister of Social Services. And I would like this House to 

welcome Mr. Atkinson here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would also like 

to welcome the former president of the National Farmers Union 

to the gallery, and I hope he enjoys the afternoon here. 

 

I want, Mr. Chairman, first of all to let the people watching 

understand what is happening here in this process. Being new 

to politics as of last year, I found myself somewhat confused as 

to what we were doing at times, so I know that the viewing 

public is often a little bewildered at what we're up to. 

 

The government is asking us, Mr. Chairman, to give them the 

right to spend tax dollars. They want to spend money. They 

don't want to just talk about it, they want to actually spend this 

money. And that's important, Mr. Chairman, because there's 

quite a distinct difference here. Once the money is spent, it's 

awfully hard to run out and gather it back together. It's going to 

be gone. 

 

Now in government, grievance before supply means that the 

opposition has the right to demand answers — answers to 

questions before the money is spent, not after the money is 

spent and gone. That's what the term "grievance before supply" 

is defined as meaning to me. 

 

A few minutes ago the minister said that if you want the 

answers, wait until later. Then, our experience already has 

indicated to us, even though we've only been here for a year 

and a half, that when later comes members of the government 

will say to us: well it's a little late now; you should've asked us 

that before. 

 

And it seems to me, Mr. Chairman, that we are being given 

something of a run-around here. And I suppose that's good 

government politics, but it isn't good accountability for public 

money. And I put it to the minister that the people will judge 

whether you are being honest with the expenditures of their 

dollars, or whether you are playing games to try to cover up the 

choices that you're making of where you're spending money. 

 

(1630) 

 

And so, Mr. Chairman, so that the people can understand why 

this is so important, let me explain to the public what kinds of 

things the government wants us to agree to by this Bill coming 

to a vote. They want us to provide them with money to use to 

pay for things like the Tetzlaff brothers' legal fees in fighting 

the Rafferty-Alameda project which apparently adds up to 

$250,000. Obviously this one-twelfth share must include that, 

or at least a portion of it, depending on what kind of an 

arrangement was made for the payments to be made. 

 

Government lawyers who are fighting farm families in court 

have to be paid. They're fighting against the farmers who 

wanted their fair share of GRIP payments. And we'd like to 

know how much of this one-twelfth is going to go to pay those 

lawyers and their research and all of the things that go into it. 

We want the people to be able to judge whether or not that is 

fair and reasonable. 

 

We find $800,000 to the newly created Provincial Secretary 

office, and we wonder if that payment is going to be split into 

twelfths, if one-twelfth of that money is going to be paid out at 

the present time out of this allotment of money. And if it is, I 

think we have some right to know what that money is going to 

buy for the people of Saskatchewan, what advantage. 

 

What are they going to get out of it? Where is the return for the 

investment to the taxpayer? Ninety-nine thousand dollars, we 

find out, is to keep snowmobilers in Saskatchewan. Now that's 

a good one. I expect that that has to be built into this 

one-twelfth as well, and I'm sure the minister will want to 

explain that. 

 

We see $20 million to buy video lottery terminals from 

American companies that are presently under criminal 

investigation, not only in one country, but in two countries, 

under criminal investigation — companies which the 

government still refuses to release details on. 

 

But this is $20 million of taxpayers' money. Is that all included 

in this one-twelfth appropriation or is it just one-twelfth of the 

20 million; is it paid over a period of time? 

 

The people of our province have the right to know how that 

money is being paid out to and who to. They have a right to 

know whether or not there are going to be follow-up legal 

implications when monies are paid to companies that are 

presently under criminal investigation, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Will there be repercussions for having done deals with them? 

Will there in fact maybe be lawsuits following up later on that 

people will have to dig in their pockets and pay more taxes to 

pay for? This is quite serious stuff when you get right into it. 



764 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1993 

We have a lot at stake in the government asking for an interim 

payment of one-twelfth of the whole budget, especially when 

that budget now goes up to 5 billion and taxes are continuing to 

increase and all of the utility rates are increasing, not only once 

last year, but twice, and who knows how many times more. 

And with all of these increases in taxation, the minister stands 

here and said, give me the money; it has to be paid; nothing we 

can do about it. 

 

The reality, Mr. Chairman, is that a lot can be done about it. 

Choices are where the money goes to. Choices by the 

government determines who gets the money. Don't tell me that 

you're committed absolutely to spending $5 billion over the 

year. You make a choice of where that money is spent. Most of 

it is spent by choice, by the determination and the direction of a 

government with a particular philosophy of what they support 

and what they don't. 

 

Unfortunately for me and people like myself, people in rural 

Saskatchewan don't figure into the equation with this 

government. And for that, of course, the government will be 

judged later, that's if there is anything left of rural 

Saskatchewan to express an opinion when the time comes. I 

somehow expect, Minister, that most of the people from rural 

Saskatchewan will be living in Medicine Hat by the time the 

next election comes and it probably won't make much 

difference to them what happens here. 

 

We see that there's 150,000 extra to be paid for the highest 

bidder on the budworm contract. And while the government 

has explained to us that they think they've done the right thing, 

the taxpayers of this province have a right to know whether 

you're paying for that entirely out of the first one-twelfth that 

you're taking or if you're splitting that up into segments and 

going to be paying it off over a period of time. Will you be 

asking for one-twelfth of that money now or will you be asking 

for it all? Are you paying the whole thing or part of it? 

 

And I believe that that's a legitimate question. It's a legitimate 

question that needs to be answered in spite of the fact that it 

still does not require you to explain your contracting policy, 

which in my opinion is the wrong part of this whole deal. But 

at least the people have in this process the right to know how 

you're making those expenditures and at what times and in 

what procedures you're doing it. 

 

Somehow I think the people of Saskatchewan will be unhappy 

when they find out that in reality the airport in that particular 

project that was supposed to be built by the government 

presently consists of a road that many airplanes have landed on 

supposedly before, according to the people who were 

interviewed by the news media yesterday. And according to 

those same people in those same interviews, no new airport 

was ever required or needed, and that this is all just a 

subterfuge and a cover-up. 

 

And when those kind of allegations, Madam Minister, are 

levelled about a project, then it becomes even 

more important to the people to have an opportunity to 

question how and when and where those monies are going to 

be spent. 

 

Will there be countersuits and lawsuits as a result of that 

process? Have you figured into your one-twelfth appropriation 

the monies required if litigation is brought against you because 

of those misguided decisions, the choices that you've made, 

choices that apparently might be questionable, that might in 

fact turn out to be not only the wrong choices, but choices that 

have actually cost Saskatchewan people jobs? 

 

Taking American airplanes into Saskatchewan when there are 

planes already here available? It is a very questionable move, 

especially in difficult times. I would have to say that it must be 

hard for a government to do that even if the contractors here 

weren't particularly politically friendly, because they must 

employ some people besides themselves that would justify 

spending that money. 

 

We have extra money, Mr. Chairman, for increased staff in the 

Provincial Secretariat's office and the Premier's office. And that 

is an obvious, clear indication to us — and I think to the people 

of Saskatchewan — that apparently the government really does 

have money to spend. The great, huge deficit that everybody 

keeps wanting to talk about on that side of the House and wants 

to impress the people of the province with as being the reason 

that choices have to be made not to spend money, that great 

argument seems now to fall apart because here we do have 

dollars. 

 

All of a sudden the reality is that there's all kinds of money if 

you have a Provincial Secretary's office or if you have a 

Premier's office that needs more dollars. There suddenly seems 

to be lots of money around. But when you have to make a 

choice to put some money into saving a rural hospital, then 

we're broke. 

 

And that doesn't make any sense. You can't be rich today and 

poor when you go to the country — rich in the cities and then 

poor in the country. You can't have it both ways. You've got 

money for one thing and no money for the rest. So it's not a 

question any more of whether or not we have dollars to spend. 

It's a question of where you are choosing to spend them. 

 

I was rather annoyed when I heard the minister replying to the 

questions by the previous member. In fact I could even say that 

I was more than rather annoyed; I was quite annoyed. 

 

She replies that interest on our debt is going to go up from 135 

million to 847 million. That's a projection, and I understand 

that projections can be wrong. And in fact they'd better be 

wrong. We've gone from 22 per cent interest rates in the middle 

1980s down to five-point-some per cent at the national level. 

 

Surely you can't be so foolish as to be borrowing money for 15 

and 20 per cent. Surely you can't be saying to us that with 

interest rates dropping on the money that you borrow, that 

you're going to have a 



March 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 765 

hundred million dollars more debt on the same . . . or more 

interest rates to pay on the same debt. 

 

What you have to be saying to us here is that you're going to 

increase the debt. And in order for that to increase at lower 

interest rates by a hundred million dollars, you're going to have 

to increase this debt very significantly. And that's got people 

worried. 

 

How much would you have to increase the debt in order to cost 

yourself an extra hundred million dollars at lowering interest 

rates? Aren't you also saving some money? Aren't you also 

saving some money on the total debt? 

 

Now suppose the debt is 15 billion. How much money are you 

saving by doing some good financial wizardry and going out to 

the banks that you borrow from, or whoever you borrow from. 

I suppose the Saskatchewan power bonds and all those things 

must be included. 

 

But you must be saving some money by having some of those 

loans come due and refinancing them at lower rates. You must 

be able to finance now at, well, at least, what, 7 or 8 per cent? 

The national level is at five-point-something, dropping every 

day. I'm quite sure it will be below 5 per cent before long, the 

way it's going. I think I heard 12 weeks in a row now the 

interest rates have dropped. 

 

Surely there has to be not only hundreds of thousands of 

dollars, but millions of dollars at stake in these interest rates 

going down. And where, where is your good management if 

you can't capitalize on that? And how can you possibly be 

saying that we're going to have an increase projected of over a 

hundred million dollars on the same debt with interest rates 

dropping and plummeting daily? 

 

It doesn't make any sense. And of course, Madam Minister, 

your whole budget doesn't make very much sense because it's 

got the wrong choices in it. All of the wrong choices are in this 

thing. 

 

Well you can see — and of course if you can't, I know that the 

people watching through the country can see — why I get a 

little bit annoyed when I take out my little calculator and can 

soon figure out that something is terribly amiss in all of these 

figures of doom and gloom that are sending my people from 

my constituency scrambling to Alberta as fast as they can go. 

And that's what you're doing with your budget. You've almost 

written them a one-way ticket to get out of Saskatchewan. And 

to tell you the truth, there have been lots of days when I've told 

people, if you can get out, you'd better. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, the list does go on and on of the places 

where money is being spent. And there are many questions that 

must be answered with regard to these very important issues 

and as well with many other issues. And I want the answers, 

Mr. Chairman, to many of my questions. And, Madam 

Minister, I hope that you will have the patience to try to answer 

some of the questions. Because if you don't have the 

patience to answer our questions, then we will have to be here a 

very long time because it only requires then that we become 

more . . . well better, I guess, at the way that we ask our 

questions, more determined to rephrase them to bring them out 

in another way. 

 

(1645) 

 

You force us to go into a long litany of different approaches to 

try to achieve the result of getting the answers. It's our job; we 

have to do that. And we will do that job and we'll do it well and 

we'll do it for as long as it takes to get the answers. So what it 

means is that if you don't answer us forthrightly and honestly, 

then we will be here for a very long time. And I want to remind 

the minister that I don't have any summer vacation plans, so I 

might as well be here as anywhere else. 

 

First of all, I want to ask the question, Madam Minister: why 

are you waiting until the last minute to ask for interim supply 

to be passed? It seems to me that it's irresponsible that if you 

need money one-twelfth of all of the budget — a budget that 

hardly anybody in this province would agree with — why 

would you leave that until this day, the last dying hours of the 

month? Why wouldn't you have done this at least a week ago 

or two weeks ago? Why would you have tried to put pressure 

on the opposition to get money to pay the workers of this 

province that you are dedicated and responsible to paying? 

 

People's pay cheques, I am told, can be in jeopardy after some 

period of time goes by if these supply Bills aren't passed. 

 

So where is the rationale? Perhaps you would like to explain to 

the people of this province, Madam Minister, why you didn't 

do a responsible thing and ask for this money some time ago so 

that we could have debated it without feeling that pressure of 

obligation to help the people that you are going to not be 

paying. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With 

respect to the timing, the debate on the budget speech only 

ended last week. We had to serve notice with respect to the 

interim supply Bill coming before the legislature. It is here. 

 

It's really the opposition that will decide the timetable of the 

legislature and how the time is spent. If in fact you're saying 

that you did not think that the time was well spent in the last 

session, well then I would say that it was that side of the House 

that makes the choices. If in fact you want to debate in detail 

how we're going to spend the money before we start spending 

it, you've got 10 minutes. Pass this interim supply through 

quickly and we'll get into the detailed estimates before a penny 

of the money is spent. 

 

So it will be the members opposite who will decide when the 

people of Saskatchewan will get the detailed information that 

you say they are asking for. We can spend . . . the Associate 

Minister of Finance and I have booked off the next 10 days. 

We're prepared to stand 



766 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1993 

here as long as you want and talk about generalities. But if in 

fact you want us to be open and accountable, as we would like 

to be, then you have to move to the next stage of the process. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Madam Minister, I think the people of 

this province know full well that you're the people that called 

the legislature together on February 25; I didn't do that. You 

didn't ask my opinion. You could have called it on January 25. 

That would have given you a whole month for the process of 

budget and throne speech and all of those things to fall into 

place — long time ahead. So this line of argument that it's our 

fault now that you're running late, that's the most laughable 

thing I've heard since I got here. 

 

I was getting paid my wages as an MLA in January. I didn't go 

skiing, I could have been here. Maybe you folks ought to try 

earning your wages and start a month earlier and get things 

done before we get so close into the spring so that everybody's 

budget in the whole province is so badly off track that nobody 

knows what the dickens they're doing any more. 

 

And you pulled that trick last year too. You scheme and you 

fret and you make sure a big to-do about your political 

manoeuvring to try and gain ground, you've forgotten how to 

get down to the basics of the honest truth of just running the 

province and designating where the money's going to go and 

making your decisions and doing it. 

 

You're so busy playing games that you're outsmarting yourself. 

You're tricking yourself into places where nobody ever, ever 

tried to put you. You're the master of your own fate, which is 

that you're always running late because you just won't get to 

work and do things. Start a month earlier. 

 

Don't lecture me about how we cornered you into taking too 

much time debating the budget. Those kinds of things are all 

set down in the rules. You know exactly from year to year 

every year when you call the Assembly together how many 

days you're going to have to spend debating it. It's written in 

the rules. I didn't write the rules. They were here long before I 

got here. So don't hand us that crap. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, I have another question. And, Madam 

Minister, what is the total dollar amount spent on paying off 

the legal bills of the Tetzlaff brothers in relation to this 

one-twelfth? You could outline whether you're paying 

one-twelfth or whether you're paying the whole amount. Is any 

of this money going towards this cause — the one-twelfth 

appropriation? Or are they to be paid later? 

 

The Chair: — Why is the Minister of Justice on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I'd like leave of the committee, Mr. 

Chairman, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce to 

you, and through you, to members of the Assembly two guests 

in the Speaker's gallery. 

 

The first one that I'd like to introduce is Mr. John Amagoalik. 

Mr. Amagoalik is a very well-known, very famous Canadian 

who has spent the last 20 years of his life in pursuit of the 

dream of Nunavut, a province in Canada to be created, 

populated almost entirely by John's people, the Inuit people of 

Canada. 

 

It has been my pleasure to have known Mr. Amagoalik for the 

past 12, 13 years, and to work very closely with him in 

connection with land claims some time ago, and then most 

recently in connection with the constitutional discussions 

leading to the Charlottetown accord. 

 

With Mr. Amagoalik today is his assistant, Michael 

McGoldrick. I would like the Assembly to join me in 

welcoming Mr. Amagoalik and Mr. McGoldrick to the 

Assembly this afternoon. They were meeting with me, 

discussing aspects of the Nunavut proposal, which is before the 

House of Commons, and briefing me on recent developments. 

And I would like to have you join me in welcoming them to the 

Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 

join with the Minister of Justice in extending congratulations 

and best wishes from the official opposition to our two 

distinguished guests. 

 

I know that the Inuit people of Canada have benefited from all 

of the years of hard work, John. And I can say to you, just keep 

up the good work because there is a brighter future, and just 

don't let up. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Pringle: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I've 

been listening . . . Point of order, if I might. Point of order, yes. 

 

The Chair: — What is the member's point of order? 

 

Mr. Pringle: — I've listened very carefully all afternoon, Mr. 

Chairman, to the member from Maple Creek, and the minister 

is answering questions to the best of her ability. And the 

member just said, don't give me that crap. Now I would ask 

you to make a ruling on that. I think that's unparliamentary, Mr. 

Chairman, and I would ask you to invite the member to 

withdraw that statement or apologize. 

 

The Chair: — Order. The member for Saskatoon 

Eastview-Haultain has raised a point of order with respect to 

language used by the member for Maple Creek. Now the Chair 

did not hear the remarks which 



March 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 767 

the member for Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain alleges that were 

used by the member for Maple Creek, and I would ask the 

member for Maple Creek if in fact he used those words, and if 

he did use those words, to retract them and to apologize to the 

House. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I don't recall 

whether I used the word or not. But if I did, I certainly would 

retract it and apologize to the House. And I would certainly use 

the word garbage from here on. I'm sure that would . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. I asked the member a question as to 

whether or not he used the words which the member for 

Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain alleges he used. I asked the 

member, did he use those words, and if he did use those words, 

would he retract them and apologize to the House. 

 

When the Chair asks a member to retract and to apologize it 

should be done unequivocally, without any further comment. 

 

Now I ask the member for Maple Creek one more time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I will retract those 

words. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 


