




















































Hansard: April 26, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1171 

 April 26, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's my 

privilege to present on behalf of a number of residents across 

this province a petition regarding Bill No. 3, the debate taking 

place in the Assembly, and I'd like to read the prayer for the 

record: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by residents from 

the communities of Khedive, Kerrobert, Dodsland, Kindersley, 

Compier, Major, Coleville, Luseland, and Eatonia. I so present 

them to the Assembly. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 

petitions from across the province to present today: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from Eatonia, Laporte, Frontier, Claydon, 

Climax, Mr. Speaker, across the western side of the province. 

And I present these today. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too will, with 

pleasure, will lay these petitions on the Table today. And as of 

course of your request, I'll just read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these five or six full pages that I have here are 

from Frontier, Eatonia — that whole page is Eatonia. These are 

mostly in that Eatonia area; some from Kindersley, Mantario, 

all mostly the west side. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

table some petitions with respect to health care. And these 

several pages are from places in Saskatchewan like Invermay, 

Antler, Climax, Frontier, Bracken, Eatonia, and generally on 

the west side of the province. 

 

I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And I'll table these. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have similar 

petitions to my colleagues asking the government to postpone 

the implementation of The Health Districts Act. 

 

The petitions that I have are also from Climax, Mr. Speaker; 

from Frontier, from Bracken; from Tramping Lake; from 

Luseland, Kerrobert, Dodsland, Major; from New . . . 

Kerrobert, pardon me, Mr. Speaker, and Margo, and others as 

well from across the province, Mr. Speaker. And it gives me a 

great deal of pleasure to table these in the House. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions 

that relate to the health care districts Act so that . . . And the 

petitioners have signed this from Kerrobert, Tramping Lake, 

Luseland, Kindersley, Major, Climax, Frontier, throughout the 

west side of the province, Mr. Speaker. And I want to submit 

these to the Assembly here today. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would present 

petitions today on behalf of Saskatchewan people who have a 

great deal of difficulty with the government's proposals on 

health care. I'll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a 



1172 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

genuine impact on the process without intimidation or threat 

of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have people from the communities of 

Kerrobert, Major, Saskatoon, Kindersley; Drumheller, Alberta; 

Dodsland, Coleville, Luseland, Drake, Springwater, Kerr., 

Loverna, Major, Tramping Lake — there are people here, Mr. 

Speaker, from all over the province of Saskatchewan — I shall 

lay on the Table. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 

to table with the Assembly today more petitions regarding the 

proposed 230,000-volt power line from Condie to the Queen 

Elizabeth power station in Saskatoon: 

 

 Wherefore you petitioner humbly prays that the Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to do the following: 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I will summarize this lengthy petition. 

 

 1. Order SaskPower to facilitate the production of non-utility 

generated power in areas of increased demand, 

namely Lloydminster and Meadow Lake. Several 

companies in this area have applied to generate 

power. Allowing non-utility generation of power in 

this area will make the construction of the power 

line and its attendant $42 million expenditure 

unnecessary. 

 

The individuals request from the Minister of Environment an 

undertaking of a complete environmental assessment; from 

SaskPower a full and complete compensation package for all 

affected landowners; that the SaskPower table, in the 

legislature, a complete economic analysis by an independent 

auditor that proves the economic benefits; that they order 

SaskPower to table, in this legislature, a review of all national 

and international studies on the effects of electric and magnetic 

fields on humans. 

 

And lastly, Mr. Speaker, order SaskPower to cease and desist 

all planning, surveying, or preparation for construction of the 

Condie to Queen Elizabeth 230,000-volt power line on any of 

the proposed routes until all other points in this petition are 

honoured. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

There are 25 names on this particular petition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province praying that your Honourable 

Assembly may be pleased to postpone consideration of The 

Health Districts Act. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Farm Income Projections 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

my question will be to the Premier. 

 

First of all I'd like to welcome the Premier back from his trip. 

I'm sure that while you were in New York you did many 

valuable things for the province of Saskatchewan. However, 

Mr. Premier, your absence was noted by about a thousand or so 

Saskatchewan people who showed up on the steps of the 

legislature last week to take issue with the way that you're 

governing the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Premier, I find it curious that while you were in New York 

you told the Canadian Society of New York that your 

government's financial projections are based on, amongst other 

things, increased farm receipts. And that's quoted in the 

Star-Phoenix. 

 

Mr. Premier, today's paper both Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and 

Ag Canada are predicting income drops to new, record lows. 

And how do you explain to this House and to the people of this 

province, Mr. Premier, the fact that you go to New York and 

you tell the business community and the bankers there that one 

of the reasons that your government is on track is because you 

are going to have increased farm receipts? 

 

Mr. Premier, don't you find that kind of strange when 60,000 

farm families . . . everybody else in the province knows that 

that's sheer bunk, that they're dropping dramatically? Mr. 

Premier, how do you explain that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to first of all 

acknowledge with deep gratitude the welcome back to the 

House that the Leader of the Opposition has extended to me. I 

knew that beyond all of the debate and differences that we 

might have, there exists a very deep affection between the two 

of us as public servants, so I accept the welcome. 

 

I will say, Mr. Speaker, that what I'm going to do is provide 

later this afternoon — I don't have a copy with me — a copy of 

the exact text of the notes which I used at the time I delivered 

my speech to the Canadian Society. And as I recall, what we 

were saying to them, to the Canadian Society, was that the 

projections contained in the four-year balanced budget plan 

were projections based on indices used by the credit-rating 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1173 

agencies themselves and had been approved by a variety of 

external people who have analysed whether or not those 

predictions are accurate. 

 

That is our position and we believe those are very legitimate, 

conservative — small C conservative, I might add, as opposed 

to big C conservative — estimates, and it is the projection 

which we think is solid. Of course, time will tell; we're only a 

few weeks into the '93-94 year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Premier. Mr. Premier, as usual in this House you tend to 

want to avoid the question at hand, and the question at hand 

today is the fact that Ag Canada is forecasting Saskatchewan 

farm income to fall from anywhere from 56 to 68 per cent this 

year. That works out to less than $5,000 per farm, Mr. Premier. 

 

Meanwhile, you go to New York . . . And I don't know why the 

reporters wouldn't tell the truth here — they say that the 

Premier, citing increased farm receipts, increased potash sales, 

increased uranium production and oil revenue, means that 

Saskatchewan's economy is on the road back. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, rather than running around New York 

telling bankers something that is blatantly untrue, I think it's 

about time that you started staying home, going out, and 

actually talking to some farm people who are beginning their 

annual megaproject in this province, their megaproject which 

spends a billion dollars here, sir. And their income is dropping 

through the floor. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, would you like to once again have a shot at 

why you are telling New York bankers one thing when farm 

families in Saskatchewan know diametrically the opposite? 

Would you try it, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, again my response to 

the Leader of the Opposition is much along the lines of my 

earlier response. The Canadian Society, by the way, was not a 

speech to bankers alone by a long shot. We had over 150 attend 

these from the business community: some financial, some 

potential investors, people with entrepreneurial interests and 

the like. And it was actually a very successful turnout. 

 

I think the best thing is to get the text and to make it available 

to the member opposite. I would say before I take my seat in 

this regard that, none the less, we understand that there is a 

difficult situation at the farm gate. I don't think anybody argues 

that there is peaches and cream and a rosy particular 

atmosphere at the farm gate right now. I think everybody 

understands that it is a difficulty. 

 

But I think it's also correct to say, talking about newspaper 

reports that, Mr. Paul Martin for example 

of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix amongst others, reports a new 

sense of optimism, that the farm crisis has resulted in farmers 

diversifying in a whole number of other areas. 

 

The heading that I've been just handed by my colleague here 

says, "There's a new fighting spirit in rural Saskatchewan" on 

Saturday's Star-Phoenix and an optimistic one. I don't mean to 

say that they have overcome the difficulties by a long shot; I'm 

only saying that I think that it's not as doom-and-gloom filled 

as the official opposition would have us believe. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Premier. Mr. Premier, it was a brave try but it simply 

doesn't wash. Sask Wheat Pool, in their spring seeding report 

here, are saying that the average income is, in their best 

estimation, is around $6,000; Ag Canada is saying 5. That 

compares to $15,000 a short time ago, Mr. Premier. It's 

dropping like a stone. 

 

Now maybe one of the reasons, you also didn't mention in your 

talk to your New York friends about closing hospitals all over 

rural Saskatchewan, raising sales taxes, and generally doing 

things in your last budget that devastate rural Saskatchewan. 

Maybe you didn't talk about that because that would have put a 

different face on your projections for farm income, Mr. 

Premier. 

 

Obviously, Mr. Premier, the reporters are saying that you 

weren't talking about the salient issues in Saskatchewan, that 

you were off on some other tangent. Now the fact that farm 

income is dropping through the floor in the face of your 

election promises, Mr. Premier, could you tell the farmers of 

the province today that you've got something in the works for 

them that's going to give them some hope as they plan their 

billion-dollar seeding project this spring? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 

Opposition talked about the most salient feature — I recall the 

word salient in his question — which I would interpret to mean 

the most important aspect of the trip to New York. 

 

I want to tell the member that the most important aspect, the 

most important mission that we had on the trip to New York, 

was to make sure that we could tell the bankers and show them 

through our budget that we had turned the corner indeed; that 

we have now begun to put the finances of this province on a 

sound footing. They know our figures and they know our 

economic situation a lot better than you, sir, might think they 

do — notwithstanding what any premier or any other political 

leader may or may not say, by accident or by design. 

 

The salient purpose of this trip was to preserve our credit 

rating, which, sir, is perilously, perilously on the verge of dire 

straits as a result of nine years of the most 



1174 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

horrendous, horrific budgetary deficits racked up in the history 

of any government in Canada. That's what I was there for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question's to 

the Premier. Mr. Premier, the problem is that you go to New 

York and you say one thing. You recently run an election 

campaign and you say one thing. And what we find out, Mr. 

Premier, is it's always diametrically the opposite the way things 

turn out. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, you're the one that made the election 

promise about no new taxes and doing away with $200 million 

in taxation. Mr. Premier, you're the one that said we're going to 

protect health care in this province. Only you, sir. 

 

Now you go to New York and you say one of the reasons that 

my government is on track is because farm revenue is going 

up. And everyone else in the world says it's dropping through 

the floor, Mr. Premier. I'm scared if I walked in here and said, 

good afternoon, Mr. Premier, you'd say no, it's night or 

something like that. I mean we've got to come clean with the 

people here, Mr. Premier. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, the issue today is the fact that farm income 

is dropping through the floor. You're telling New York bankers 

one thing. Mr. Premier, could you tell farm families in this 

province today that you, or you in combination with somebody 

else, have got some hope that that $5,000 figure of net farm 

income isn't going to be a reality because your government's 

ready to stand with rural people. Are you ready to do that 

today, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, after question 

period I'd be pleased to forward a copy of the notes of my 

address to the Canadian Society of New York, which I have 

just taken the liberty during the course of the question of 

skimming very briefly, and I do not see the reference that the 

hon. member makes. So this perhaps is again either an 

accidental misinterpretation or some misunderstanding. But the 

notes speak for themselves. I followed these notes very 

carefully, and I indeed distributed them to the media and you'll 

see the situation with respect to farm receipts. I made no 

mention of farm receipts, that I can see here. 

 

But that's not the fundamental aspect of the question. The 

fundamental aspect of the question is the need to have 

optimism and a need to have hope. And I'm saying to the 

Leader of the Opposition, as I say to all the members of the 

Conservative caucus over there, that while the farmers are 

facing a serious situation — we understand that; you 

understand that; they know that too — there is much more 

optimism this spring. 

 

Not because the receipts from the traditional farming are going 

to be any better — the predictions there remain a little bit 

difficult — but, as Paul Martin and 

others have indicated, there is an attempt now to diversify. 

They're going to move away from wheat and other areas they're 

going to be planting in. They're going to be looking at a variety 

of new industrial and home-based economies and enterprises, 

and the level of optimism is indeed much higher. 

 

In fact the only darkness that descends here is when I come to 

question period and listen to the questions put forward by the 

Leader of the Opposition and the Conservative caucus. 

 

I would say to him: sir — and to all their caucus members — 

please lighten up and join the province in the sense that we 

have turned the corner and that there is more optimism. Please 

stop the doom and gloom and start building instead of 

wrecking the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Premier. I'm sure, Mr. Premier, that you've got the 

appropriate written text to pass over to the opposition to give 

yourself a little bit of a smokescreen for what you actually said. 

But, Mr. Premier, people in this province know that you very 

seldom use a prepared text and you go off and say all sorts of 

things. 

 

I mean we've just had an election campaign, Mr. Premier, 

where you said all sorts of things, none of which have come 

true. So I would suspect that you went down and you talked to 

the folks in New York and you just went off the cuff and you 

said a bunch of things that aren't true, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, your friend, Garf Stevenson, comments in the 

same report here. He says yes, diversification is on the right 

track but it's going to take years — years — to make any 

impact. Now, Mr. Premier, the fact is, the fact is, the number is 

$5,000 per farm family in this province, Mr. Premier. Would 

you please tell the farm people of the province today what your 

government has in mind to change that number, either what 

you heard in New York or what you heard some place else on 

your trip. 

 

Mr. Premier, that is poverty. Can you tell farm families today 

what your government has in store to make sure that number 

comes up. Would you do that, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, there are two aspects to 

this question as I see it. First of all I invite all members of the 

House and all members of the public who may be watching this 

question period to note that the questioning began by the 

Leader of the Opposition about my notes or my remarks to the 

Canadian Society of New York. I have a copy of the Canadian 

Society of New York notes and the text which I gave right 

here. And I'm going to give the opposition a copy of it. 

 

Then he switches the debate and says, oh well, I know the 

notes might say something, but you know you're 

smokescreening. I think that's simply not credible. And it is 

from that position, Mr. Speaker, which I think 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1175 

the rest of it simply falls down as well. 

 

Of course no one's happy about farm gate receipts. We want to 

see those elevated. We think there are a number of reasons for 

them and a number of possible solutions for them — including 

some assistance by the federal government which we perhaps 

may or may not see at this budget which is about to be 

announced in the next 10 minutes or so — a number of these 

things. 

 

But my central proposition, the Leader of the Opposition, is 

this: that in these difficult times, notwithstanding governments, 

notwithstanding the difficulties that they have, the farmers of 

this province do have a higher sense of optimism. They are 

diversifying. They are finding new ways to meet the crisis. 

They do understand that what we inherited was a financial 

mess of the highest proportions, and that what we have to do is 

what we're doing. They know that. And there is a sense of 

optimism, and in truth and starting with truth, we'll build in this 

regard, in my judgement, a healthy and stronger economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, the 

article in the Star-Phoenix says, and I quote: Romanow is 

citing increased farm receipts, potash sales, uranium production 

and oil revenues, starting last year. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the Premier of the province 

this question: $5,000 is roughly a 56 to a 68 per cent loss in 

farm net income — is that up or down? 

 

You said in the article . . . you must have quoted something to 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan who are in the 

media, that say that you said that revenues in agriculture were 

going to be up. 

 

My question to you is this, Mr. Premier: what are you going to 

do in this crisis for agriculture in the province of 

Saskatchewan, for agriculture and rural farmers? What are you 

going to do for them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I will give this answer, 

but one more last time. I have the text in front of me of the 

Canadian Society speech about the value of resources. This is 

what I said in New York. Unlike the former premier who's 

asked me about what I said, I tell you one thing I did not say. 

What I did not say, I did not say this: I said, Saskatchewan has 

got so much going for it that I could afford to mismanage it and 

it still wouldn't go bankrupt. That I did not say, sir. I want you 

to know that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — What I told the people in New York 

is the truth about the mismanagement of nine years under your 

administration, sir, and also the truth about the fact that we 

have turned this budget and this economy around. 

If you're saying to me that the farm economy needs more 

assistance, I say yes, I agree with you. If you say that the 

farmers have no optimism or hope, I disagree with you. I 

believe that the farmers are optimistic and they are hopeful and 

they're inventive, and they're moving into a number of other 

areas. 

 

And if they need assistance, they need assistance from your 

cousins in Ottawa, and you should be asking these questions of 

the Tory leadership candidates and the Prime Minister. What 

are they going to do about helping the farmers of the province 

of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, in today's 

paper, Ottawa's CP (Canadian Press) press says that the retail 

sales adjusted have a .7 per cent drop. In your budget you said 

that there's going to be a 4.2 per cent increase. Now everybody 

in the province of Saskatchewan understands that what you 

said in the paper is wrong. When will you admit that you were 

wrong? 

 

Farm sales are going to drop 56 to 68 per cent, and you say that 

that's going to be an asset to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan? Mr. Premier, those are not my statistics. Those 

are not my quotes. They are actual fact. 

 

Will you tell the people in the province of Saskatchewan who 

are relying on the billion dollars that farmers are going to put 

into the ground this spring, that they're going to get paid for 

their seed, they're going to get paid for their fuel? Will you give 

some of those farmers an optimistic view of what the world is 

really about by telling them the truth. They want to know what 

the truth is, and you said it's going up. Pool says it's going 

down. Canada says it's going to go down. Where's your 

optimism, Mr. Minister? Have you got some money for the 

farmers in your back pocket that you're going to deliver? Is that 

the optimism that you have? Would you provide that for us 

today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, oh how I wish I had 

some money in my back pocket to give to the farmers and to 

the others in the province of Saskatchewan. But unfortunately, 

Mr. Speaker, those members opposite who governed this 

province for nine years emptied every pocket of every avenue 

that the people of the province of Saskatchewan have ever had. 

 

They lifted up the taxpayers upside down and took every penny 

out of them, and mortgaged them and hocked them to the end 

of the world. And this member has the audacity to get up and 

say, do I have extra money in my pocket to help out the 

farmers. How credible is that? 

 

Please, as an opposition which is supposed to be responsible, 

do you expect anybody in 



1176 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

Saskatchewan, let alone Canada and North America, to accept 

that proposition? Because if you do, then you are sinking 

further in the public opinion polls than you are now. 

 

I say to you, sir, and I say to the Leader of the Opposition, and 

the former premier, get real. Get to the situation of admitting 

your mistakes, and join us in overcoming this difficult 

challenge rather than always being on the doom-and-gloom 

side. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, you are cited 

to have said there's increased revenue for agriculture in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, $5,000 a farmer 

is not very much. And that is 56 to 68 per cent less than they 

had last year. And that, Mr. Speaker, is the statistics that we 

have. 

 

You are also going to take away revenue from all of the other 

off-farm income that people have in the province. The people 

in the province of Saskatchewan earn a billion dollars off the 

farm every year, and you're going to take that away too. 

Fifty-two hospitals — gone. School boards are going to be 

ripped apart by the very fact that you're going to tax them 

more. Every one of your taxes that you've delivered to them are 

offloading on them. And, Mr. Premier, the only cost of 

inflation is your taxes. 

 

Will you tell the people of the province of Saskatchewan that 

you're going to give them some relief? Would you tell them 

that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, we're back at it again. 

Would you please tell them that . . . is the repetitive question. I 

like to be home except for the terrible doom and gloom that the 

members of the Conservative Party have opposite. 

 

Conference Board of Canada recommends 3.2 per cent growth 

in 1993 for Saskatchewan. Even that's a case; well it's a fact 

you can just throw out. Nesbitt Thomson says Saskatchewan 

may be the first province to get an actual upgrader - 

_ just throw that out of the whole picture. 

 

The former premier yells from his chair: did you tell them 

about what you're doing in the wellness model in 

Saskatchewan? Yes, I told them exactly what I was doing in 

the wellness model in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Did I tell them about our 

foundations? Yes, I told them about our foundations. Mr. 

Speaker, our foundations are strong. Our resource base is 

strong. Our farming community, our farmers are the best in the 

world. We are in a situation where we are blessed much more 

than many other parts of Canada and Canadians are — I don't 

say that in any way other than facts of the case. 

Our problem has been that for the last nine years, however, that 

bounty which were given, that trust which you were handed, 

that trust to be able to manage that bounty with care and 

compassion and taking care of future generations, you 

squandered. You squandered. You squandered. 

 

And in 18 months we're trying to clean up your mess. And I 

want to tell you, you may not believe it, but the people in 

Saskatchewan believe it; the people outside of Saskatchewan 

believe it; and those who listened to us in New York, they also 

believe it. So what in the world is wrong with you folks? Why 

don't you admit that you were wrong and help join us in 

rebuilding Saskatchewan? Please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Federal Transfer Payments 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the Minister of Finance, but I have one comment for the 

Conservative opposition next to me, sir. In nine and a half 

years, Madam Minister, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and 

Ottawa had Conservative leaders in power and in nine and a 

half years there were no prairie grain-belt solutions for farmers 

in this province and no reforms. 

 

The federal government began delivering its budget today 

about 25 minutes ago and there's considerable speculation that 

there may be cuts in transfer payments to the provinces. Given 

the federal government's actions to their last several budgets, 

I'm sure that you have planned for potential reductions in 

transfer payments to the province of Saskatchewan, and if so, 

what contingency plans are in place and in what part of the 

budget are they listed? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes. Mr. Speaker, I thank the 

member opposite for that question. If you would look at the 

estimates upon which we based this budget, you will see that 

we planned for a reduction in transfer payments. The number 

goes from 28 per cent to 24 per cent. So we have been very 

realistic in our projections, and when we were in New York 

one of the comments that was consistently made was how 

realistic our projections are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 

Minister, municipalities are unable to make their plans for the 

year until they know the extent of government assistance and I 

do commend you that you have given projections to 

municipalities over the next several years. But just as you are 

awaiting the federal budget and not knowing if this will throw 

off your revenue and expenditure projections, local 

governments continue to be forced to wait for the provincial 

government each year. 

 

One of the important reforms that Liberals campaigned on — a 

reform that your government has committed to implement — is 

to fix a regular time frame for the delivery of the provincial 

budget. 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1177 

Madam Minister, after 18 months of consideration, I think your 

government has had ample time to choose set budget dates. 

 

Will you give governments and third-party agencies who rely 

on your funding a clear message by acknowledging the 

difficulties unpredictable budget dates have created for them 

and announce the set budget dates for the province of 

Saskatchewan from this day forward? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Several comments to make. First of all with respect to 

the budget date, this is the earliest budget date in about 10 

years in the history of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Second, with respect to giving third 

parties advance warning, that is precisely what this government 

has done. We have given them two years advance notice as to 

what their grants are going to be, and we have even talked with 

them about what may be in store for them beyond that date. 

 

I guess I would like to address the main thrust though of the 

member opposite's question. I think she's dead wrong. I do not 

believe the federal government will be cutting transfer 

payments to the provinces in this budget. I have spoken to the 

federal Minister of Finance and I have said that we're into a 

new era of politics in Saskatchewan, in Canada — we are 

setting aside partisan differences on the issue of the need to 

control the deficit. 

 

How we control it, the measures we take, we will differ. They 

will do it one way; we will do it another way. But in terms of 

the overall goal, this province stands united with the other 

provinces and with the federal government because we want to 

present to the outside world a common front. We know we 

have a debt problem; we're going to cooperate, we're going to 

sit down at the same table, and we're going to deal with it 

together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Mankota 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 

reading of a Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Mankota. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:38 p.m. until 2:39 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Toth 

Devine D'Autremont 

Neudorf Haverstock 

Martens  

— 7 

Nays 

Romanow Upshall 

Van Mulligen Lorje 

Thompson Lyons 

Wiens Lautermilch 

Tchorzewski Calvert 

Lingenfelter Murray 

Teichrob Trew 

Koskie Draper 

Anguish Serby 

Solomon Flavel 

Carson Cline 

Mitchell Kujawa 

MacKinnon Stanger 

Penner Knezacek 

Cunningham Keeping 

— 30 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

St. Walburg 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to restore health care services to the community of St. 

Walburg. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:41 p.m. until 2:42 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Toth 

Devine D'Autremont 

Neudorf Haverstock 

Martens  

— 7 

Nays 

Romanow Upshall 

Van Mulligen Lorje 

Thompson Lyons 

Wiens Lautermilch 

Tchorzewski Murray 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Teichrob Draper 

Koskie Serby 

Anguish Whitmore 

Solomon Flavel 

Carson Cline 

Mitchell Kujawa 

Penner Knezacek 

Cunningham Keeping 

— 28 

 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Vanguard 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 

reading of a Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Vanguard. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:43 p.m. until 2:44 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 



1178 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

 

Muirhead Toth 

Devine D'Autremont 

Neudorf Haverstock 

Martens  

— 7 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Hagel 

Thompson Lorje 

Wiens Lyons 

Tchorzewski Lautermilch 

Lingenfelter Murray 

Teichrob Trew 

Koskie Draper 

Anguish Serby 

Solomon Whitmore 

Carson Flavel 

Mitchell Cline 

Penner Kujawa 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Upshall Keeping 

— 28 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Cabri 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 

reading of a Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Cabri. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:45 p.m. until 2:46 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Martens 

Devine Toth 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

— 6 

Nays 

Thompson Lorje 

Wiens Lyons 

Lingenfelter Lautermilch 

Teichrob Murray 

Koskie Trew 

Anguish Draper 

Solomon Serby 

Carson Whitmore 

Mitchell Flavel 

Penner Cline 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Upshall Keeping 

Hagel  

— 25 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Coronach 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 

reading of a Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Coronach. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:47 p.m. until 2:48 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

Yeas 

Muirhead Toth 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens  

— 5 

Nays 

Thompson Hagel 

Wiens Lorje 

Lingenfelter Murray 

Teichrob Draper 

Koskie Serby 

Anguish Whitmore 

Carson Cline 

Mitchell Knezacek 

Cunningham Keeping 

Upshall  

— 19 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Whitewood 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 

reading of a Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Whitewood. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:50 p.m. until 2:51 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Toth 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens  

— 5 

Nays 

Thompson Hagel 

Wiens Lorje 

Lingenfelter Murray 

Teichrob Draper 

Koskie Serby 

Anguish Whitmore 

Carson Cline 

Mitchell Knezacek 

Cunningham Keeping 

Upshall  

— 19 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Craik 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 

reading of a Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Craik. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:52 p.m. until 2:53 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Toth 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens  

— 5 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1179 

Nays 

Thompson Hagel 

Wiens Lorje 

Lingenfelter Calvert 

Teichrob Murray 

Koskie Serby 

Carson Whitmore 

Mitchell Cline 

MacKinnon Knezacek 

Cunningham Keeping 

Upshall  

— 19 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 3 — An Act respecting Health Districts 

 

The Chair: — I would ask the Associate Minister of Health to 

please introduce the officials here with him today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have with me 

today Mr. Duane Adams, deputy minister of Health; and Mr. 

Jim Engel, health policy planner. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think that what 

we must do here . . . My colleague from Arm River is going to 

be asking some questions and was going to get up first, but I 

find the situation as it is developing here, Mr. Chairman, totally 

unacceptable. And I must protest in the strongest terms 

possible the manoeuvre taken by the Minister of Health or the 

House Leader, whoever is responsible for this travesty of 

setting up a toy minister to answer the questions from the 

opposition that we want to ask the Minister of Health. 

 

This is not acceptable. The people of the province had to come 

to Regina to ask the Minister of Health questions on last week 

Wednesday. And then when they were going to be . . . were 

prepared and had the opportunity to ask questions, Mr. 

Chairman, the Minister of Health ducked and she ran into the 

shelter of this Assembly in order to duck the direct questions 

from the people of this province. 

 

So now we have two days and the Deputy Chairman keeps on 

chirping and interrupting proceedings, Mr. Chairman. He's 

setting a fine example for other presiding officers in this 

Assembly. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, it is unacceptable for this government to 

put up the member from Moose Jaw and pretend that he is the 

Minister of Health. That is not acceptable, and we want the 

Minister of Health. We want the Minister of Health, I say 

again, to answer and be accountable for the actions of this 

government. 

 

And to think that they can get away with a ploy of putting up 

the member from Moose Jaw 

and pretend that he has anything to say in this government is an 

utter travesty. We want either the Minister of Health or the 

Premier of this province to answer our questions, Mr. 

Chairman. This will not do. 

 

Failing that, Mr. Chairman, I would suggest that we adjourn for 

the remainder of the day. I suggest that we adjourn for the 

remainder of the day and that this time be not counted in the 

time allocation motion. 

 

You're playing games with the opposition, that's what you're 

doing. That's what you're doing, you're playing games with the 

people of this province. They came to Regina last Wednesday 

to ask the Minister of Health some very pointed, specific 

questions. And they wanted answers. And the Minister of 

Health ducked, and she ran into the legislature to get away 

from them. She turned her back to the people. 

 

Now we have the last-ditch opportunity that we have as an 

opposition to ask the minister detailed questions about the plan 

in Committee of the Whole. This is the only opportunity we 

have, and she doesn't come out, she ducks — she ducks, Mr. 

Speaker . . . Mr. Chairman. That is unacceptable and I give 

notice to the Government House Leader now that we want the 

Minister of Health back into this Assembly so that she will . . . 

 

(1500) 

 

And we insist that she comes in to answer the questions that we 

want to ask her. Not the member from Moose Jaw — he doesn't 

make any decisions. He's going to be acting as a messenger of 

some type. But we want to shoot the questions at the Minister 

of Health, not at the messenger. 

 

And I request the Government House Leader now to see to it 

that the Minister of Health appears. I don't know how long it 

takes her to get down from her office, but the five or ten 

minutes that it would take her, and I respectfully then ask for a 

recess during that time while the minister comes into her place 

to answer the questions that we legitimately want to ask her, 

not this cop-out. 

 

An Hon. Member: — On a point of order, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: — What is the point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I would ask for a 

ruling on the availability of ministers to answer questions. It's 

my understanding that the established rule in this Assembly — 

established ironically by the members opposite — for associate 

ministers to answer questions during estimates or during 

committee on Bills has been in place for some time. And I 

remember very clearly the premier of the province, the premier 

of the province, the member from Estevan, leaving the 

Assembly and allowing the associate minister to answer 

questions of the premier's office and the Department of 

Agriculture. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Chairman, in light of the fact 



1180 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

that the Minister of Health is in North Battleford, P.A. (Prince 

Albert), Swift Current, and Yorkton today, I would ask for a 

ruling, Mr. Chairman, that would allow the committee to do its 

work. The same advisers, the deputy minister of Health, is here 

to give advice, the same person as would be advising the 

minister. And this is nothing but a phoney excuse for the 

member to try to get away from asking the questions, I would 

make the comment, as opposed to the answers. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — To counter the arguments made by the 

Government House Leader, we have questions, Mr. Chairman, 

that we want to ask — very, very legitimate questions and lots 

of them. 

 

Now this is a bunch of nonsense what we have here. The 

Minister of Health has known for three weeks at least that the 

deadline . . . with the closure motion in place that the deadline 

was fast approaching. She knows full well we only have today 

and tomorrow to ask her questions. So she ducks. She ducks 

because she doesn't want to answer. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we only have two days to ask questions. And 

now we don't even have the minister so we can direct our 

questions to her. She's in P.A. She's in North Battleford — 

tightly controlled meetings, no doubt, where the public is not 

invited to attend. I know how those meetings work. I know 

how those meetings work — she's doing damage control out 

there instead of facing the people of Saskatchewan through 

their elected representatives, Mr. Chairman. 

 

It's totally inappropriate, with the Government House Leader 

having the audacity to get up, having the audacity to get up, 

having put time allocation and having put closure on time 

allocation, that we only have two days in which to ask 

questions of Committee of the Whole. And then they 

orchestrate it, they orchestrate it purposely so the Minister of 

Health isn't even going to be here. 

 

I ask again, Mr. Chairman, that you rule that this House recess 

until tomorrow at the time where this minister will be available 

to answer questions that we want to ask her. 

 

The Chair: — Order, order. It's not up to the Chair to 

determine which minister shall answer questions for the 

government. The government can call on any minister it wishes 

to respond to questions by the opposition. Order. This is a 

matter that the members can resolve themselves — order — 

and the point of order is not well taken. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want somebody 

in this province to notice what's going on here today. This 

manipulation of the process . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And 

that is exact . . . Now, now we're getting somewhere. The 

Government House Leader has admitted that they don't care 

what goes on in the House right now because the federal 

budget is coming down. Another fluff, another hope that this 

will camouflage what these people are doing, Mr. Chairman. 

This is unacceptable. I repeat that. We do not want to talk to 

the toy minister, as they describe him themselves. The 

associate minister is not responsible for any actions of this 

government other than being basically a back-bencher and a 

yes-man. That's all. We want to talk to the real thing. The 

Minister of Health is going to be held responsible. 

 

We have a government here that is involved in the biggest, 

massive restructuring of the health program that this province 

has ever seen, and they don't want to be held accountable for 

that restructuring. 

 

So what do they do? They put on time allocation and say you 

can only have so-and-so much time to talk about it. And then 

they put closure on the time allocation and they expect us to sit 

back here and be content to ask the member from Moose Jaw 

questions. 

 

This is totally unacceptable — totally. The Minister of Health 

has to be here. The Minister of Health is responsible. Then put 

the Premier in his chair or the Minister of Finance in her chair, 

and then we'll get on with it. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the Government House Leader got up and said 

it is within the purview and the mandate of the government to 

have any minister get up and answer questions, and I concur 

with that. Those are the rules of this Assembly and I full well 

know that. 

 

Then I will say this, I will say this to the Government House 

Leader: put up the Minister of Finance or put up the Premier 

and we'll get on with the show. I put that challenge to the 

House Leader right now. 

 

The Chair: — Clause 1 agreed? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — See what happens, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. 

Chairman? Immediately there's silence. They don't want to 

answer our questions. They're ducking, simple as that. 

 

Now the questions are not difficult that we are going to be 

asking, but I think the answers are extremely difficult. The 

answers are extremely difficult if you don't have them. And I 

can see why you're ducking. I can see why you do not want to 

put up your ministers — the ministers that are accountable and 

responsible for what is happening. That's our problem here. 

 

The questions are straightforward. The answers are going to be 

demanding of you folks, to come up with appropriate answers. 

That is true. 

 

Then we have the member from Moose Jaw, and I hold no 

personal grudge against him. I know he's in a bind and he is 

wishing right now he was anywhere else except here right now 

as well. But he's the person that's been assigned — you take the 

flak. And I'm sure he'll do a good job of fudging. But he doesn't 

know, he doesn't know what perpetrated the conclusion that 

you people have come to as to how you want to restructure 

health in this province. 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1181 

Quite frankly, I think it would be more appropriate for the 

Minister of Agriculture to get up and answer these questions. 

At least he's rural-based. And the devastation . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Well ask him then. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Well ask him then, the member from Prince 

Albert says. Sure we will. If he gets up, we're on a roll. We're 

on our way. 

 

But I want someone who is going to be answerable to the 

impact that this health restructuring is going to have to the 

people of the province in general and in particular to rural 

Saskatchewan. And with all respect to the member from Moose 

Jaw, I don't think he's got a handle on it. 

 

We want someone from the treasury branches that we can ask 

specific questions to, detailed questions to, impact questions of 

how this is going to affect rural Saskatchewan. And what we've 

got here is the member from Moose Jaw who has been assigned 

the task of covering for the government. 

 

Now that's a shameful cop-out. I'm really disappointed in the 

House Leader and the Premier and particularly the Minister of 

Health, who has chosen deliberately to avoid answering to the 

people of Saskatchewan. And she's now got herself up in the 

northern part of the province in a contrived atmosphere to do 

some damage control, talking to a few media folk, but certainly 

not talking to the representatives of the people that are being 

hurt in this province and who have asked us as the opposition 

to hold the government accountable. 

 

I'm waiting for the Minister of Agriculture to indicate that he 

would be willing then to answer and field these questions that 

we have. You see how low this government is stooping, Mr. 

Chairman, in terms of giving the opportunity to the opposition 

to ask questions to credible ministers who are responsible for 

these actions. 

 

Now we've used associate ministers under certain 

circumstances who have been assigned tasks. And when those 

items were up, that associate minister got up and answered the 

questions specific to him. But now under one of the most dire 

consequences that this province has ever experienced, we have 

the Premier ducking and we have the Minister of Health 

ducking. Now that's a frustrating experience to find yourself in. 

We've been looking forward to these two days. 

 

And again I ask the Associate Minister of Health then, if you're 

the only one that I can talk to: will you consider deferring the 

Committee of the Whole and we'll get on to other government 

business and come back tomorrow and Thursday at the 

appointed times so that we can have a real, meaningful 

discussion with the Minister of Health? Will you be 

honourable, Mr. Member from Moose Jaw, and agree to that 

compromise? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, at last a question. 

We've been at this I think now the best part of 15 minutes 

listening to quite a diatribe from the member from Rosthern, 

and now it continues as he sits in his seat. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I think I understand the process of this 

legislature. We are now into Committee of the Whole which 

gives the appropriate time to thoroughly look clause by clause 

at the provisions of a Bill. 

 

With me here today are two extremely senior officials from the 

Department of Health who can provide to all members of this 

legislature through me, the detail that will be requested by any 

member in this House. Mr. Chairman, that's the process. 

 

Now I want the member from Rosthern to understand that in 

this government — perhaps that wasn't the way it functioned in 

his; I'm not sure — but in this government when any initiative 

is undertaken it is an initiative of government. And any 

minister, Mr. Chairman, any minister in this House is fully 

equipped and ready to stand up and discuss these issues with 

any member of the opposition or indeed with any member of 

the House. 

 

And so, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to what I hope can be a 

fruitful afternoon and perhaps evening of discussion of the 

detail of this very important piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I asked you a very specific question, Mr. 

Minister. Your own caucus members, your own cabinet 

colleagues have called you and your position . . . perhaps rather 

than . . . I don't want to get personal — have called your 

position a toy ministry. That's what your cabinet colleagues 

think of your position. 

 

Now under normal circumstances . . . and I know that you have 

some specific responsibilities as associate minister. And if you 

would get up to answer those issues that you have specifically 

been assigned to, we would have no problem with that as long 

as we have the real thing in terms of the Minister of Health to 

ultimately answer. She is the policy-setter here and we want 

her to answer the questions that we're asking on behalf of the 

people of the province. That's all we're asking. 

 

We know that your professionals, your bureaucrats are here. 

We know that they're capable. We know that they've got the 

answers. And the answers that have not been supplied on 

previous occasions are only because it's a political decision on 

your part that you're not going to convey those answers to the 

public through us. 

 

And so, Mr. Member, you are being obstructionist here. That's 

the simple bottom line. Your minister has chosen to duck. She 

has known about this day for a week. She could easily have 

made alternate arrangements. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, will you commit that the minister will be 

here tonight? 



1182 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, there needs to be some 

consistency in the members opposite. Now on one hand, they're 

saying that we as members of government, members of the 

government caucus, members of the government Executive 

Council, and so on need to be addressing the concerns of the 

public in the public forums. 

 

On the other hand, now today he says, well we should all be 

right here and ready to answer his questions. Well I again say 

to the member: I'm here ready to answer his questions and I 

would be pleased if we could finally get to the discussion of 

health care. 

 

And I'm not sure if this is . . . if he wants to divert the 

discussion this afternoon on to some other fields, other than the 

important legislation which is before us, or not. I'm here, we're 

here, to get looking at a serious look at this piece of legislation 

and, Mr. Chairman, I welcome the opportunity to do that. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Frankly, Mr. 

Minister, I don't want to talk to you. That's the bottom line. I 

want to talk to the Minister of Health. I want to talk to the 

Minister of Health. That's the bottom line. 

 

Now you can joke and make fun of it, but I hope there are 

enough people in Saskatchewan who are watching proceedings 

or are listening, or at least some of the media that will pick up 

this atrocity to the democratic process. 

 

Now you made some eloquent speeches when you were in 

opposition about closure. I'm almost tempted to read some of 

them because I have them here. But that is not the issue today 

as much as it is the issue of your minister deliberately — 

deliberately — flaunting her ability to speak to the people, to 

speak to the questions that we're going to be asking. She's 

deliberately ducking. That's what's so irritating here. 

 

Now I know you can convey messages from your deputy 

minister there when we ask questions. But we want to hold 

accountable for the people that are responsible for these 

decisions. 

 

Now with due respect to you, Minister, please don't get up and 

say that you were the determining factor as to what the policy 

was going to be. It was driven by the Deputy Premier, the 

Premier, and the Minister of Finance, and the Minister of 

Health has been jumping to that tune ever since she became 

appointed to that post pretty well. 

 

Now we want to hold them responsible and accountable. That's 

what this process is all about. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Go ahead and ask questions. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Go ahead and ask questions, says the 

member from Quill Lakes who finally wakes up. No, Mr. 

Minister, we want to ask the questions to the Minister of 

Health. Failing that, obviously, obviously 

there's no point in pursuing an issue when you just steadfastly 

refuse to be open and forthright and accountable. So then the 

only alternative we have is, I guess, to bite our tongue, bite our 

lip, hide our frustration as much as possible, and continue on 

with the process. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, I don't think that this is going to fly in the 

public of Saskatchewan. I don't think it's going to fly. It's a 

serious miscalculation on your part. You cannot duck. You 

cannot duck. That's the point I'm going to try to make, as I turn 

the proceedings over to my colleague here, the member of Arm 

River, who is going to ask you some specific questions then. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well I've seen a 

lot of things happen in this here legislature in 15 years but 

nothing like this today. There's nothing wrong with bringing in 

an associate minister for part of estimates, or part of a Bill, or 

whatever. But when a heavy-handed government comes down 

and says, closure, and then closure on closure, and then as the 

. . . our House Leader, the member from Rosthern says, she 

ducked. 

 

And I want to ask you this direct question and I ask for a direct 

answer. I will not be able to be in this House Tuesday and 

Wednesday when this finishes off — I've only got today to be 

here — and I've got a lot of questions I want to ask. Do I just 

. . . do we have you all day today, or will she be back for some 

time this evening? It's going to affect how I ask my questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I can say to the member 

from Arm River, I will be here as long as necessary to answer 

as many questions as he wants to deliver. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — That's got to be the dumbest, stupid answer 

I've ever heard from a smart man in my life. I just asked you a 

decent question so it would affect . . . Nothing wrong with you 

finding out if she's going to be back tonight or not, the minister. 

That's all I'm asking. And it will affect how I . . . if she's going 

to be back, maybe I'll ask you some questions and some of the 

more direct questions I will ask tonight. But if she's not, I will 

be asking you all my questions and giving you all my 

frustration. 

 

I just asked you: do you know whether she'll be in the House 

from 7 to 10 tonight or not? And there's nothing wrong with 

asking a question like that, so please give me a direct answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Nothing wrong with the question at all. 

And here's a very direct answer. The member will have 

questions. The member may ask his questions at length. 

Whether it is this minister responding to the questions, or 

whether it be the Minister of Health, or whether it be another 

minister in this Chamber, the answers will be the same. And 

therefore, member from Arm River, please carry on with your 

questions. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, this shows you the 

arrogance of the whole government. I had to sit and 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1183 

listen to a half an hour of arrogance in question period today 

when the Premier would get up and talked about this new 

optimism coming into Saskatchewan and going to another 

country and talking about the farmers doing so much better. Of 

course we're always optimistic in Saskatchewan. 

 

You go to Craik or my town of Davidson out there in my area 

where I've been most of last week to two funerals and met a lot 

of people. And of course they're optimistic. There's lots of 

moisture, and they want to grow a crop. But if you think they're 

optimistic about not having any dollars and cents for it . . . I'm 

optimistic about going out and sowing a crop and try to get 30 

bushels or 40 bushels to the acre, but I'm not optimistic about 

the cheques I'll be able to write with it this fall. 

 

So why should we have a Premier get up and misrepresent the 

whole country, not just Saskatchewan, maybe the entire North 

American continent and say we're doing fine in Saskatchewan. 

The farmers are coming out of their doom and gloom. 

 

Well I'll tell you . . . And I'm going to bring this right into what 

we're talking about on this here foreclosure Bill because you're 

an absolutely an arrogant government. This is the kind of a 

government that they've had in over in Europe for 50 years or 

75 years . . . are getting rid of these Communist thinking people 

— dictators. If you think you're not the worst dictators I've ever 

heard of, then why isn't the minister in her seat? Why isn't she 

there? 

 

You want to talk about optimism? We had the Premier talk 

about optimism. I'll tell you I'll talk about optimism. When I 

was just a boy in the '40s, I took my team and wagon as a boy 

and hauled gravel for the hospital in Craik. You people don't 

know what it is for older people that lived in rural 

Saskatchewan. We've put these hospitals together. We've put 

our communities together. We put our schools together, and 

you people are tearing them apart at the roots. 

 

There'll be nothing left to rule Saskatchewan when you people 

get through. I can't believe that this day would ever happen 

when I would sit here — and this is my 15th year — that I 

would ever see even an NDP-CCF (New Democratic 

Party-Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) government be 

so low as they are today. 

 

You don't need to tell me, Mr. Minister, that this just started. 

You think about this, Mr. Minister, Mr. Associate Minister, and 

you can respond. You think about this: when did this start? 

When did this new wellness model start and when did the new 

idea start of closing hospitals and going this route we're going 

in? I'd just like to hear your comment. When did it start? 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I did ask a direct question. He wasn't 

paying any attention anyway; he was talking to somebody else. 

I don't think you heard . . . Did you hear what I said? 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, yes. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — All right. Well let's just start. How did this 

all start? Where did this all come from? Well what started this 

here move of closing down hospitals and closing down rural 

Saskatchewan? Where did it come from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member asks: 

when did the process of reform start? Well I could show, for 

instance, to the member from Arm River, some studies that 

were done in the 1940s that talked about the need for district 

formation — interestingly enough, in the 1940s. 

 

We could look, Mr. Chairman, through the 1960s and find 

studies conducted across the province that talked about the 

need for health care reform. Same thing in the 1970s. 

 

Now we get to the decade of the 1980s when members opposite 

were in government and the member from Arm River, for a 

time, sat on Executive Council and he will know this, that their 

government commissioned a Mr. Elmer Schwartz to do a 

report. That report was done and received. And what did it 

recommend? What did it recommend? I think the member from 

Arm River knows what it recommended — movement towards 

district formation. 

 

And then the highly publicized, widely travelled, very 

expensive Murray Commission report was done, again under 

their government. And, Mr. Chair, what were . . . now there 

were 200-and-some recommendations there. But certainly two 

of the major thrusts of the Murray Commission — and if he 

wants to talk about the Murray Commission in detail, we 

certainly can — but again, the proposal of the Murray 

Commission to move to large districts, health care districts. 

And, as he will know, the Murray Commission talked about 

changing roles of many of our rural health care institutions. He 

knows that. 

 

Now what did that government do with all of those reports? 

Well they just stuck them on the shelves. For whatever reason, 

they just stuck them on the shelves. 

 

Now that same government, Mr. Chairman, who seem to lack 

either the foresight or the courage or the will to begin the 

process of the necessary health reform, left the people of 

Saskatchewan with an inheritance that has simply forced us, 

simply forced us to look very, very seriously at health care 

reform and that's the financial straits they left this province in, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But when he asks, when did this all begin? This has been an 

ongoing process for decades. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, it sure has been an ongoing 

progress for decades, but not to do what you folks are doing. 

You had no mandate to do what you're doing. And you 

certainly . . . there was commissions that . . . and different . . . 

Murray Commissions and different groups that did studies for 

the government. It's been going on forever. 



1184 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

But a government using their head at all, would want to ask the 

people if it's the right thing to do. Certainly we had the courage 

to do what was right, but we didn't have the courage to go out 

and do what you did, because you're going against the people. 

When you go against the people, that's not courage; that's 

destruction, Mr. Minister. That's destruction. 

 

You cannot go into rural Saskatchewan and get support for 

what you're doing. You cannot get it. It wasn't there; it never 

was there. But you don't know your history very well, when the 

ownership of Saskatchewan, as much as they could possibly 

. . . possibly could own started right in the '30s; you're one 

decade out with the Regina Manifesto. That's when your CCF 

put their program and their policies together and what they 

were out bent to do, and that was to own, own, own. 

 

And I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, the direct question. If this 

ever gets to happen, if the people of Saskatchewan allows you 

to go ahead with your dictatorship type of things you're doing 

out there, who will own the property? Like in a community, if 

you're going to close a hospital or maybe you're going to close 

part of it, who's going to own it? Will the community own it or 

will the district own it or will the government own that 

property? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I thank the member for his question; I 

think it's a question that's on the minds of Saskatchewan 

people. He asked the question, who will literally own the 

properties that are now health care institutions. I think we need 

to be very careful that there are now currently different owners. 

Some of our health care institutions will be owned by churches 

or religious organizations. That will continue to be the case; the 

religious organizations will maintain ownership of their 

properties. 

 

Some health care institutions, as the member will know, are 

privately owned by private corporations or private citizens, and 

again those properties will be retained in private ownership. 

Then there are those institutions which have been built by the 

public purse, the union hospitals, the public hospitals, and so 

on. Ownership of those properties, as they are today, will 

remain in the public, but now in the name of the district health 

board. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Associate Minister, 

you're saying that if a hospital that's been a public hospital, not 

owned by a religious organization or a private enterprise or a 

private group of people, that will be owned by the district. Are 

you clearly saying that the Government of Saskatchewan will 

not own that hospital? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, yes to the member 

from Arm River, that the ownership will be vested in the 

district health board. 

 

(1530) 

 

An Hon. Member: — Full control. 

Mr. Muirhead: — Yes, I can bet full of control. We got full 

control all right. Tell me why, that if this is so, that you're 

going to take the ownership away from a town. We'll just take 

any town in Saskatchewan, town A — they own their hospital. 

Well we'll use my town of Craik for example. It's a hospital 

that was built in the last couple of years; it was opened a year 

ago. There's been a hospital there since 1940 and it's always 

been owned by the people. They built that hospital. They didn't 

put the mill rate up one bit. They had $700,000 they raised in 

that community, with a pot of money left. 

 

You going to tell me that they can't hold . . . own the 

ownership? The community owns that hospital; the town owns 

that hospital. You mean to tell me if down the road you 

changed your mind — this outrageous move you're making 

doesn't work — that they still won't have control and own that 

building within our town? That, say, if we go into Regina or 

Saskatoon or Moose Jaw districts, that we're going to be 

controlled by other hospitals in other communities? 

 

Why could we still not have the district and have the ownership 

of our title? Everybody in rural Saskatchewan wants to own 

what they paid for — same as your farm. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, the member will know 

that it's not simply the town that now owns the facility, but it'll 

be the union hospital, the union hospital board that will involve 

a number of RMs (rural municipalities). 

 

The fact of the matter is the facility will be owned by . . . the 

title will be vested in the district. Now whichever district the 

community is part of, that will be the district that holds title to 

the various health care institutions and properties within its 

district. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Well that's an awful shock, Mr. Chairman, 

Mr. Minister, that's an awful shock to us. I was hoping that 

couldn't be true. 

 

The question was asked to a Dr. Bell that came out to Craik the 

other night and he didn't answer any questions. He just 

answered questions to keep people confused. It sounded good 

at the time, but when everybody got their heads clear and they 

left, they didn't know anything. 

 

But I can't understand how the local people that . . . And you 

can say, whether the municipality owns it, whether the town 

owns it, you've got community hospitals, you've got union 

hospitals out there. Union hospitals are owned by several 

municipalities; a community hospital, like we are in Craik or 

my town of Imperial . . . it's union hospitals, and it goes all 

around Saskatchewan. All my colleagues . . . And you people 

are the same way — you've got community and union hospitals 

and you've got religious hospitals, you've got them all over. But 

why could you not let us join the district . . . to join the district 

to work together if that's the way it has to be? 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1185 

But if this doesn't work and something goes wrong with it or 

you got to change into another district or whatever, why can't 

the ownership and the title stay where it is? Because I can tell 

you, Mr. Minister, you're going to have a lot of problems in 

Saskatchewan . . . people find this out that their titles are going 

to leave that town. It's controlled from within the communities, 

and they're not going to . . . It's bad enough that they have to 

work with someone in a larger district which has been the 

mandate of this government for a good many years. 

 

They want larger school districts. They want larger RM 

districts. They want larger hospital districts, and we can't stop 

you. But for goodness sakes, be reasonable about who's going 

to own. My goodness, when two RMs or three RMs go together 

to make a bigger RM, they don't say, well you're going to own 

the land within it. The farmer still owns the land no matter how 

big a district he's in. An RM is controlled, and all the roads are 

built by the municipality and the taxpayers and what. But the 

farmer owns the land, and that building sits there. 

 

And now 52 towns you're talking about plus all rural 

Saskatchewan . . . We haven't even got to the big bunch you're 

probably going to close in January '94. I understand that's when 

you're going to be closing the ones that aren't in good shape; 

you're taking a look at those. So it won't be just stopping at 52. 

 

I cannot believe it that you can't reconsider and be serious 

about letting the town . . . whatever you're going to do, let the 

towns or communities own their own hospitals. Is there not any 

way you'll reconsider that, Mr. Minister? Or do you have to 

wait until you have a cabinet meeting and get the ministers 

from the front row? 

 

Not taking away from you, Mr. Minister, you can't help it that 

you're associate minister, but I know you have a problem and 

maybe . . . your deputies, your people around you, are not 

going to be able to say yes, no. That's got to be a political 

answer, and the minister's not here to answer that. But try to do 

the best you can. Is there not some way? Have you heard them 

talking about reconsidering something about ownership? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, the member, I think, tries 

to indicate that he is surprised by the idea today that ownership 

will be held in the district. Well if he is surprised about that 

today, I'm not sure where he has been or who he has been 

talking to. Meetings have gone on across this province over the 

last number of months — hundred and hundreds of people 

actively involved on health care boards, trustees, and 

institutions — where this has been widely discussed. And it has 

been clearly stated and understood that the ownership of 

facilities would go into the district. This is not news to anyone 

involved. 

 

Now I would point out to the member from Arm River I think 

there is a school in his community and schools in other 

communities that are part of his constituency. And he will 

know that those school facilities are 

owned by the district board. There's nothing new or strange 

here, Mr. Chairman. And it only makes good sense that that 

governing body which will have responsibility for the 

institutions within the district should also have the 

responsibility of ownership. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Well, Mr. Minister, I am surprised because 

when a minister, even an associate minister, answers in this 

House, it has to be the gospel. And I'm going to tell you why I 

am surprised. Because when Dr. Bell was asked that question 

. . . and it shook the whole town of Craik. It took the next day 

when the people that weren't there heard about it, they were 

told directly by Dr. Bell that the government would own it. 

And so now you're telling me the districts will own it. Now 

which way it is? 

 

So are you going to tell me I'm going to be surprised to hear 

anything because your member from the Department of Health 

that went out to answer the question distinctly — and that's 

why I phrased my questions the way they did, because that's 

exactly why you're not the right minister to be answering the 

questions — he said your hospital will be owned by the 

government. The province of Saskatchewan will own that 

hospital. And at the coffee break they just went . . . the people 

just . . . never seen them so upset. 

 

Now you come in here and you tell me no, the districts. So 

that's why I asked you before. Get it straight because if you 

think that people . . . you said where have I been all this time. 

I'll tell you, I've been listening to people and I haven't maybe 

had as much touch this last month as I should have had out 

there because of my illness but I've got a lot of phone calls. I've 

got a lot of people that phoned me. And I can tell you that the 

people in the Craik community didn't have a clue that they 

were going to lose the ownership of that hospital. 

 

But now get it very straight — that's why I asked you before — 

who's right? Dr. Bell telling the people . . . the member from 

North Battleford was there, he'll hear it very clearly. I didn't see 

him stand up and say no, you're wrong, Mr. Bell, I must correct 

it, that it's going to be the district. 

 

Now which way is it going to be? Are you going to say one 

thing in this House like you always do and one thing out in the 

country? That's the way it's always been. I won't sit down. 

Because that's the way it's always been. This government here 

says one thing in the House and says something some place 

else. 

 

We had a real good example right in question period today 

from your own Premier. Don't tell me that your Premier didn't 

misrepresent the whole country in this House today saying that 

farmers are doing well. And to get the bucks flowing out of 

Washington he tells them a different story down there. So don't 

tell me you people can't do it. You're full of it. And don't tell 

me that you can't misrepresent, because I've heard heckles from 

my seat several times about this here Tory deficit causing all 

this problem. 

 

You people have all read this $3.5 billion debt we 



1186 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

took over from you in 1982, and it's right there in Hansard. 

And we know it's 4.9, but we got an admission of 3.5 billion — 

billion — dollars debt. That's all we hear. 

 

You said it too. You said it . . . the minister has also said it 

today, 3.5 billion, and you always talk about all this debt that 

you got . . . we took over from the Tories. 

 

Every time I speak I'll be saying that right till this . . . there's an 

election called — about this $3.5 billion debt admitted. And 

you take it in 1993 dollars, it is $14.8 billion which is your total 

debt today. 

 

It's like me buying a farm for a hundred thousand dollars and 

paying cash. And then I think I own it and somebody says, you 

owe another hundred thousand over here. 

 

That's how you people did it. You balanced your budget and 

then it was all hid in your Crowns. Took us a year to bring all 

the debt out. 

 

So don't tell me that you know what you're doing. You misled 

and misled everybody in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as I hand this piece of paper out, I got some people from 

Watrous that want to see this. They wouldn't believe it. And 

when they seen it they said, well I'm going to make the NDP in 

Watrous, every NDP in Watrous is going to eat this, they said. 

They're going to do it. It was in the Watrous Pool here two 

weeks ago. 

 

So I'm getting sick and tired of them howling from the seats 

here about the big, big deficit the Tories left. You people left 

the deficit yourself. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Gerry, did you watch W5? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Somebody said, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister, somebody said, did I see W5. Well I'll tell you, W5, 

they sure weren't around my town to get that information. They 

sure didn't . . . they misled the whole of Canada, saying that the 

Tory government built a hospital here and a hospital there and 

a hospital there. They made them think they'd just built some 

brand-new ones. 

 

They never built . . . we never built one hospital where there 

wasn't one before — not one. And when you took over 

government there was a hundred . . . I think we dropped about 

six or seven hospitals in Saskatchewan, 137 to 133 while we 

were in government. We just fixed up the messes that you 

people left in the 1970s. 

 

You could see when this whole program came together, it all 

started back in the Regina Manifesto time that we're going to 

own, own, own, the government's going to own you. And it 

proved itself through the years. 

 

I remember having problems in the early '60s trying to keep our 

hospitals. We had to come down here and 

shake things up then. And then in the '70s you put a 

moratorium on nursing homes in Saskatchewan. You never 

gave any money to repairing hospitals in the 1970s. You just 

let them go because you knew what your plan was today. Just 

because you put it in action today — and the minister just said 

a few minutes ago that this plan started in the '40s. So that 

means absolutely a contradiction to what the front-row 

minister's been saying through this whole legislature . . . or 

since the whole session, that it's only doing this because of the 

Tory deficit. Now we got . . . the associate minister said this 

plan started in the '40s. Come on, get it together, you folks. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Do you have a question? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — You bet I've got a question. I asked him 

and if he's forgot it, then he shouldn't be here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I recognize there was a 

number of questions I think in the member's presentation there. 

I think we started around the question of ownership of the 

facilities. Now I will make it once more clear to the member, 

so there is no confusion in his mind. 

 

The ownership of those facilities which now are public 

facilities will transfer to the district board. Now that should be 

as clear as it needs to be for the member or for anybody. 

 

But I want to go now into some of the other issues that he 

wanted to raise here. He talked about a health department 

official who was at a meeting in his community. We've had a 

conversation with that official, who assures us that in fact in 

that meeting he indicated that the ownership of the properties 

would go to the district — not to government but to the district. 

 

Now further to that, Mr. Chair, the member has had I believe in 

his possession a copy of this piece of legislation for almost two 

months. This legislation was introduced here in the House, I 

believe on March 3. It's been in his hands for almost two 

months and in the hands of his caucus and their other members 

over there. 

 

Now right here in the Bill, in the printed Bill, it indicates what 

will happen to the assets, that those assets will become the 

assets of the district health board. And I can refer him to 

section 16, clause (1), part (c). There it is in black and white for 

anyone who cares to read it. And I would assume when 

members opposite have a copy of a Bill of this import that they 

would have read it, and I would further assume they would 

share the accurate information with their constituents and 

communities. 

 

But there it is, right in the Bill, plain to see. So that the member 

should come in here this afternoon and suggest on how he's 

surprised about this information, well one wonders therefore 

what's going on here? Is this a serious questioning of the Bill 

and its clauses, or is this an opportunity to grandstand a little 

bit. 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1187 

(1545) 

 

Now he talked about the debt, and he talked about $3.5 billion. 

And he is true; he is accurate indeed. The Crown debt existed 

in 1982 but it was not hidden. The suggestion that it's hidden is 

a ludicrous suggestion. It was widely reported in the annual 

reports of the Crown corporations. He knows that — nothing 

hidden about it. 

 

What he fails to report to the House this afternoon, that when 

he and his friends inherited government in 1982, were given 

the responsibility and mandate to govern, in the Consolidated 

Fund was a surplus of over $140 million cash, money in the 

bank. Now what did they do with that surplus? What did they 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well now the member from 

Moosomin wants to enter the debate. I invite him to get on his 

feet and enter the debate if he wants. 

 

I tell you there was $140 million-plus in the Consolidated 

Fund, cash money in 1982 when you people took over. And 

what did you do with it? What did you do with it, my friends? 

You blew it at a rate of a billion dollars a year, you blew it. 

 

And what's the consequence? What's the consequence? The 

consequence is the kind of phraseology that's used by a Mr. 

Eric Malling on national television. This province is now the 

financial basket case of North America. That's the consequence 

of 10 years of your billion-dollar-a-year debt. 

 

So I would ask the member from Arm River to please be 

accurate with the facts here, that there was in fact money in the 

Consolidated Fund when they took over and that now has 

reached 10 billion in debt. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, I never heard such 

grandstanding inaccuracy in my life. He can't even read. It says 

right here by your own Minister of Finance . . . I'll touch on 

that one first. I'm going to read it to you. He didn't say $140 

million. He says right here, the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski, and he 

reads it. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, on the Consolidated Fund . . . that's what 

you said, 140 million which is the government side, 

taxpayer-supported debt. Do you know what it was, Mr. 

Chairman — $190 million. You're talking about 140 million to 

the good, and he says 190. And so don't stand up with your 

sanctimonious figures and think that we're always wrong. 

Because you are wrong, Mr. Minister. And if you can read, you 

can read it. So what are you talking about, standing up here 

saying 140 million sitting there for us? 

 

And I know where most of it came from. It wasn't even your 

fault and we didn't blame you for that. Because you 

overestimated in the potash income for that year. I was here in 

1981 when the budget came down. You weren't here. And they 

were estimating, which is all right. It's like a farmer going into 

the bank today and said: Mr. Banker, I've got to borrow some 

money and I'm expecting 50 bushels an acre on my canola, 30 

on my flax, 30 on my wheat. But he don't get it. And that's 

what happened on the potash, and there's why the $190 million 

debt was there. 

 

But don't stand up and say $190 million. And don't stand up in 

this House and tell me what Dr. Bell said out at Craik. Don't 

say such a thing. Because you bring him into this House and if 

he can say to you that the people in Craik weren't told that 

they'd be owned by the Government of Saskatchewan, I will 

resign. 

 

Because I got 137 signatures at Craik that all were upset 

because he distinctly — and my hearing is good — and in the 

name of God he said that it will be owned by the province of 

Saskatchewan, and that is fine. If he made a mistake, that is 

fine. But don't get up here and say, oh that he said something 

that he didn't say. Because I know what he said and I can get 

enough people in here by cars for tonight's meeting to tell you 

what he said. They'll scream it to you from the world. 

 

And that's not a big thing, but it sure mixes people up. Because 

yes, I knew . . . I thought it was supposed to be owned by the 

districts because of your Bill, because of the Bill. But why 

wouldn't I get upset? Why wouldn't the Craik people? Because 

that's why I asked you the question. Why I was upset, Mr. 

Minister, and surprised. Because he — maybe a mistake — but 

he did say it. He upset the reeve and the municipality and all 

their councillors. And I'll tell you . . . and the mayor of the 

town. They are upset. That's all you hear in the streets at Craik 

today is the Government of Saskatchewan is going to own our 

hospital. 

 

I even heard the comment, if it was even going to be owned in 

the district, it wouldn't be quite as bad. So don't get up and tell 

me what somebody that's not sitting beside you said. Because I 

know what he said; I was there. I was from here to that chair 

from him. And the hon. minister from North Battleford will tell 

you what he said. He didn't say it; he said it the way I said. And 

don't contradict me on that or we'll be here right till 10 o'clock 

arguing about it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chairman, for the purposes of 

this afternoon, let us be clear once again. Here in the legislation 

for all to see and all to read is the indication what will happen 

to the assets, and they will be transferred to the district board. 

 

Now the member's had this piece of legislation in his hands for 

almost two months. I assume he has read it. I would further 

assume that in a public meeting if an official of government is 

not accurate in what is being reported to the meeting, that I 

would assume a member of this legislature would stand up and 

say, well no, no, no, that's not what's in the Act; here's what's in 

the Act. And have the Act with him. I assume he would take a 

copy of the Act with him. 

 

Now apparently the member didn't do that. Apparently if — 

and I underline the word "if" — if the official reported 

something that was not accurate to the legislation, I would 

expect a member of this legislature from whatever party to 

stand up and report what's in the Bill. 



1188 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

Now I am not here to suggest that the official of government 

present at that time reported anything else but what he has now 

reported to us, that in fact he reported to that meeting what is in 

the Bill, and that the assets will be owned by the district. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, it's fine except 

for this. I know the way you've said the way it's going to be. I 

accept it, and that's the way it's going to be. They're going to be 

owned by the districts. That's fine. 

 

But you must control your people out talking, because it wasn't 

up to me. I didn't have a Bill with me that night. I didn't have 

anything but my bare hands. I didn't even take it. We went to 

that meeting, didn't even know the minister was coming out. It 

was a meeting called to vote on what district they're going to 

go into. 

 

But your minister was there. The member from North 

Battleford, I think he had the Bill in his hand because he had a 

folder. And when he was sitting closer to him than me, why 

didn't he get up as a government member and correct him. 

 

Anyway, we'll get off that, Mr. Minister. I accept it that he 

made a mistake, but it should be corrected that, be very, very 

careful when people vote not to upset people that way. Because 

it's going to be hard now for me. I'm going to have to take 

Hansard back. Well I would say that they're going to try to get 

the people to understand that they're going to be owned by the 

districts. I will do that. But I don't want it left on the record that 

your Dr. Bell . . . he made a mistake. He definitely did. 

 

All right. Maybe this is not right on hospitals, but you're 

answering on behalf of cabinet; you're answering as associate 

minister. You must know a lot of what's going on. What is the 

future plan? You're taking over the hospitals now. When do 

you plan to take over the schools and the municipal offices and 

the rinks? Have you got a plan when that's coming? Do you 

hear that? Because that has to be in the plans, all the same 

thing. 

 

We can't probably run our own rinks; we probably can't run our 

own schools. I've heard it coming from the departments that 

they're monitoring the enrolments in all our schools. Now it's 

not right on the Bill but it's all connection what you're doing 

here. It all connects. Everything all connects. 

 

And destroying rural Saskatchewan. We're now closing 

hospitals and they're dictated to. And people that worked and 

toiled . . . you don't know, you're not old enough to know what 

people in rural Saskatchewan did to put their buildings together 

in these towns. 

 

You're not old enough to know the sweat and toil that went into 

these hospitals and to have a hospital when times were tough, 

when there wasn't any money at all. You didn't get money from 

government. Communities paid it all. There wasn't anything. 

When is your cabinet's plan to start closing the schools now 

and moving them into larger districts, and our municipal 

offices and our urban offices and our rinks. When's your plan 

for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, again the member . . . 

You see, this is what happens here — the member's wild and 

exaggerated statements that take us miles from what we are 

intending and should be doing here in a responsible legislature. 

We should be looking clause by clause, and we were getting 

close to it when we were talking about the ownership of the 

assets. That's close to the content of what we should be doing 

here this afternoon. But now, in his exaggerated rhetoric, he's 

taking us all over his map. 

 

And again the member opposite, and like his colleagues, wants 

to misrepresent what's going on. He in his . . . I heard it again 

talking about the closure of hospitals when he knows full well 

that what is happening here is conversion of some of our 

smaller, acute-care institutions into new and better health care 

centres to serve our people not just for today but in the long 

run. 

 

So I would really appreciate it if we could get to the Bill, get to 

the clause-by-clause study, which we are intended to do this 

afternoon. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you make 

the accusation about making these here wild accusations. If you 

would have told anybody at election time you were going to 

close rural Saskatchewan, I would have even thought it was a 

wild accusation because I wouldn't have believed it. 

 

You never said anything at election time in the fall of '91, so 

why isn't it . . . it isn't an outrageous accusation to say what 

you're going to do. It was the CCF back in the '50s that started 

the school units and closed down our country schools and we 

had to move into the school units. It's your concept. 

 

So it's not a wild imagination to say we're going to have larger 

units and larger municipality because it's been talked about. I 

didn't ask an outrageous question. It wasn't outrageous at all. 

But you just stand up and grandstand and absolutely say 

nothing because you think, oh, we'd never so such a thing. 

 

If you, Mr. Minister, had have met me on the streets of Moose 

Jaw and said, I heard while the election was on and said, I 

heard out of Regina that our own governments may be talking 

about closing 52 hospitals and shaking up medicare the way 

they have and destroying and drug plan and the dental plan, I 

wouldn't have believed you because I couldn't believe that it 

could possibly happen by this government — couldn't believe 

that it could ever happen. 

 

Let me ask you this question: what is your plan and what do 

you think, Mr. Minister, that when we close . . . I understand 

that in the city of Regina and Saskatoon, if someone has a heart 

attack or has an accident or a 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1189 

fire and they're injured and they're in emergency, that it only 

takes a matter of minutes and somebody's there to pick them up 

to get them to care, to a hospital or wherever. 

 

When you close all these hospitals out there, what is your plan? 

And don't get up and give me that big story that you're not 

going to close hospitals, because why did your press release 

say that? — the closure of 52 hospitals. You're not making 

people believe you very well because the headlines in every 

paper . . . 52 hospital closures. We know you're playing your 

politics now. They're coming open one by one by one. 

 

It isn't going to happen, but you made a big smokescreen out 

there, Mr. Minister, of making people think that, oh we're 

closing a whole bunch of hospitals in our NDP (New 

Democratic Party) ridings and not so many in the PC 

(Progressive Conservative) ridings. But did you ever fool 

people because now we're hearing where this hospital's going 

to stay open maybe for a year now, like talk about Pangman . . . 

because I can imagine the minister would soon come into your 

caucus and cry and lay on the floor until she says, give me back 

one of my three hospitals. 

 

It's politics that's starting to happen. It's started to happen all 

over the province. Well you're so . . . You haven't got a plan. 

You just hit out there and close 52 down and you . . . We'll 

have to play it by ear and see what happens out there. Well I 

tell you, once you start doing that you're going to have 

everybody going to be upset. 

 

And there's going to be hospitals closed, you said that. But I 

want to know, what is your plan for someone in rural 

Saskatchewan that is going to have a facility gone, a doctor 

gone? What are you going to do to save his or her life? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I know this is an 

important issue to the member, and it's an important issue to 

the people of Saskatchewan. He refers in his question to the 

provision of emergency care. It has been stated clearly from the 

beginning of these discussions and re-emphasized over and 

over again that emergency care for Saskatchewan people will 

continue to be available. 

 

I think what the member opposite confuses in his own mind is 

an acute care bed — a hospital bed — as that bed which 

provides emergency care. And he knows that's not true. 

Emergency care is not provided by the hospital bed. It will be 

provided by trained and qualified people. It will be provided by 

ambulance services. It will be provided by communication. But 

he knows full well that emergency care is not particularly 

provided by a hospital bed. 

 

Now it has been from the beginning the commitment of this 

government and through the reform process has been stated 

over and over again, that the provision of emergency care will 

continue to be made. In fact that I believe we will see 

enhancements of emergency care, as districts come together 

and understand their need 

and will begin to put their facilities in place in an appropriate 

manner for their district, that what we're going to see is better 

emergency care across all of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — You can stand there and say so nicely and 

quietly and smoothly, that they're going to have all this care. 

But what if they have . . . what if somebody is out there seeding 

. . . let's say this is a year from now, and their hospital and their 

doctor is gone. 

 

And don't tell me there isn't going to be some doctors leave, 

because they're talking about it all over. In the town of Craik, 

where I talk quite a bit about naturally, because it's where I live 

and it's where I was born and raised, and I've been a part of 

four hospitals being built in that town, so naturally it's . . . and 

it's the only hospital in my riding that's any chance of losing the 

acute care beds. 

 

(1600) 

 

I already find out that Imperial, built the same time, they've 

already played their politics over there with somebody on the 

board and it looks like they're going to save their hospital — 

that's fine. They saved theirs; we want ours saved. So you're 

into problems. You're into deep problems. 

 

But our doctor in Craik has been asked at the meeting the other 

night: if we lose our acute care . . . we only have two. You've 

misled all the people in Saskatchewan about the hospital beds 

out there. You said we've got more hospital acute care beds per 

capita than any place else. Well it isn't right, because you didn't 

use the right figures. You use 6 acute care out of Craik; you 

used 8 out of Imperial; I think it's 8 or 10 out of Davidson; but 

you didn't . . . you should use the ones that they pay for. 

 

They only pay for two. That's the figures you didn't use. If they 

only pay for two acute care in the town of Craik; and they only 

pay for, I believe, two in Imperial; and it's the same proportion 

all over the province — that's what the dollars and cents is to 

the government, to the taxpayer. We've got to fund the rest 

ourselves when it happens to have six, or eight, or overflowing. 

 

But the question, Mr. Minister, that if that doctor leaves, our 

doctor . . . We just got a new doctor there from South Africa 

and he is one tremendous doctor. And the plan was for the 

Craik hospital was to build a health centre. And it's got 18 beds 

— 12 level 4; 6 acute. And when we couldn't hold a doctor . . . 

and this wasn't a suggestion from Craik. This came from the 

Department of Health. We were building a new hospital. It was 

the department, probably the same people sitting around you, 

talked us into building the health centre. And we want to know 

if that doctor leaves, and somebody has a heart attack, or this is 

a year from now and they break their leg on a tractor accident 

now, what are we going to do with them, because for 40-some 

years — 50 years now — in 1941, they've been able to go into 

the Craik hospital, Davidson hospital, Imperial, Central Butte, 

Moose 



1190 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

Jaw. They've always had their care, quick care; keep them alive 

to make that move. 

 

I had a real close neighbour that just about died just two years 

ago. They got him to the Craik hospital, and a doctor kept him 

alive — put a nurse in an ambulance, and he lived till he got to 

Saskatoon; nobody thought he was going to ever make it — but 

he's living and walking around today because we had a doctor 

and a hospital to save his life. 

 

What are you going to do, Mr. Minister, if the doctors are gone 

from some of these local areas? Are you going to have a nurse 

trying to be sitting around there to save their life? Or what's 

your plan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The member covers quite a wide swath 

in each question. The member will know that what is 

happening across Saskatchewan today is that communities are 

coming together into districts. Now those communities are 

working together across the province, and they'll be assessing 

the needs and the most appropriate distribution of health care 

facilities and institutions and programs within their 

geographical district. And we believe and have believed for a 

long time that those kinds of decisions are best made more 

locally as opposed to being made more centrally. 

 

Now I happen to believe that the people of Craik, and whatever 

district Craik becomes a part of, will have a better ability to 

make decisions for Craik and the district than for instance we 

sitting here in Regina or officials. Now that will hold true for 

the provision of emergency services. Understandably in every 

district there will need to be a variety, an accessibility to 

emergency services. Now that can take a variety of forms as 

we've discussed earlier. 

 

Part of the provision of emergency service is the medical 

doctor in the district. Now there is very little to indicate that the 

medical doctors who are now practising in rural Saskatchewan 

will be choosing to leave. There have been ongoing discussions 

with all of the medical profession in the province. There have 

been some very specific discussions with medical doctors that 

work in those communities that will see role changes for their 

institutions. Many of them are suggesting very creative 

responses to the situation. 

 

In fact, it's being suggested by many that this district model 

will in fact enhance rural medical practice through the 

opportunity for medical doctors in rural practice to join into 

group practices which, I would like to underline, does not mean 

that all of those medical doctors will group in one community. 

They will continue to live in the communities where they now 

live and serve, but will be joined together in group practice 

where there is more coordination and cooperation between 

those same doctors to provide the services. And so the plan is 

just that. It's a plan of local decision-making and control to 

provide the quality health care service that we all desire and 

need. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you almost 

make me laugh. Like you said when you got 

up, that I cut quite a wide swath when I ask a question. That's 

because I've been listening to your ministers for a year and a 

half . . . get a pretty wide swath when they answer questions. 

And you said something though in your remarks that it really 

pleased me, Mr. Minister. I am so happy what you just said 

because it's the contrary, the contrary, to what has been 

happening. 

 

We were told that if we formed the districts, the people will 

decide on the hospital closures . . . what we're going to do, I 

should say. I wouldn't say hospital closure. We're going to 

make the decisions out there. 

 

But before the Bill is through the House . . . and it never really 

got discussed I guess much until really today because it's the 

first time we've even had an associate minister. We may never 

see the Minister of Health because she more likely is making 

sure when she hits North Battleford today and Meadow Lake 

and she'd be in Uranium City and gone. She didn't want to 

answer questions. 

 

But you said a statement there — and it sounds so nice to say 

that to the people — you made the statement, Mr. Minister, that 

when I talked about these decisions about doctors and acute 

care and what not, you said it's going to be up to the district. 

Well are you telling me, Mr. Minister, that Moose Jaw . . . Like 

we're talking about in . . . and I'm using my town of Craik 

again, as the other members may use the example of their local 

areas, because Craik's the only town I have a hospital in danger 

of losing acute care. 

 

So they're talking about going . . . in fact they made the vote 

the other night, a straw vote, to go into at Moose Jaw and 

Central Butte; that's going to be their district. And they already 

made their decision. The district has already made the decision, 

and Moose Jaw very clearly has already said to us that if we 

can get together we will make the request and we will make 

sure that there's one acute care left in Craik. So they've made 

their decision. 

 

We've made our decision. We're going to have one acute care 

left in Craik — one bed. We're going to drop from two to one. 

But are you going to let that happen? It wouldn't be fair just for 

Craik to have . . . You've already said we can make our 

decision, that the district will make the decision. 

 

Well I can tell you, there have already been meetings going on 

between many people in Central Butte and Moose Jaw and 

Craik and meeting with the other areas. They've talked about 

going into Imperial, coming to Regina, and it'll look to be the 

best to go to Moose Jaw because there we'll see that we get a 

one-bed acute care. 

 

All right, you're going to let that happen. But what about the 

rest of the people here? Is everybody going to have the same 

right as we are in Craik, that we're going to be able to make the 

decision, Mr. Minister? You said, we'll make them. The 

decision's already been made. We're going to let you take the 

one away that'll save you $165,000 a year and we'll finance the 

other ones ourselves. Craik will do that and they're 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1191 

quite happy about it. And seeing now that you said it and 

you've agreed with the people, but I just hope that you do that 

for the rest of the people here. 

 

I wouldn't want Craik to be the only one just to have a one 

acute care given back to them, like Imperial. I wouldn't want 

them to be the only one. I want that for all of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Minister. Is that your plan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, the member illustrates, I 

think, by his own comment precisely why it is advantageous 

now for communities to move into the district bed . . . into the 

district formation. 

 

Now this is not the place, obviously. The floor of the 

legislature is not the place to do a detailed discussion of the 

provisions of each district. That's obviously not the place and 

we're not the people. There are people much better equipped 

for those discussions and for those decisions than either you or 

I or anyone else in this House. 

 

But I think what the member illustrates is that the discussion 

that's going on with Craik, and I guess the Moose Jaw District 

— I'm very happy to hear that personally — is the kind of 

discussion that needs to go on across the province because here 

are communities working together assessing their needs. 

 

Now he talks about the provision of a bed in Craik. Obviously 

as districts form and look at their needs for the provision of 

emergency services, a bed may be needed for observation 

purposes. That may be an appropriate decision for a district or 

a community. 

 

Some institutions or some districts will want to put into place 

perhaps a respite bed, or respite beds. Those are the kinds of 

decisions that are best made on the local level. The member 

points that out by his very words here this afternoon. That's 

what's happening and that's good news. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Associate Minister, but 

you're playing games with my words. You got up and said all 

the things that we might be able to do out there by being 

dictated from your department. You said before we will make 

the decision. We already have made the decision what we're 

going to do in Craik. We're going to keep one acute bed. We've 

already made that decision. 

 

So you said we could make our own decisions, the same as the 

district boards would make the decisions in the first place. But 

you get up with your cute little answers and you skate away 

from that. And that's exactly what Dr. Bell did out at Craik 

when he was asked that very question. 

 

I asked one very important question; I'm going to ask you now. 

I asked Dr. Bell and he couldn't answer at all. He wouldn't even 

attempt to it; he was scared of this one. 

 

Now we'll just use any town for example here, but I'm going to 

be thinking of several in the same position. Say they have six 

or seven acute beds now or they're 

under that and they're going to lose them all; they're going to 

lose all these acute beds. But they're an integrated facility to 

start with so they want to hold their level 4. There's several of 

those I understand — 20-some — in the province that's in the 

closure position. 

 

And so they lose their acute care — and this is the question I 

asked Dr. Bell — these beds are going to be closed down, 

maybe use one or two, we hope we can get it back in for acute 

care; you said today we'll be able to do what we want. And let's 

assume whatever happens, Mr. Minister, that in these hospitals 

and these situations with integrated facility, that there's one to 

five or so beds that are left empty, for no need whatsoever. 

They have no way at all, because whatever these . . . may take 

one or two beds to handle these needs you're talking about, 

whether it be still be a one-bed acute or for emergencies or for 

whatever, Mr. Minister, whatever, but there's still several beds 

left empty. What are you going to do with those beds? 

 

Because I asked the question to Dr. Bell: will they be able to be 

filled with the level 4 waiting-list that they have in our town in 

Craik now, and the same all over the province? If they're sitting 

there empty and there's a waiting-list, will we be able to fill 

them up as planned by the same department that you're 

working for now; it's an integrated facility, when we lose the 

doctor or whatever, it's going to be filled with level 4. Will that 

plan still be in effect if they're sitting there empty, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Number one, Mr. Chairman, some of the 

beds that the member refers to are today empty beds. We 

understand that, that we have beds across Saskatchewan that 

are not being used for their purpose. Hence the need for some 

reform. 

 

Now we're saying the money that we're spending, if we can 

take some of that and put it into the provision of other services, 

isn't that a better idea to take our limited health care dollars and 

spend them as wisely as we can in providing services? 

 

Now we're learning as a society and a community and a 

province that there are effective ways to provide health care 

that are not always related to institution. I hope the member 

agrees with that, that there are effective health care programs 

that can be provided to our people, that are not specifically 

related to an institution or a room or bricks and mortar; more 

related to community and the people who can provide those 

services. 

 

Now the member asked a specific question about beds will be 

. . . or rooms or space that will be available in some of our 

institutions. What will happen is this. The district board will 

assess its need district-wide. The district board will have some 

. . . a global budget with which to work. If within the financial 

constraints that we all must live under — and the member I 

hope will admit that, that there are financial constraints we 

must live under — if under those constraints the district board 

assesses the need that some of those beds should be used for 

long-term 



1192 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

care, and if they're confident that their waiting-lists require it, 

then that becomes part of the district board decision-making 

process, and is an option that's available. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, thank you 

for that answer. Now I want to ask you, do you agree with me 

on this statement I'm going to make, that if there is such a thing 

— and there will be many throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan — where a hospital, an integrated facility ends 

up with empty beds, and that hospital is going to be heated, has 

the nursing staff, and if that need is there and the list is there 

and the people . . . level 4 care has got a long list or whatever, 

and the district agrees, do you agree that that should be used for 

. . . do you agree personally, Mr. Minister, that that should be 

used for level 4 if everything works out that way rather than 

leave it empty? 

 

Do you agree that that should be, and will there be funding 

from the government if there's some level 4 space left and 

they're not using it, will you allow them to use it and will there 

be money . . . funding for it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Member, whether I agree or not or 

whether you agree or not I guess is not the issue. The issue is 

we have health care needs in our province that must be met. 

We have limited resources with which to meet those needs. 

 

What we are proposing and doing with this piece of legislation 

is enabling districts, communities, to come together in a district 

basis. They will be in a better position I think than we who sit 

here in Regina, to understand the real need, the real needs in 

that geographic area of our province. 

 

They will be provided from government a global budget based 

on need. They will then assess with the resources available to 

them how best to spend those monies. In that circumstance, if 

the district has, for instance, a very high percentage of seniors, 

it may well be that a district will decide to use some of its 

global budget to offer some of those beds for long-term care. 

However, in many cases we know that districts will opt to put 

some of those resources, perhaps more of those resources into 

community-based programing, home care, and other. 

 

But again it's a district decision based on the real need in that 

district, understanding the financial constraints. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I can sure see 

why that they brought you in here today, than having the Hon. 

Minister of Health here, because I think you're better at saying 

nothing than she is. She couldn't hold herself. She would be 

into temper and mad at us and be hollering back and forth. And 

you're the best minister I've ever . . . You're just about as good 

as the member from Swift Current at getting up talking nice 

and saying nothing. You're just answering questions without 

answering them. 

You know what your plan is. Your plan is — and I've already 

heard it from some of your back-benchers — in five to ten 

years there will be no level 4's in rural Saskatchewan. You 

know that as well as I do, that you want to get them into 

high-rises in Regina and Saskatoon. You know that. 

 

So that's the reason why these beds are going to stay empty. To 

prove otherwise, let's fill them up and let's say differently. Tell 

me I'm wrong — that you're not going to close down rural 

Saskatchewan and let the people have to move in here and die 

miles away from their loved ones. You know, Mr. Minister, 

that if you're born and raised in Moose Jaw, you want to be in a 

home in Moose Jaw in your dying days. 

 

You know the plan of the early settlers in this province was 

that parents died at home with their families. We have moved 

away from that and the people are living much longer. And I'll 

give you a good example. My mother-in-law, Mrs. Duff from 

Davidson, went into a home in Davidson when she was 75 and 

lived till she was 99 years of age with the good care she had. 

I'm sure she couldn't have made it the last 10 years without that 

good care in a home. 

 

But what kept her alive wasn't her family just coming to see 

them every week. It was living in Davidson and somebody 

went by every day, several times a day saying, hi, Mrs. Duff. 

And I'm using that example because it's that way right across 

this province and you people don't care about that. You don't 

care about that or you would want every bed in this hospital 

right full of level 4's. 

 

That's the number one issue you've got to do out there is to 

make sure that if you do close down acute care and you don't 

leave them a doctor and you don't leave them something that 

they want — not what you want. If you don't, you'll look after 

the aged out there because you've been the promisers of it since 

Tommy Douglas days. If Tommy Douglas was here today, he'd 

be ashamed of the lot of you. He'd be so ashamed of you that 

he wouldn't own you. He'd want to have nothing to do with 

you. 

 

And I'm ashamed of you — your ideas, your examples, and the 

way you walk over people. I'm absolutely ashamed of you. 

There's some good, decent people in this caucus over here. I 

know them. I've talked to them one on one. But they can't stand 

up and be counted because there's a few members that tell 

members like you, Mr. Associate Minister, what to do. You're 

told what to do. You can't stand up in your caucus like I did 

when I spent four years in cabinet and if two or three of us 

didn't like something, it was stopped. 

 

There was many moral issues came to our cabinet and people 

. . . Several of us stood up and said, we don't want it and we 

could stop it, but not in the case of over here. And I'm even 

going to call . . . like hospital closures to me is a mighty moral 

issue. Boy, I tell you, when you get talking about death, we're 

talking about health and death of people. 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1193 

And you people over there, when it comes to vote on your 

towns, they ran out and wouldn't even vote. Where was the 

member from Bengough-Milestone when they voted on her 

town the other day? She ran like she couldn't run any faster. 

The member from Rosetown, he was in the House and he took 

off out of here when we voted on one or two of his, and he 

came and run back in here to introduce some visitors in the 

gallery. Couldn't stand it to vote against his town. 

 

The only one that was the member from Lloydminster that 

could do it. And I give her a lot of credit. She done what she 

was told by you henchmen. She done what she was told. And I 

said it in this House when I was in opposition before from 1978 

to 1982, that the member from Riversdale, when he pulls that 

chain and he goes up and down, your heads go up and down; 

when he goes this way, it goes this way. That's the way it's 

always been. He's a dictator. 

 

And you people haven't . . . And I think even he would listen to 

you. He would listen if you stood up and be counted. Stand up 

and be counted and said, we don't believe in the closures 

affecting people's health out there. We don't believe in 

destruction of rural Saskatchewan. We don't believe in having 

our Premier go to another country and misleading them about 

how well the farmers are doing and coming out of their 

dilemma of financial problems they're into. 

 

Stand up and be counted you people. But you can't, you won't. 

When it comes to a vote on this Bill I will guarantee you that 

the ones that got a heart, the ones that got a feeling for people, 

the ones that feel for the aged in rural Saskatchewan will be in 

the caucus and not vote. You cannot get a unanimous vote over 

on that side. But you won't have anybody stand up and tell the 

House Leader, say to the House Leader . . . And that's how you 

stop Bills. 

 

That's how I stop Bills, along with my colleagues when we 

sometimes said, perhaps . . . I had it suggested to me a couple 

times, perhaps they said, maybe it'd be better if you just didn't 

come in and vote. I said, I vote. If you people would say it . . . 

all these issues and we're going to come to another one on the 

human rights Bill, all kinds of things like this. Stand up and be 

counted. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you stand up and be counted for rural 

Saskatchewan? That's the question I'm asking you now. Stand 

up and be counted and do what they want because now you're 

not. You're not doing what . . . you're dictating to them. You're 

walking right over top of them. Listen to them. There's nothing 

that's wrong with saying I'm sorry, and we will go back and 

look this thing over and do what's right for the people of 

Saskatchewan. Will you stand up and be counted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Yes, Mr. Chair, yes to the member from 

Arm River, I am proud to stand up and be counted as 

supporting this legislation, and so, Mr. Member from Arm 

River, is every member of this government. 

It is difficult, you know, it is difficult in this process, when 

we're supposed to be doing a detailed clause-by-clause 

discussion of the Bill, when we never seem to come near the 

Bill or a clause of that. We are fully prepared to try and answer 

the questions the member may have, but it is sometimes very 

difficult to pick out a question in the remarks the member 

makes. 

 

Now he said, I think rather complimentary, that I sound quite 

nice but then he went on to say nothing. Well the member 

doesn't sound so nice and he doesn't say anything either. 

 

And then he rambles around to talk about Tommy Douglas. 

Now this is in fact where he does get off track because, I tell 

you, beware the Tory who starts to quote Tommy Douglas in 

this place or any place. 

 

He talks about the need for members to stand up in the caucus. 

I have to ask the member opposite, well was he standing up for 

the last 10 years in his caucus when he watched the financial 

health of this province just go on a downhill slide like we've 

never seen before? Was he standing up and saying . . . was he 

protesting about that? 

 

I think he was part of the cabinet decision-making process in 

that government when we started on this slide downhill. Was 

he standing up and saying, don't do this to my children and 

grandchildren; don't leave us this inheritance; don't leave any 

future government the kind of choices that you're leaving with 

them? 

 

Was he protesting the kinds of deals that we saw over the 

course of the last 10 years in this province? Was he protesting 

the waste and mismanagement that's got us to this state? No, I 

don't think he was standing up enough if he was standing up at 

all. 

 

Now I think there was a question in what he said and it had to 

do with the provision of long-term care for Saskatchewan 

people in or near communities where they live. And on this I 

share his view. As far as we are able as a province to provide 

that long-term care near our home communities, the better — 

the better on every occasion. 

 

And there is absolutely no plan, sense, or desire to centralize 

long-term care into two major urban centres, as the member in 

his comments was saying. It is shared by this government, and 

I think by all members in this House, that if we can provide 

that long-term care opportunity as near to home as we can — 

and we can't always do it in each of our communities, we know 

that, but as close to home as we can — the more, the better. 

 

But then beyond that, Mr. Chairman, the more that we can 

provide services and facilities that people can remain in their 

own homes without deinstitutionalization, I say, more power to 

that. That's the direction we're trying to move. Of course we 

will need long-term care for the aged and the frail. We 

understand that. And for the disabled and the young in some 

cases. But the more that we can put 



1194 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

into community-based resources to have us living in our own 

homes, the better. 

 

So I would appreciate it if the member has some specific 

questions about the Bill, if we might get to those. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, we on this 

side decide what we're going to ask. You don't tell us what 

we're going to do. If we want to stand up here and condemn 

you for your Bill because there's nothing in it we like . . . what 

could we possibly like about your Bill? I couldn't talk about it 

clause for clause, because I'm against it all. Anything to do 

with destroying rural Saskatchewan, I'm against it. 

 

So I have my right here to stand, and in Committee of the 

Whole I have my right on item 1 to tell you what we think. 

Because I've never had a chance in this House in this session, 

to tell you what I think. I didn't have a chance to tell you what I 

thought of what you were doing to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

When on a Saturday I read the paper in Craik where somebody 

from the Leader-Post writes an article that we have to have 

closures of rural hospitals. A whole page written by a man 

named Varcoe. Closure of rural hospitals needed; there's 

wasted money out there. And that's the day, on a Saturday night 

I got that paper, I read it, and on Sunday morning I collapsed 

with a ruptured disc. And I laid in the Craik hospital for two 

days on Demerol to get survived to be brought to Regina on an 

ambulance. 

 

And I was brought into Regina to the Pasqua Hospital. I was 

left there for seven or eight hours, seven hours to be exact, 

before the doctor could get to me. They don't want to hear these 

kind of things. But this is a good example what happens. 

 

I was in emergency for up to seven hours, didn't even have a 

needle or a pill. And I felt sorry for all those good people in 

emergency because they were swamped with accidents and 

everything else. I seen life, boy, I tell you, what goes on every 

day. And I hope none of you ever have to go through what I 

went through, with pain like I've never had in my life. 

 

A doctor came to me about 6:30 at night and says, you poor 

man. He says, I'll book you in. I got to book you for emergency 

CAT (computerized axial tomography) scan. I'll book you for 

emergency operation. He came back and says, they've got no 

room here for you. And I was . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, go on. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Don't go on, because I can prove it by a 

receipt. You see, Mr. Chairman, the doctor had to get an 

ambulance . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order, order. Order. I'll ask the members of the 

Assembly to allow the hon. 

member from Arm Creek to make his point. I'll ask all 

members of the Assembly to allow the member from . . . I will 

ask all members of the Assembly to allow the hon. member 

from Arm River to make his point and to ask his question. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Naturally they 

would want to holler because they didn't want to hear the last 

part of my story because, as God has me standing here, the 

doctor could not get me in that hospital. And they had to get an 

ambulance and take me to my apartment and leave me for two 

nights and one day to look after me, and it may affect me the 

rest of my life. It may affect me. 

 

Now the point I want to make, I'll wait my turn to die if I have 

to wait my turn to get into a hospital, but don't let me read in 

the paper, close down hospitals. And I'm saying to anybody in 

the city of Regina and Saskatoon that's listening to me now, 

wake up, because we in rural Saskatchewan may be in your bed 

when you need to get in there. We're going to fill up your beds 

when they bring us in here. More and more, there'll be people 

in there for having their babies and their toe nails cut and 

everything else, any little thing, a small little operation. And 

you won't be able to get in for the emergency operation, the 

heart attacks and the strokes, because the beds are going to be 

full from people from rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So you members from the city, you'd better wake up and stand 

up and be counted or you're going to be in trouble in this 

province like you never were in your life before as democrats. 

Never ever has this ever happened before that any government 

ever disturbed health care, medicare like you people have. 

 

And the associate minister keeps throwing in every once in a 

while — he has nothing else to talk about — the financial 

mess, the financial mess. And he knows right well that he'd 

better get off that, because I've told him and I told him, and he's 

going to make me say it again, that your 3.5 billion which we 

think is 4.9 billion . . . your $3.5 billion debt is $14.8 billion 

debt. 

 

Certainly I stood up and was counted in my caucus and my 

cabinet. If they ever even suggested, Mr. Chairman, if they 

even suggested in my caucus or cabinet that we talk about 

closing a hospital or even thinking about touching medicare . . . 

we even think about it. I was upset when we had to take some 

of the deductible off, but we did, on drugs. But you people just 

swiped it right away. You bet I stood up to be counted, and I 

knew the debt was climbing. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What about GigaText? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Talking about GigaText. That's a good one 

to talk about, Mr. Chairman. Yes, that's just about exactly the 

same as talking about the $5 million for GigaText. It didn't turn 

out very well and I wasn't even for it in the first place. It didn't 

turn out. 

 

But I'll tell you, I'll tell you what the minister said out in front 

of the legislature here. She said that when the thousand people 

were here, she said it all so she floundered around all the way 

from nothing to $20 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1195 

million this is going to save us. Well I'll tell you, that's about 

saving a farmer a year . . . going in for one cup of coffee. She's 

going to think they're going to balance a budget of $15 billion 

with disturbing rural Saskatchewan with $5 million. 

 

You're going to save 5 million to $10 million, and you're going 

to upset the whole rural province and have them so upset that 

people will be probably having heart attacks tonight over it. 

There's people so upset that phoned, they're so disturbed, that I 

know that there'll be people that will have a hurried death 

because of you people. 

 

You people are responsible from now on for what you've done, 

and you can sit . . . The member from Canora sits there and he 

laughs. But some of you are pretty sober, pretty quiet. Because 

wait till there's a first death in your riding because of lack of 

hospital care and the doctors are gone and whatever. They're 

not all going to leave rural Saskatchewan, but they're not going 

to hang around very long either if you take their acute care 

away. They're not going to be hanging around. 

 

And you people, one by one in your ridings, you won't show. I 

could go home to Craik when we had my meeting there the 

other night and hold my head high. I helped them build it in 

tough times. I helped them build a health centre in Imperial and 

Craik, and I fought for it. I fought hard. My father started 

fighting in 1949 for a level 4 and we finally got it in 1992. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You fought against medicare, you know 

it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — We were always for medicare. I came here 

on the steps of the legislature in 1963, supporting what you 

people were doing — medicare. I supported what you were 

doing for health care in this province. I supported when 

Tommy Douglas brought out health care, after Diefenbaker 

brought it out to Canada in the first place. Diefenbaker 

introduced it to the world. And certainly we got to give the 

credit to the CCF for bringing medicare in and hospitalization, 

and we got to give the credit to you turkeys for taking it away. 

 

Now I better not be saying turkeys. I guess I better even 

withdraw that word because that's . . . I understand that 

happened when I was away in the hospital. It's called the 

barnyard debate, and I take that back already, Mr. Chairman. 

We'll just say that they're doing wrong, these people over here, 

of what they're doing. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I'm going to ask you again to stand up . . . 

and you've never really answered one straightforward question. 

Only one question you've answered this afternoon, and that's 

the question that we have made some progress on. And you did 

answer me that for sure that the hospitals or facilities will be 

owned by the health districts, not the Government of 

Saskatchewan. That's the only question you've answered. You 

strayed and scattered away from all the rest. You've only skated 

away from that integrated 

facility. 

 

If those beds are empty out there, if we got an empty bed and 

the district requests that they be filled up with level 4, is the 

government going to do it or say no? Are they going to dictate 

to them, or is the districts going to be able to have their say? 

Are the districts going to be able to have their say, long as 

they're in the parameter of their financing? I understand that 

they got to be in the parameter of their financing. And if it's 

there, will the government stop any bed being filled with a 

level 4 care? Or will they say, the health district, you make the 

decision as long as it's in the parameter of their financing? I 

want a direct answer on that, and then that's my last question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, the member says I've 

answered one question specifically. It's only because he's only 

asked one specific question in an afternoon that's supposed to 

be filled with very specific questions about the Bill. 

 

Now I understand if the member wants to turn this into a 

further second-reading speech, that's fine. But if he wants 

specific answers to specific questions, we're more than 

prepared to bring them. Give us some specific questions. 

 

Now he asks again about the prospect of long-term care beds in 

some of our smaller rural institutions. And I repeat again the 

process. The process is that communities will form into 

districts. Districts will do their need assessment, sorting out 

what is the appropriate need, the real need within their district. 

 

The district then is charged with the responsibility of spending 

their global budget within that district. That global budget, Mr. 

Chairman, will be set by the department based on the 

availability of resources to the province. There then are three 

constraints on the local district. One is the budgetary constraint. 

That's obvious. Number two, there will be provincial-wide 

standards established by the department and by government 

that each district will have to adhere to. And number three, 

there will be each year struck with the district and the 

department a contractual arrangement so that the department, 

the province, can be assured that the services are being 

provided to Saskatchewan people in each of our districts. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, there's no 

sense asking you questions because I said I will ask another 

direct question. You won't answer that question. I've asked you 

about three times. I wanted just a yes-or-no answer on this one. 

 

I'm going to try you once more. If the parameters of financing 

are as such in the district and there's empty beds in an 

integrated facility, will they be allowed to fill them up with 

level 4 if the parameters of financing say such? Just say yes or 

no. That's all I need from you. I don't need a long speech 

saying nothing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I just said to the member, if he'd have 

listened, so long as the provincial standards are being met, so 

long as the budgetary requirements are 



1196 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

met and there's no exceeding the pools of money available, and 

so long as this is contracted, in the understanding that services 

are being met in the district with the contract with the 

department, the answer is the district has the ability and 

responsibility to make choices for their communities in their 

district. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, I will apologize. The first 

time I didn't quite hear you because the Leader of the 

Opposition, the member from Thunder Creek just come and 

told me that I'm getting calls to my office, as I'm speaking this 

afternoon, asking if the minister's going to be here tonight to 

answer questions for my colleagues. And I want you to answer 

that when you get up. 

 

But you still didn't answer my question on the integrated 

facility. You just get up and say, if everything's right and all 

this. It's not whether the district will make the decision. Let's 

say they've made the decision — and I've said that to you 

several times this afternoon — the decision's already been 

made in Craik what we want on the acute care. We want one 

acute care bed. That's been there. You already said they're 

making decisions, so we thank you that we're going to get one 

acute care bed in Craik. All right. 

 

And I've told you and told you and asked you and asked you, if 

the district says within the parameters of financing that we 

want you to have two or three or four of those beds go to 

integrated facility . . . I mean, or sorry, for level 4 nursing care, 

and you won't get up and say yes, the government will let them 

do it. 

 

That's what you won't answer. You're only skirting on that one. 

Now get up and answer me, whether it's yes or no, if the Moose 

Jaw district or any district — I'm only using them for an 

example this afternoon because it's closest to me — if the 

Moose Jaw district, if Craik goes in with them, says yes, we 

want in the town of Craik two or three or four of those beds go 

to level 4 care, will the government step in and say no, you 

can't do it anyway, or yes, you can go ahead? 

 

You won't answer that. You just get on and make that big story. 

Try it differently this time so we can move on to something 

else. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I think it is obvious that 

the member is, I think, talking about his local situation. And I 

am not about, on the floor of this legislature, nor should he, 

think that we are going to make the specific decisions for any 

specific institution or a specific district. This is not the place 

and we're not the people. 

 

I repeat again, the decisions will be made, the decisions will be 

made based on real need within a district. That need will be 

determined by the district board and the planning committees 

that are now in place that will evolve to district boards. 

 

Those decisions will have as constraints the financial 

constraints of budget that we all live with, and the district 

boards will live with. They will be constrained by the 

provincial-wide standards that must be and will 

be set by the department and the province, and it will require 

contractual arrangements between the district and the province 

so that we can ensure that services are being provided in a fair 

and equitable manner to all people in Saskatchewan. That's 

how the system will work, Mr. Member. And we're not going 

to get into a process here on the floor of the legislature of 

making that kind of decision for the districts. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, that is 

absolutely a nothing answer again. You know what I'm getting 

at. You're smart enough to know what I'm talking about. 

 

Let's forget about talking about a specific district of Moose 

Jaw. Let's talk about district A. I've said to you very clearly, if 

the financing is available in that district to do whatever they 

want to do, whether it be acute care or whether it be a level 4, 

whatever, will you allow them to do it if the money's available 

within that district? And you will not answer that because you 

are dictators. You figure on dictating to them after the districts 

are formed — and you better tell us otherwise if it's not true — 

the same way as you dictated to all Saskatchewan when you 

wanted this Bill through to set the boundary lines and then you 

closed the hospital before you done it. 

 

Now is that what you have in mind after we go into a district 

and a hospital has the facility for whatever, and the district 

board says yes we want this, but Mr. Government comes along 

and says no. All I wanted from you to say whether it's any 

place in Saskatchewan . . . It's not a specific. We're not talking 

about whether it's Craik. I only use that for example. It may be 

any of those integrated facilities. 

 

Will you allow the districts to make their decision if the 

money's available in that area, for what they want to do? Or are 

you going to be the dictator that comes back in to your NDP on 

the board to say . . . Because they did say that at Craik the other 

night, that all the board members were going to be appointed 

by the minister. 

 

So will you be telling your NDP-appointed member on that 

board, no you won't be able to do that even if you had the 

money; you've got to do this? So explain it more careful than 

you have been, or we'll be here a long time. 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Member, I'm prepared to be here for 

a long time, until such time as I guess we can have you 

understand what's happening here. Now the member asks if the 

district can make decisions. And of course the district can make 

decisions; that's the goal of the reform process. He somehow 

accuses us of being dictatorial when in fact just the opposite is 

true, when just the opposite is true. For the first time in the 

history of Saskatchewan, local communities, through the 

district model, will have the decision-making power and the 

responsibility to make the health care decisions for their 

district. 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1197 

Now that's a first in our province's history; this is a major 

reform of returning to local control health care decision 

making. It's coming away from the centre of government into 

the hands of local communities because we think the local 

communities can make better decisions. Now those decisions 

have to be in the context of budget, as the members pointed 

out. We all agree; it has to be in the context of the limited 

resources which are available. It has to be also in the context of 

some provincial-wide standards. And I hope the member would 

appreciate the need for provincial-wide standards and so that 

each district will enter into a contractual arrangement each year 

with the department to ensure that those standards are being 

met. 

 

But the responsibility and the authority for decision making 

will be vested in the district. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I can't stand 

that kind of talk. On the closing days of the House last August, 

the minister was sitting there, and I was standing here. I was 

the last one to speak the day the House closed on a health Bill. 

And she told me the same thing exactly, that the districts in 

these here . . . the people in Saskatchewan are going to say 

exactly what they want. Whatever they want, they'll get. 

 

Who would deny . . . You look at Hansard, and I said it to her, 

what's happening today? I said, do you want to tell me that the 

four hospitals in my area, Outlook, Imperial, Craik, and 

Davidson, will have the say what they're going to do? You're 

going to tell me that Craik board's going to say: oh, we'll just 

close down and you can have it, Davidson, or vice versa? And 

Outlook is going to say: well we'll let our hospital go; 

Rosetown, you can have it. Or Imperial will say: we'll close 

down and go to Watrous. 

 

That's a bunch of bunk and you know it is. Because they may 

have the say to tell you, but whoever controls the purse strings 

has all the say. So don't try to fool people of Saskatchewan that 

you people with your financing to rule Saskatchewan has all 

the say. 

 

There's no sense continuing on. This is a long ways from being 

over. You've got us on closure but I'm only going to ask one 

more direct question and then I won't be back until the end of 

the week and this is going to be gone. I won't be back till 

Thursday. But you mark my words, when estimates come, 

we're going to get answers or estimates will go on until you 

have to do closure on estimates. And that's never happened in 

Saskatchewan before. 

 

I'm going to bring out and I'm going to read all the letters. 

There's just a few letters from just one town about what they 

think of you. This is just one town — one town. And I'm going 

to read every one in this legislature and she is going to answer 

the needs of people. 

 

I'm telling you there's going to be something happen in 

estimates in this House that you people will wonder what 

you're going to do next, because Mr. House Leader will not 

control us, how long we're going to go 

in estimates. Unless you're going to get so dictatorship-like that 

you're going to put closure on estimates too. 

 

Now my last question, Mr. Minister: is the Minister of Health 

going to be in this House to answer questions tonight from 7 

till 10? Is she going to be here tonight or not? Now that's not a 

big question. Turn around and ask your House Leader where 

she is. Because all we want to know . . . it makes a difference 

in how we put things together because we're under closure, 

we're going to be absolutely through here asking questions in 

committee by tomorrow, and we got to know how long we're 

going to have her. There's no sense wasting them on you 

because we've never had any answers. You wonder why I go 

off to make speeches. Because when I do ask a direct question, 

I don't get it. So I might as well tell you what I think of you. 

 

Mr. Minister, my last statement today until estimates. Is the 

minister going to be here tonight from 7 to 10, or what time 

will she be here to answer questions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Member, I will be here tonight to 

answer as many questions as you or any of your colleagues or 

indeed any member of this House care to raise on the specifics 

of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, we 

were afraid of that. It's most unfortunate, most unfortunate that 

we have spent pretty well the entire afternoon, all of the 

afternoon, first of all with the Premier and now with you, 

getting a whole bunch of non-answers to one of the most 

important developments that has hit this province in a long, 

long time, as you are going around now dismantling to a large 

degree the health care services in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we've been trying to ask you questions, my colleague 

from Arm River has been attempting to ask you questions 

dealing specifically with his area, framed in his own words. 

And we don't seem to be getting any responses from you. 

Perhaps if I gave you something more solid to go on, we might 

get somewhere. 

 

And what I'm holding in my hand right now is a letter that was 

delivered to me today that was written on April 23, so it's very, 

very recent. And it's signed by a Collette Jones, who's the 

administrator of the rural municipality of Carmichael. And if 

you don't know where Carmichael is, it's . . . the address here is 

Box 420, Gull Lake, Saskatchewan. And she is writing this to 

me, and she says: 

 

 Dear Mr. Neudorf: This letter is in response to your letter 

dated April 5, 1993, whereby you request council's views on 

the new health districts. (And I did write that letter and I did 

ask council to respond in the fashion that they felt.) On 

March 24, 1993, this municipality held a spring ratepayers' 

meeting and had 102 ratepayers at this meeting. And we 

passed a few resolutions at that meeting. 



1198 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1993 

 Resolution No. 1. Whereas the Government of Saskatchewan 

has announced the plans for severely reducing the health 

services to rural Saskatchewan and further disadvantaging 

rural residents by limiting their access to acute health care 

facilities, be it resolved that this meeting move a motion of 

censure against the Minister of Health for abandoning the 

health care of rural residents. And be it further resolved that 

we request the Government of Saskatchewan to reconsider 

the restriction of hospital care services to rural Saskatchewan 

and budget to retain existing acute health care facilities in 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

That motion carried, Mr. Minister. They want a response from 

me, as to what your response was to their resolution. What 

should I tell them, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I do not believe . . . and to 

the best of my knowledge, we have not received a copy of the 

RM of Carmichael's resolutions or resolution that the member 

refers to here in the House. If he would like to send one over, 

there certainly will be a response. If that resolution is directed 

to government or to the department, there most certainly will 

be a response given to the administrator and the RM. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Is it that difficult, Mr. Minister, for you to 

answer the question that I have just posed to you from this 

RM? I'm simply asking you for your response. What will it be? 

Or is it contrary to what you have been leading the people of 

Saskatchewan all afternoon, that you can answer for your 

colleagues, that you are a decision-maker. 

 

Now the people of the RM of Carmichael want your response. 

What is it? Or do you want me to repeat the resolution? I can 

read it again. You indicate no. All right, well then let's have 

your answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I think it's appropriate 

that we do both. If that is a resolution that's directed to 

government, then I think the member should provide a copy to 

government. If he is the channel by which the resolution is to 

come to government, then he should deliver the resolution. 

 

We can certainly in this forum have discussion about the issues 

that are raised by the resolution. Now we will make a specific 

response to the RM of Carmichael if the resolution is provided 

to us. That's number one. 

 

Number two, we will have discussion here this afternoon and I 

presume this evening about the issues that are raised in the 

resolution. The resolution raises the budgetary issues. He 

knows, he more than many will know, the kind of budgetary 

pressure this government in this province is under. We won't go 

into the long discussion about how we got here, but surely to 

goodness he will admit we are in a fiscal crisis in our province. 

 

And these very difficult decisions — and it's certainly not in 

just this one area 

of government or this one area of health care — these difficult 

decisions have been made by this government and they are part 

of this budget. And he knows that. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Minister, I'm glad that you're saying you 

are prepared to discuss in detail the issues raised in this 

resolution. I need this paper for a little while longer and then 

I'm going to give it over to a page to make copies to give to 

you. But there's another resolution on here as well, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

The irony of the whole situation is that you're hanging your hat 

on the deficit and yet we're being told by your own officials 

that the savings this year is $5 million. Now, Mr. Minister, I 

don't know exactly what the percentage is, but a saving of $5 

million on a $5 billion budget has got to be extremely low. And 

the pain and the suffering that is being created by this measure 

on your government to save $5 million I think becomes very, 

very questionable. 

 

Now we're going to go into detail on that issue as we go on into 

the evening session where you're going to be forced to defend 

that $5 million statement and your $20 million annualized 

savings every year hereafter. Now we're going to take a good, 

deep, close look at some of the bureaucracy that has been built 

as a result of the restructuring of the health care system. 

 

Mr. Chairman, from the RM of Carmichael, resolution no. 2: 

 

 Whereas the Government of Saskatchewan has announced 

that the proposed larger health care boards for rural 

Saskatchewan are to be composed of eight locally elected 

members and four members appointed by the provincial 

government; and 

 

 Whereas it is our belief that locally elected board members 

will better reflect the interests of rural residents; 

 

 Therefore be it resolved that we request the province of 

Saskatchewan to reconsider and that the local health boards 

be composed of 11 locally elected members and only one 

provincially appointed member. 

 

And that also was carried. And there's a concluding paragraph, 

Mr. Minister: 

 

 These resolutions reflect the opinion of council and the 

ratepayers and it is felt that they should be taken into 

consideration when making decisions regarding this matter. 

 

So I ask you on their behalf at this time, Mr. Minister, are their 

concerns in the resolutions, are they going to be taken into 

consideration when decisions are made regarding this matter, 

or have all decisions been made already? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I anticipate we will have 

a copy 



April 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1199 

of those resolutions. I see the member has sent them with the 

page, and we will have a copy and the RM of Carmichael will 

receive direct response from government to their resolutions 

which are presented to government. 

 

On the issue of the board structure proposed in this legislation 

which we're now discussing, the Minister of Health, myself, 

other members of this government, and officials through the 

department, as the member knows, consulted widely, talked to 

many groups and many people about the make-up of the 

boards. 

 

Some suggested totally elected boards; others suggested totally 

appointed boards. What we feel we have represented here in 

the legislation is the consensus, the consensus of people across 

our province with . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who said totally elected boards? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — If the member has a further question, 

I'm sure he has an opportunity to get on his feet, to get on his 

feet and raise it. 

 

We believe that this represents what was the consensus opinion 

of people in Saskatchewan. You will find those who believe 

that they should be totally elected; you'll find others who 

believe they should be totally appointed. We believe that this 

represents a consensus and we believe it is an effective 

mechanism for the governance of the health care districts. 

 

Now further to that point, Mr. Speaker, the member suggests, I 

think, without saying it, that the four are to be "government 

appointed." To at least suggest, if not to say outright, that they 

are government chosen, I want the member to understand, if he 

doesn't already, that all of those who are appointed to those 

appointed positions on the board — one-third in the case of 

boards outside of Regina and Saskatoon — that those will be 

based on nominations that must come from within the district. 

 

And the goal through having some appointed members on 

those boards, the goal will be to give a fair representation to the 

whole district and perhaps to groups or those who might be 

involved in health care directly, to give their voice on that 

board. 

 

And so let me just, for example, Mr. Chairman, if for instance 

in a district there is a high percentage of seniors but through the 

electoral process a senior or seniors are not represented on the 

board, it seems to me that it might be very appropriate that a 

senior be appointed to be part of that health care board because 

they will represent a significant part of health care need within 

that board, within that district. 

 

But again I repeat, those who are appointed will be based on 

nominations that come from the district and so . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. It now being 5 o'clock, the Committee of 

the Whole will stand recessed until 7 o'clock p.m. 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


