




















































Hansard: April 08, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 921 

 April 8, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I hereby give notice 

pursuant to rule 34 that at the next sitting of the Assembly 

immediately before orders of the day is called for resuming 

adjourned debate on the motion to allocate time for proceeding 

on Bill 3, An Act respecting Health Districts, and on any 

amendments or subamendments proposed thereto, I will move 

that the said debate be not further adjourned. I will be moving 

that. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the Assembly today some 

folks from my constituency. I see Stuart Keys, the director of 

our school division. I see some board members. I can't see past 

the post if other board members are here, but I know they're 

here to meet with the Minister of Education and I know that 

she'll give them a good hearing. 

 

And I'd like to welcome them here and hope that their trip is 

profitable. And I'd like the members of the Assembly to 

welcome them in the appropriate manner. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Closure on Bill 3 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Premier. Mr. Premier, it's about time that you started to take 

some responsibility for the government actions, the complete 

betrayal of health care in this province which your government 

is bringing about. 

 

It's also time I think to do away with some of the hypocrisy 

which we've seen coming out of your front benches, Mr. 

Premier. You've now brought closure into this House to snuff 

out this public debate that should be taking place on health 

care. Mr. Premier, you once said about closure: discredited and 

desperate, this government has no other choice; it resorts to the 

actions of the bully, it resorts to the actions of coming down 

here and guillotining the opposition. Your words, Mr. Premier. 

That's what you're doing today, resorting to the desperate 

actions of a bully, Mr. Premier. 

 

Will you end the hypocrisy of your government? Will you 

show some leadership? Will you end this closure motion which 

you brought down on this House and ensure a full public 

debate on the health issues? Would you do that, Mr. Premier? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. I 

say to the Leader of the Opposition we totally agree with them 

that there should be full public debate. We have argued and 

maintained that there is full public debate. This Bill has been 

on the floor of the House since very early March, five weeks 

now. It is open even after the motion passes for the opposition 

to have lots of time to debate. 

 

And the difference really here is that your opposition has taken 

the position that it will do everything it can to kill this debate. 

That's different than prolonging a debate for prolonged 

arguments. You don't want to have a prolonged argument, you 

simply want to kill it. And with it you want to kill medicare, 

and we want to defend medicare. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Premier. Mr. Premier, you referred to the use of closure as 

guillotining the opposition. Well, Mr. Premier, you're not just 

guillotining us. You're just not guillotining the Progressive 

Conservative Party that's fighting you in this legislature, you're 

guillotining the people of Saskatchewan who have serious 

concerns on this matter. 

 

Two nights ago, Mr. Premier, your Minister of Health and your 

Minister of Education went off to Weyburn, Saskatchewan, and 

they heard from the people there. And they, Mr. Premier, heard 

from those folks that you don't have to spend a half a million 

bucks on polling to know that there are serious concerns with 

your wellness program. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, given what your ministers heard the other 

night, what the public is saying to you, will you now do the 

right thing, sir, show some leadership, take the closure motion 

off and let those people have the assurance that their concerns 

about health care in this province are going to be roundly 

debated in the legislature today. Would you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Leader of the 

Official Opposition and the Conservative Party don't recognize 

the gravity of the situation which the government has to deal 

with and responsible men and women throughout 

Saskatchewan want to deal with. 

 

In today's Globe and Mail, for example, on the front page, if 

the Leader of the Opposition would care to take a look at it, 

you would see as a front page story, the following which I'll 

just briefly read: 

 

 

Canada's public . . . health care systems . . . will buckle under 

the load unless a major restructuring is done before the 

baby-boom generation retires, Statistics Canada says. 



922 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1993 

Not the Premier, not the Leader of the Opposition, Statistics 

Canada and their document set out. 

 

Now what this Bill is all about, is restructuring the second 

phase of health care pursuant to the visionaries of Tommy 

Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd, in order to save medicare. What 

you people are doing by your determination to absolutely kill 

the Bill is to kill medicare and hospitalization. And I tell you, 

that may be a consistent Conservative pitch and it may be a 

consistent Liberal pitch. It is not the position of the government 

of the day nor is it the position of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. They want restructuring. They want to be 

involved. That's what this legislation provides. We want to save 

medicare and we want you to join us in that task. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's obvious, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Premier's been living in another world here. 

The problem, Mr. Premier, isn't about rationalization. 

Saskatchewan people want rationalization. What they're talking 

about, Mr. Premier, and you're not listening to, is the process. 

They're talking about their inability to have their government 

listen to them. 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Premier, Cargill announced that it's donating a 

percentage of its spring fertilizer sales to rural hospitals. 

Cargill. Mr. Premier, what must the NDP (New Democratic 

Party) Party be thinking today when Cargill, a large 

multinational, has to donate funds to rural hospitals to keep 

them open because your government won't listen to an open 

debate on how we rationalize our health care system. Imagine, 

Mr. Premier. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, this craven bunch of ministers that you have 

here in the front benches will not go out and talk to 

Saskatchewan people. Will you give the commitment today, 

Mr. Premier, will you give the leadership today, that you will 

be in Kerrobert on the 14th and Eston on the 15th, Kindersley 

on the 19th, and Codette on the 20th? Show the leadership of 

your office, Mr. Premier. Don't let Cargill do it for you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I don't know the details 

of the Cargill situation but if they are as reported by the Leader 

of the Opposition, I think only one can commend Cargill for 

doing so. I would only hope that the recently appointed new 

member to the board of directors of Cominco potash, the 

member from Estevan, would have his influence on Cominco 

doing the same thing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Since at one time he was both the 

father and the engineer of Cargill and was in effect de facto 

board of directors there, perhaps he can do the same thing with 

respect to Cominco. 

 

But the issue remains the same, Mr. Speaker, and this 

is this. What the Leader of the Opposition is doing is what all 

of the Conservative and Liberal parties have been doing 

throughout the history of the province of Saskatchewan. They 

have always been saying, we are for medicare and 

hospitalization . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — But. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — But. And then they will mount every 

reason as to why it ought not to proceed. We want to save 

health care but . . . Then they will give all the arguments that 

are advanced there. That's the position that they take. They say 

we are for restructuring but . . . 

 

All you have to do is take a look at the speeches from the 

member from Kindersley, some of the others who have taken 

part in the public meetings, to tell the people of the legislature 

and the public that those buts are full of untruths and in reality 

those buts mean they want to kill health care. 

 

I say, stop it and join us; get on with the Bill. Let's debate it — 

there's lots of time — and let's save medicare and 

hospitalization for Saskatchewan. That's the line to take. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, Mr. 

Member from Riversdale, come out of your bubble, come out 

of the protective bubble, Mr. Premier, that you're hiding in. If 

this is all about the wellness plan, of wellness of our people, 

then why the rush? Why are you so afraid to listen to people, 

Mr. Premier? And again I remind you: closure is the last resort 

of a discredited, desperate government. 

 

Mr. Premier, a short time ago you said, I must go to a rally in 

Kindersley because the people are crying out to me; I need to 

attend on behalf of Saskatchewan people. Mr. Premier, those 

same people in Kindersley are having another rally. And 

they're saying, Mr. Premier, we're crying out to you; come out 

and listen to us. 

 

Mr. Premier, show the courage of your convictions. Withdraw 

this closure motion, allow full public debate, and go to 

Kindersley, Mr. Premier, like you did in the fall of 1991. 

Would you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that 

I have attended many meetings throughout rural Saskatchewan 

and will be going to other meetings in rural Saskatchewan, 

talking not only about health care but about the deficit position 

which was left behind for us by the members opposite. 

 

And I'm also pleased to report that they're very, very widely 

covered by the news media in rural Saskatchewan, and they 

understand the gravity of the situation. So wherever possible, 

members of the government side will attend as many meetings 

as is necessary and as time permits. There should be a full 



April 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 923 

and complete dialogue. 

 

I remind the member opposite that for nearly a year the 

Minister of Health led this debate by appearing in public 

meetings in virtually every corner of the province of 

Saskatchewan. I estimate that she met over 20,000 people in 

her travels. She is on the road now, virtually non-stop, and will 

be in the weeks ahead. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I would want to ask the 

member from Maple Creek to cut down his interruptions a bit 

during question period. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I just simply want to 

close off my train of thought which is that the fundamental 

assumption of the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — The train has already left. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Yes, the train has already left. The 

train has left to save health care and you had better join on or 

you're going to be opposing health care and we are for saving 

it. That's the issue. The train has left. You're right. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, Mr. 

Premier, your ministers hide, SHA (Saskatchewan Health-Care 

Association) have cancelled their spring meetings because your 

minister won't go out and face the public. 

 

Mr. Premier, when you wanted votes, when you wanted votes 

and you wanted to be Premier of this province you went to 

Kindersley and you went there before thousands of people and 

you said: I'm here to help you; I'm going to be the Premier; I'm 

going to sort these things out. 

 

And today, Mr. Premier, the very basic of our society, health 

care, and the people of Kindersley say, Mr. Premier, come out. 

Well there's no votes to be had today. Is that the reason, Mr. 

Premier, you won't go? Is that the only reason — it's only 

politics? Show them some courage, Mr. Premier, and go to 

Kindersley. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased 

to say again that I have attended and will continue to meet in 

rural Saskatchewan where time permits and as the requirements 

dictate. I have ministers who do the job very, very well and 

health care is very much at the top of the list. There's not doubt 

about that. 

 

But the fundamental assumption of the Leader of the 

Opposition is one which I want all the members of this House 

and the public to understand. It is the situation that says: we are 

for reform, but . . . And you hear it from the former premier 

right now, saying, but don't close any hospital. And we don't 

intend to close . . .  

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order! I 

will issue a second warning to the member from Maple Creek 

to not continually interrupt in question period, the Premier. 

Next question. 

 

Mr. Devine: — A question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. Just a 

two-sentence quote. One from one of your own members. 

Closure is a very drastic, heavy-handed, and despicable thing to 

do. Those aren't my words. Those are from members of your 

cabinet. 

 

And the most reprehensible aspect of this approach is that you 

are suppressing people. So my second quote comes from an 

individual. And you'll hear more of them. 

 

People like Sister Rosetta Reiniger from Prelate. And she 

writes this about your plans: it means death to rural areas. And 

she says that the province of Saskatchewan, as we know it, will 

cease to be if the present trend of destroying the rural areas 

continues. And she asks, and I quote: Do everything in your 

power to prevent the government from implementing this 

health plan. End of quote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this. Given 

individuals who genuinely believe in rural Saskatchewan and 

in health care, don't you think that we could take the time to 

debate their feelings and their issues in a democratic process 

like any real democrats would? Why, Mr. Premier, won't you 

allow this debate to go on without closure? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, again the former 

premier fails, refuses, to acknowledge the fact that the debate is 

not being cut off. There will be 40 hours of debate still, even 

after this motion is passed. You can say everything that you 

want to say over and over and over again. 

 

But in his question you will note the point that proves my 

answer, Mr. Speaker. He gets up in his preface to the question 

and he says, reading from the good sister's point of view, do 

everything in your power to kill this Bill. Just a few moments 

ago his Leader of the Opposition said no, we don't want to kill 

this Bill; we just want more time to debate it. 

 

And that's exactly the point. When it comes right down to it, 

what they really want to do is but, but, but kill it. And in killing 

it, they want to kill health care and hospitalization. That's what 

they want to do. And we won't allow it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are not trying to 

kill this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to direct a question to Madam Minister, 

Minister of Health. Madam Minister, let me read you a part of 

a letter that you received from a couple in Choiceland sent to 

you. And I quote: 



924 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1993 

My husband and I are writing about the Saskatchewan health 

plan and the terrible botch you have made of it. We both 

trusted your government and never expected the NDP to rob 

the sick. We find that's exactly what you're doing. Tommy 

Douglas would turn over in his grave if he knew. 

 

This is a letter to you, Madam Minister. 

 

And I want to go on to say, Madam Minister, this is not the 

Tories; this is your own people talking to you. You're not 

listening. When you chose to debate this Bill, you're not just 

stiffling the Tories, Madam Minister, you're stiffling your own 

people. You're not just muzzling the opposition, Madam 

Minister, you're muzzling the people of Saskatchewan, all 

around the province. 

 

Madam Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Member put his question, please. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Madam Minister, my suggestion to you is to 

go home and think this over during the Easter weekend. And 

when you come back, Madam Minister, will you . . . Madam 

Minister, will you withdraw your closure motion? Will you do 

that, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the Minister of 

Health for allowing me to answer this question. 

 

I want to say to the member from Wilkie and to the legislature 

the following: beware Tories when they quote Tommy 

Douglas. Beware. Beware any Tory who quotes Tommy 

Douglas or uses in support, because it was the Tories sitting 

opposite there and the Liberals who fought medicare tooth and 

nail in 1962. Members opposite who probably were members 

of the notorious Keep Our Doctors committee tried to kill, in 

the defence of medicare, the best reform that we've ever 

implemented in Canada. Now they're doing it in this context. 

 

I say to the hon. member from Wilkie — if he would just calm 

down — if you say that you support this Bill, then put your 

words and your deeds together. We want you to debate. We 

want you to make constructive suggestions. You have . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Please let the Premier 

answer the question, all right. And now . . . Well before we 

proceed to the next question, would members please use some 

restraint in interrupting in answers when they are given. Order. 

Order. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 

Minister of Health. Madam Minister, people all over this 

province are trying to reach you and they can't get through to 

you, and I mean that literally. 

Yesterday we received a call from a Mr. Ron Moldenhauer 

from Saskatoon who told us he tried to contact your office 

yesterday and ask for help. He's on a fixed income due to a 

disability and he can't afford an eye examination. He called 

your office, Madam Minister, and you wouldn't accept the 

charges; you wouldn't help him; you wouldn't even accept his 

call. This may seem trivial to you, Madam Minister, but the 

precise point that we're trying to make is, people are trying to 

talk to you and you won't listen. People are trying to call you 

and you won't take their calls. 

 

Madam Minister, Mr. Moldenhauer was finally able to reach 

other departments of this government but he would like to talk 

to your office. Very simply, Madam Minister, will you direct 

your office to take his calls along with the other people in this 

province that are calling your office on a regular basis to 

discuss this damaging health care reform you are about to 

impose on rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Here we go again, Mr. Speaker. Here 

we go again. I want the public to note what the Conservative 

Party is saying about this Bill. They've . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. If this interruption 

continues, I'm going to call the end of question period. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I will try again to say to 

the member opposite and to the House what the true 

motivations of the Conservative and the Liberal parties are. He 

used the words: this damaging health Bill. He has said in 

Eatonia that this Bill must be stopped. Those were his exact 

words. This is . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Until public consultation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — No. You have said that it should be 

stopped. And this member should be very careful about his 

exact words because those exactly are the words that you have 

stated and the member from Maple Creek stated, that it should 

be stopped. This is not a question of debating and debating and 

debating; this is a question where debate stops and what 

happens is outright obstruction because they want to kill the 

Bill. Well I say to him, he may want to kill medicare and 

hospitalization; we are here to save it. All the systems tell us 

we've got to save it, and we ask you and the people of 

Saskatchewan to stop the politicking there and come to join us 

in the defence of health care. That's what we're asking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, the mayor of 

the town of Naicam wrote, and I quote: 

 

 

Fear for the health of my community. If patients are forced to 

leave the community for hospital beds or doctor care, the 

people will begin moving out of our communities, with 

businesses and schools to follow. Are those of 



April 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 925 

us in rural Saskatchewan less important that those in large 

centres? 

 

End of quote. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, that's the mayor of Naicam saying that. This 

isn't a political battle between your party and our party. I was 

out in Wapella yesterday and the same thing was stated to me. 

They're very, very concerned and frustrated. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, why are you trying to stop the 

people from being involved in the debate and not going out 

there to meet them on a personal basis, on a regular basis? Why 

aren't you doing that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I don't know how many 

times I have to tell the members opposite. I suppose for ever 

because they'll never accept it. We are meeting the people out 

there. We're urging them to set up health care district boards 

quickly. There are some that have been set up. They know 

what's best in their interests. If the mayor of Naicam has a 

concern, we will obviously do the best we can to answer those 

concerns. We'll take any phone calls that we can take. The 

ministers are meeting on an ongoing basis. 

 

But it's not good enough to use isolated examples and say, 

knowing full well the minister's schedule, that this particular 

complaint hasn't been answered. If it hasn't been, we'll attend to 

it as quickly as we can. No one wants to cut off the people. In 

fact this thing will only work as a partnership with the people. 

 

In New Brunswick there was not even any consultation. In 

New Brunswick they simply decided to reform it without 

health care districts. I'm not saying that in a critical fashion 

necessarily. That's the way they've approached it. We've 

approached it in a consultative way involving the communities. 

But in order to involve the communities we need the passage of 

this Bill. We need this Bill passed so that the communities can 

organize themselves, elect themselves, so that the mayor can be 

heard properly, so that the reforms can be implemented and so 

that a lot of the untruths and the misconceptions and a lot of the 

natural concerns can be put to bed very quickly. 

 

Now if you say you're with us — you said you're with us — 

then stand up and vote with us and pass this Bill now. Do not 

drag your feet; do not delay. Join us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, yesterday I took 

the time to visit with the very reputable and respectable 

individual in my community, Mr. Don Whiteman, who's the 

chairman of the steering committee in relation to the area 

around the city of Swift Current. There were a number of 

things that he said, Mr. Speaker. There was a number of things 

that he said. There's no homework been done by the 

government. This is a random plan. The longer the work . . . 

They believe everything has been decided. 

 There is nothing given to them. This is the words of a very, 

very irritated and frustrated, very respectable individual in the 

community of Swift Current, Mr. Premier. 

 

And the question that I have for you is exactly the same as the 

other. Why don't you go out there and talk to those people. And 

I could give you a whole list of those names of those 

individuals and they are not Liberal only, they are not 

Conservative only, they are not NDP only. They are all 

political parties. And, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, they 

resigned from that steering committee because they are 

frustrated beyond words about what your Minister of Health is 

doing to the province of Saskatchewan. Will you go out there 

and visit with them and relieve that frustration that they feel all 

over the place? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Associate Minister 

of Finance has been in Swift Current and has met with these 

people and will continue to meet with the people. 

 

Of course we understand that they embrace people of all 

political persuasions in the community. That's exactly what we 

intend to do and that's exactly what this Bill is all about which 

we're trying to pass and you're trying to hold up. Join us in 

passing the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — But please also, Mr. Member, tell the 

complete story. Please tell the complete story. Because in the 

same report that you're talking about, and I've got a copy about 

it in today's Leader-Post, here's what it said, by Mr. Whiteman, 

or at least the story says: 

 

 

However, there was no conflict (note this, Mr. Member, there 

was no conflict) within the committee with regards to the 

NDP government's basic philosophy of health-care reform, he 

said (referring to Mr. Whiteman). 

 

 

"I think it's been a feeling of many over a long period of time 

that with escalating costs, a close examination of the hospital 

situation was absolutely necessary," said Whiteman, who 

serves on the executive of the Swift Current Union Hospital's 

board. 

 

Now he may have frustrations. A new board has been set up. 

 

Now that is what he is saying. He is onside with our basic 

philosophy. He is onside with our legislation. He has said this 

in this article, unless it's a misquote. 

 

Now if it's okay for him even with the frustrations, what's 

wrong with you? Why aren't you onside? I don't accuse Mr. 

Whiteman of anything, but I say that what you people say, 

namely that you're for it but do everything to kill it, tells me 

that you're really not onside, that really what you want is this 

health care 



926 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1993 

system to collapse. Typical Tory and Liberal. And I say it will 

never collapse so long as we're here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1030) 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Provincial Lands Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Provincial Lands Act be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:31 a.m. until 10:42 a.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Romanow Murray 

Van Mulligen Hamilton 

Thompson Johnson 

Wiens Trew 

Tchorzewski Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Teichrob Sonntag 

Anguish Flavel 

Goulet Cline 

Kowalsky Scott 

Carson Wormsbecker 

MacKinnon Crofford 

Penner Stanger 

Hagel Knezacek 

Bradley Harper 

Koenker Keeping 

Lorje Carlson 

Lyons Renaud 

Pringle Langford 

Lautermilch Jess 

Calvert Haverstock 

— 42 

Nays 

 

Swenson Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth  

— 7 

 

The Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 51 — An Act to amend The Wildlife Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Wildlife Act be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:45 a.m. until 10:55 a.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

Yeas 

 

Van Mulligen Murray 

Thompson Hamilton 

Wiens Johnson 

Tchorzewski Trew 

Lingenfelter Draper 

Teichrob Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Anguish Flavel 

Goulet Cline 

Kowalsky Scott 

Carson Wormsbecker 

MacKinnon Crofford 

Penner Stanger 

Hagel Harper 

Bradley Keeping 

Koenker Carlson 

Lorje Renaud 

Lyons Langford 

Pringle Jess 

Lautermilch Haverstock 

Calvert t  

— 41 

Nays 

 

Swenson Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth t  

—7 

 

The Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that question 

93 be converted to motions for returns (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: — Motions for returns (debatable). 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Time Allocation 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We'd like to pick up on 

the discussion of yesterday about the closure motion and the 

lack of interest this government seems to be displaying with 

respect to the concern for the debate and the concern about the 

way the health care reform is going in this province. 

 

We saw in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, a desperate Premier 

desperately attempting to justify his actions; absolutely 

desperate in his attempts to try and convince people of this 

province that what he's doing 



April 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 927 

is correct. And he drags out the memory of Tommy Douglas as 

his last weapon. It's always the last resort is to bring out 

Tommy Douglas. That's the last thing that he can always do. 

 

But the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, is I don't think 

Tommy Douglas would be in favour of closing rural hospitals. 

I don't think he'd be in favour of closing the hospital in Eastend 

or the one in Eatonia or the one in Eston or the one in 

Kerrobert or Dodsland, or all over this province. Forty-one 

small hospitals are in danger, I predict, as a result of this 

government's actions, Mr. Speaker, 41 rural hospitals. 

 

(1100) 

 

An Hon. Member: — Is that all? 

 

Mr. Boyd: — And the member from the back corner over here 

says, is that all? Is that all? Forty-one hospitals at risk and that 

member has the audacity to say, is that all? How many more 

then are you going to put at risk? Is 41 not enough to satisfy 

you? Is 41 hospital closures not enough to satisfy that member? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I say, shame on that member. Not one 

hospital in this province should close. Not one hospital should 

be put at jeopardy as a result of this government's actions. And 

you, sir, should take that kind of thought back to your 

constituency, and I wonder what they would think of your tone 

and your actions and your thoughts in this legislature. 

 

That member . . . It's interesting, every time the debate comes 

up the Premier likes to say everybody's against health care but 

himself. Everybody's against health care but himself. 

 

Well who is the one, who is the one that's bringing forward 

these changes? Who is it? Who's the one that's reducing the bed 

levels in rural Saskatchewan from 4.5 to 1.5 — 70 per cent 

reduction in my constituency alone. Who is that? It's the 

member from Riversdale, Saskatoon Riversdale. That's who's 

doing it. That's who's making these destructive changes. 

 

That's why the people of Saskatchewan are rallying all over 

this province and will continue to rally all over this province. 

That's why they're asking for more debate on this. That's why 

they're asking that the government holds this Bill up. That's 

why the people of Saskatchewan want the member from 

Riversdale to step back, take a look at the situation, provide 

adequate time for public consultation and public debate. 

 

But oh no. As is the case of this Premier ever since he's become 

elected, if you don't like what I'm doing, too bad. I'm going to 

force it through the legislature without any adequate 

consultation, without adequate debate. That's his way of 

governing, and the House Leader of the government supports 

him in that view and pushes forward at every opportunity, 

every single step of the way. Push, push, push. It doesn't matter 

what anyone else thinks. He is the government. He's above 

debate. 

Got to get the job done, he chirps from his seat — got to get the 

job done. No matter who it hurts, no matter what the cost, no 

matter what hospital closes, no matter what — got to get the 

job done . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Absolutely. 

Absolutely. Got to get the job done, he says. So that means 

closure. 

 

Something that that member spoke so eloquently about that he 

said that closure should never be used in this legislature. But 

now when he has the tools of government at his disposal, the 

levers of government at his disposal, he uses it at every 

opportunity. More times than the collective premiers in the 

history of this province he has used that. And he gives the 

thumbs up signal. Right on, he says. That's the way he views 

this institution, Mr. Speaker, with absolute disgust. He doesn't 

care about this institution. The only thing he cares about is the 

promotion of his agenda. That's the only thing he cares about. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think this Bill is indicative of the way he 

views this legislature, this motion. And I'd like to take an 

opportunity to read this motion and show the gravity of the 

motion to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

On the proposed motion presented by the hon. minister: 

 

 

That notwithstanding the rules of the Assembly and 

following the adoption of this motion, when the order is 

called for resuming the adjourned debate on the motion for 

second reading of Bill No. 3, An Act respecting Health 

Districts, not more than two sitting days shall be allocated to 

debate on such order and that 15 minutes before the set time 

of adjournment on the second sitting day, unless sooner 

concluded, the Speaker shall interrupt the proceedings and 

put every question necessary to dispose of the order; 

 

And I think that first paragraph outlines to the people of 

Saskatchewan exactly the way this government feels about this 

institution. It doesn't want to debate Bill 3. It doesn't want to 

debate anything any more, it seems like. They just want to push 

their agenda forward, force it on the people of Saskatchewan, 

force it on the government . . . or the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And it's interesting. The Premier, the Premier in question 

period desperately tried, desperately tried, Mr. Speaker, to pick 

out passages from newspaper clippings to defend his position 

— to defend his position. And here is the complete clipping of 

what he was trying to quote from, Mr. Speaker, on Bill No. 3. 

 

And it's interesting. He says that Mr. Don Whiteman of Swift 

Current is supportive of his changes. Well if he would have 

read on just a little bit further, just a little bit further — in fact 

all he would have had to read is the first paragraph — he would 

have found that he wasn't in favour of it at all. 



928 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1993 

While he is suggesting that health care reform is necessary, he 

also says, and I quote out of the Leader-Post of today: 

 

 

A feeling health boards are going to be the "fall guys" for 

tough austerity decisions is one reason the health district . . . 

committee here (chairman) resigned recently, says its former 

chairman. 

 

He's so much in favour of this that he resigned. Can you 

believe that, Mr. Speaker? The Premier holds him up as an 

example in question period and says this man is supportive. 

He's so supportive he resigned. He resigned his position 

because he supports the government's view. 

 

How ludicrous can that possibly be. Don Whiteman from Swift 

Current, former chairman of the board out there. And he goes 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . former chairman of the planning 

committee; I stand corrected; that's right . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Absolutely. 

 

The Premier says he supports it, but the man steps down, 

resigns from the planning committee because he's so supportive 

of your Premier. What a joke. What a joke, Mr. Member back 

there. Take the time to read the article yourself if you don't 

believe us. 

 

And he goes on to say: 

 

 

And had the other three members been present, "it likely 

would have been 12 (out) of 12," . . . 

 

Resigned. Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, 12 out of 12 would 

have resigned had they been there that day, he predicts, 

because they do not support the government in these changes. 

And the members opposite sit in their desks, Mr. Speaker, and 

they laugh and they say, oh well that doesn't matter — that 

doesn't matter. That man, he obviously supports us even though 

he resigned. 

 

 

In fact, as things progressed, it became apparent "we were 

being (used as) a buffer for the government, and if things 

(went) wrong . . . the fault could be laid at the feet of the 

committee," . . . 

 

That's what the people who are so-called supporting you are 

saying. That's what the people that you guys hold up as 

examples to the people of Saskatchewan and say this man's 

supportive . . .  

 

And I'll just read that over again because it's important, Mr. 

Speaker. It illustrates clearly how the Premier wants to 

misrepresent this kind of information in the legislature. It 

simply isn't the facts. The fact of the matter is, the man said: 

 

 

In fact, as things progressed, it became apparent "we were 

being (used as) a buffer for the government, and if things 

(went) wrong . . . the fault could be laid at the feet of the 

committee," . . . 

And that is why that man stepped down. That's why that man 

resigned. And they're saying from their seats, scare tactics — 

scare tactics. He's one of the most distinguished members of 

that area . . . the people from that area when he comes to health 

care reform. And it's absolutely incredible that anyone could 

say that it's scare tactics on that man's behalf. He's been around 

there longer than you've been alive probably, when it comes to 

health care. Member of city council, absolutely tremendously 

well-respected man from that area. 

 

And he goes on to say: 

 

 

The government also tried directing the committee to do the 

things its way, despite Health Minister Louise Simard's 

earlier statements that the districts would have autonomy, he 

said. 

 

Absolutely astounding, Mr. Speaker. This man has condemned 

this process right from start to finish, and the Premier has the 

audacity to stand up in question period and say he supports 

you? Absolutely incredible. 

 

 

When the committee decided governance would be its first 

priority, it was much to the consternation of the deputy 

minister (Duane Adams)," he said. 

 

I can't think of any other complete condemnation of this 

government's actions than what we see in this article here. And 

for the Premier to stand in his place and say that he supports it, 

a total falsehood, Mr. Speaker, a complete misrepresentation of 

the truth, absolutely unfounded in this House before. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first paragraph of this motion I think has in 

fact become a manifesto for the NDP government, the single 

characterizing principle about what this government lawyer 

from Riversdale is all about. And we have to look back, Mr. 

Speaker, about what other members have said about closure in 

the past. 

 

And I wish the members opposite would take the opportunity 

to stand in their place and tell us about what they think about 

closure today. What do you really believe about closure? Do 

you believe that what you're doing is correct? Do you honestly 

believe that you're doing the right thing? Well the people of 

Saskatchewan I don't believe would agree with you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the member from 

Humboldt just of a few words that he said in this Assembly, 

and I quote: Mr. Speaker, we are in this debate because the 

government is drunk with power. That's what he said. He went 

on to absolutely condemn a government for bringing in closure. 

And what is he doing and what is he supporting today? He's 

exactly supporting that very same thing. That was the member 

from Humboldt that said those kinds of things, Mr. Speaker. He 

didn't care then; I don't believe he cares now. 



April 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 929 

The member from Humboldt went on and on and on about how 

outrageous it was for a government to bring in closure, and that 

was after 70 hours of debate, Mr. Speaker — 70 hours of 

debate. We've had an opportunity to debate this Bill only five 

hours — the actual Bill No. 3, five hours, three speakers. That's 

it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think that by the member from Humboldt's own 

assessment, the logic of this continued use of closure is 

undermining the institution of this Legislative Assembly. 

They're repeatedly using closure because they don't believe the 

people no longer care. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think they're wrong. I think the people of 

Saskatchewan do care. I think they care about this institution. I 

think most members here care about this institution, and yet 

they are being led down the garden path by a government that 

seems bent on destroying the rules of this legislature, changing 

them at whim to suit their purposes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it's hard as members of the opposition to be able to fight 

this government when we see these kinds of things. But you 

can be assured, Mr. Speaker, that we will not sit and just take 

this kind of action. The people of Saskatchewan already . . . I 

talked to the economic development officer yesterday in 

Kindersley, and he suggests to me that the people on the west 

side of the province are at the point now where they want to 

have a mass rally in front of this legislature. He believes that 

there are enough people in this province that want to come and 

stand in front of this legislature and demand that the Premier 

talk to them. If he won't come out to their area, they probably 

will have to come down and visit him themselves. 

 

They're in a position now, Mr. Speaker, where they believe 

there would be all kinds of people that would want the 

opportunity to talk to the Premier about this. And I say that 

public consultations must take place, absolutely must take 

place, before this Bill proceeds any further, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one of the more . . . One of the other members that spoke 

about closure in the past, Mr. Speaker, is the member from 

Regina Churchill Downs. He has a contribution to make to this 

debate, and I'll just lend him a hand in making that 

contribution. And he said, and I quote from Hansard: 

 

 

. . . I sincerely hope it'll be the last time closure is ever 

invoked in this province. 

 

Now that's relevant to the debate, Mr. Speaker. He sincerely 

hopes it will be the last time closure is ever invoked in this 

House. But what is his government doing today? What is his 

government doing today? And where is that member when it 

comes time to vote on this? Where will he be? 

 

In fact he was the one that introduced the closure motion. He 

sincerely hopes that it would never be used, but he's the one 

that stands in his place on behalf of the government members 

and makes the motion, even though in the past he said he hopes 

that 

it never has to be done again. Hard to believe. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say a whole bunch of things about 

closure. He wanted closure to never be used again. And yet he 

is standing there with the member from Riversdale, shutting 

down dissent, shutting down debate, his own little verbal 

Tiananmen Square, killing debate. That must be profoundly an 

unhappy experience for him, and I await his expression of 

dissatisfaction. 

 

(1115) 

 

Because you know, Mr. Speaker, he is also very cynical about 

the whole thing, very cynical indeed. We are approaching 

summer, Mr. Speaker, and in face of this NDP motion to close 

all debate in this Assembly, one of the most fundamental 

elements of what I would call the social contract of 

Saskatchewan people in the province . . . But indeed we face 

the approach of summer, and what does the member from 

Churchill Downs have to say about governments who impose 

closure with the approach of summer? Well let me quote him 

further, Mr. Speaker, we'll just continue on with what he said: 

 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is undoubtedly another factor — I wished it 

were not so — undoubtedly another factor is simply the 

desire of members opposite to enjoy their summer. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't think that that's the case. 

 

So we've had a sad admission that the NDP thinking process, 

when it comes to closure, includes considering how it might 

affect their summer vacations. And isn't it an interesting 

coincidence, Mr. Speaker, that the last time this NDP 

government used closure, it was also in the midst of the 

summertime. People want this debated, but they have to invoke 

closure so they can get away on their holidays. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one denies these New Democrats their summer 

vacations. They'll get it before very long. They know they're 

going to get their way in the legislature at some point. But I 

think the point has to remain that people all over this province 

want an opportunity to debate this legislation. They want an 

opportunity for there to be public consultation. 

 

They want an opportunity to try and help this government 

improve on this legislation. They don't want to destroy 

medicare. What kind of ridiculous talk is that, that the Premier 

constantly has to use when he gets into the most heated type of 

debate that he frequently finds himself in. Why does he want to 

lower the debating skills that he has to that level, where he says 

people want to destroy medicare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the previous administration built hospitals around 

this province, provided increases in budgets to health care in 

this province. I think that's a clear testimony to the fact they are 

supportive of medicare in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Open hospitals all over the place, Mr. Speaker, 



930 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1993 

allowed for access to acute care beds, long-term beds, all over 

this province. Is that not a testimony to the support that the 

Progressive Conservative Party has to medicare in this 

province? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, and yet the Premier likes to say that 

everyone but himself is going to uphold the principles of 

medicare. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that he is the one that's 

out of step. I think that he is the one that's in danger of closing 

down a large part of the rural hospitals in this province. 

 

I think the people of rural Saskatchewan and indeed the people 

of the medium-sized cities in this province are beginning to 

realize that that isn't the case any longer. He is no longer the 

great defender of medicare that he likes to stand in this 

legislature and harangue on about. He's no longer that man that 

is going to be the principled one, that's going to stand in the 

defence of everything that was set forward in medicare from 

the start of medicare to the present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from Churchill Downs goes on to say further 

about closure motions: right now this motion would kill debate 

just as people are gathering the resources to oppose this 

government. 

 

Well isn't that ironic, Mr. Speaker. This motion would kill 

debate just as people are gathering the resources to oppose this 

government. How those words must come back to haunt him 

today. Because that exactly is what is happening today when it 

comes to health care reform. 

 

All over this province people are gathering their resources right 

now, right as we speak, to oppose this government's destructive 

health care reform package that they are laying out. That's what 

they're doing, Mr. Speaker. People all over this province are 

gathering their resources today to oppose this government. 

 

They are stirring . . . Here's the words once again of the 

member from Churchill Downs: they are stirring in community 

after community and they are preparing themselves to do battle 

with this government. Exactly, I say, Mr. Speaker, exactly what 

is taking place in Saskatchewan today. 

 

Public meetings are being organized as we speak, all over this 

province. There is one that the member from Morse attended 

last night in Wapella. There's one being proposed, a possible 

date of the 13th in Kindersley, or the 19th. They haven't 

completely fixed it. They may be . . . And I talked to the 

economic development officer last night. I talked to the mayor 

and economic development officer last night. 

 

And they had originally scheduled it for the 19th. They had 

originally scheduled it for the April 19, Mr. Speaker. But now, 

in light of the fact that the government is bringing forward 

closure, they are giving absolute serious consideration, serious 

consideration to moving that timetable up to the 13th, hoping, 

hoping that a large-scale rally would convince this government 

of the need to step back and review this, step back and take the 

opportunity to 

provide for public consultation with the minister and with the 

Premier himself at those meetings. 

 

And the member from Churchill Downs went on to say: they 

cry out to be heard and they demand to be heard. And day after 

day after day the Minister of Health and her Premier deny the 

people of Saskatchewan. They reject the people and refuse to 

hear their cries. And instead they have turned the civil service 

of this province into a political armed force to sweep across the 

province in a blitzkrieg taking on community after community. 

 

But the people who have responsibility, the people in whom the 

electors have placed their trust, these NDP ministers and their 

Premier, they hide behind this motion of closure. And once 

again, how does the member from Churchill Downs feel about 

that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Well we'll just bring forward a little bit more of his public 

record of 1989, Mr. Speaker, from Hansard. He said, and I 

quote: 

 

 

They don't want to be here, Mr. Speaker, because they don't 

want to face the music. They don't want to admit and they 

don't want to be reminded that the public doesn't want this. 

They are acting contrary to public opinion and they are being 

arrogant, insensitive, and undemocratic. 

 

That's what he said at that time, Mr. Speaker. And you were in 

the House at that time; you probably remember that. He said 

that in 1989, the member from Churchill Downs. 

 

And is it not one of the most accurate characterizations of the 

NDP leader and his Minister of Health that you've ever heard, 

Mr. Speaker? I think it is the most telling story of what the 

member from . . . the Premier and the Minister of Health are 

doing in this province. The NDP leader, who the people called 

the man in the bubble, the bubble boy does not want to face the 

music so he brings in closure. The Minister of Health does not 

want to admit and does not want to be reminded that the public 

does not support her unfair, ill-conceived and costly shotgun 

approach so she brings in closure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the public support for this motion, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

point out to the media, one very bizarre set of statistics that the 

NDP government wants the people of Saskatchewan to believe. 

I'm of course referring to the opinion polls released recently by 

the minister responsible for politics, the Provincial Secretary. 

In those polls they say that 52 per cent of the people support 

closing rural hospitals if it saves money. And at the same time 

they say 60 per cent oppose closing hospitals in Regina and 

Saskatoon even if it does save money. 

 

That seems like some kind of careful manipulation that the 

government has been able to do with the numbers, Mr. 

Speaker. On one hand, 52 per cent of the people say that they're 

in favour of closing rural 



April 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 931 

hospitals if it saves money, but yet those same people, when 

they are asked about saving money in Regina and Saskatoon 

hospitals, they say no, 60 per cent are opposed to that. 

 

If you look at the structure of their sample, even though their 

rhetoric implies that there is a balance in the rural as compared 

to the urban, you find that for the particular set of questions, 

their definition of rural is everything outside of Regina and 

Saskatoon. Well I would remind the government, Mr. Speaker, 

that everything outside of Saskatoon and Regina is not rural. 

The city of Moose Jaw, the city of Prince Albert, the city of 

North Battleford and others, Mr. Speaker — I don't believe 

they consider themselves rural. I think they consider 

themselves cities equal to Saskatoon and Regina. 

 

So what you have is a polling question skewed with the 

responses from Regina and Saskatoon. The people of Regina 

and Saskatoon, according to the NDP government, are happy to 

see rural hospital closures so long as their hospitals are not 

closed. 

 

Well first off, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe the results of that 

poll. And I don't think anyone in Saskatchewan would believe 

those results of that poll. I don't believe the people of 

Saskatoon and Regina want to see rural hospitals close. I don't 

believe that they think that there's wasteful amounts of money 

being spent in rural Saskatchewan on health care. 

 

I don't believe the people of Regina and Saskatoon are that 

unfair or that callous, and that this government should be 

absolutely ashamed that it is even asking questions structured 

in such a way as to try and pit urban people against rural 

people. 

 

That's what's happening, Mr. Speaker. They're trying to pit the 

rural against the urban with respect to health care. This is 

simply a continuation of an absolutely despicable campaign of 

a rural-urban split that the NDP, and in particular the member 

from Riversdale, mounted in the past five years. It worked so 

well for them in opposition, they tried to use the same 

disgusting tactic when they are now in government. They try to 

use the same disgusting tactic to justify their unsavoury 

motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some days you have to wonder what these people 

across the way are made of. I say to you that even the fact that 

they would structure this survey in such a way is so deeply 

shameful that resignation should be demanded and delivered 

without delay. 

 

The Premier will claim it wasn't him. So find out who it was 

and fire those people from government. That's what should 

happen, Mr. Speaker. Because all kinds of support for this 

motion just is not there. There isn't support for a closure motion 

in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. And I dare say in all of 

Saskatchewan there isn't support for this motion. 

 

This government has got to face the music and address the 

issues that are before them, Mr. Speaker. The NDP leader has 

to quit being so obsessed with his own 

political agenda, with his own political hide, and to start being 

concerned about the future and well-being of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Even the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, even the Minister of 

Health had some direct observations about closure in 1989. She 

said the use of closure was a symptom of a government 

obsessed with its own political agenda. 

 

Just let me quote a few passages from Hansard from the 

member from Regina Hillsdale: 

 

 

This debate, Mr. Speaker, is about a government with its own 

agenda, an agenda that is not in the best interest of the people 

and that is not good for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

That's what she said at that time, Mr. Speaker. That was from 

August of 1989. And the Minister of Health would do well to 

go back and look at her own words. 

 

She is proving by this motion that she does not care what the 

people of Saskatchewan think; that she is not concerned for the 

best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. She is only 

interested in trying to prepare the way for a smooth political 

situation two years from now when she has to face the music 

whether she likes it or not. 

 

And that is what this motion is all about, Mr. Speaker. The 

NDP leader has figured out if she can inflict enough pain now, 

close down the greater part of rural Saskatchewan now, that she 

. . . that he can build for himself some room to make some 

fancy footwork two years from now and make the case: see 

how I've taken out the pain in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

But the fact is, the people will not forget where the pain came 

from, Mr. Speaker. As desperately as the Premier wants to keep 

people under a delusion that the pain is all on the shoulders of 

others, the people very bluntly . . . the people are not stupid, 

Mr. Speaker. The people of this province will not go along with 

this. I predict the people of this province are going to rally up 

in opposition to this, just as they're doing right now, all over 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And this motion, no matter if it succeeds in shutting down the 

opposition and allowing the imposition of the vile health policy 

on this government and on the people of Saskatchewan, no 

matter, Mr. Speaker, the people will remember. 

 

(1130) 

 

The people of this province won't forget this, Mr. Speaker. 

When you go to the public meetings — and I've attended some 

of them around the province, Mr. Speaker — the people of this 

province, the people of this province now believe that this 

government is abandoning them. Absolutely abandoning them, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The people of this province, when you see the concern on their 

faces at these public meetings, when 



932 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1993 

you see them stand and go before a mike and talk to the people 

of their community, they say to them, they're concerned that 

they may lose their rural hospital. They're concerned what may 

happen to their family if they're the victims of an accident, 

what may happen to them if they are a heart attack victim or 

something like that. They're concerned about the employment 

opportunities in their town. They're concerned that those kinds 

of things will be swept away right before their very eyes by this 

government. 

 

And it's interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, when long-time NDP 

supporters stand before a large crowd of people and condemn 

this government. It must be a scary thought for the government 

when that kind of thing is happening. That the people who have 

supported them for years and years, and decades in some cases, 

stand up at the mike and say that this government must be 

stopped. Is it any wonder, is it any wonder that the opposition 

takes up their cause when they see such heartfelt concern for 

their hospital or the people in their province? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion, no matter if it succeeds in shutting 

down the opposition in allowing the imposition of this health 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province will remember 

these actions. They will remember that this government, the 

Minister of Health, and the NDP leader did not have the 

courage to face the opposition, to hear debate, to take into 

account legitimate criticism. 

 

And I think that's what we're doing, Mr. Speaker. I think it is 

very legitimate, the type of criticism that is being brought 

forward with respect to this legislation. It's not an attempt, as 

the Premier likes to say, to destroy medicare. No one, no one 

on this side of the House is in favour of the destruction of 

medicare. And yet the Premier continues along that train of 

thought, Mr. Speaker. But that isn't the case. 

 

The people in the opposition party believes that medicare has 

to be preserved and we are fighting to preserve that, Mr. 

Speaker, in rural Saskatchewan. We're fighting to preserve that 

medicare system that has served the residents of Saskatchewan 

as a whole and rural Saskatchewan in particular. It's served 

them very well over the last decades that it's been in place, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the people in rural Saskatchewan, they understand what 

these changes . . . the impact that these changes will have on 

their communities. It puts at risk their whole community. And 

they realize that. When the hospital goes, just as sure as I'm 

standing here, the jobs go along with it that are at those 

hospitals. The health care goes along with it. The long-term 

beds go along with it. The jobs in health care that are 

associated with long-term and acute care go along with it. 

 

And then it starts to put in jeopardy other things, Mr. Speaker. 

It starts to put in jeopardy the education system in those small 

towns, because those people are forced, those people are forced 

to leave, Mr. Speaker. Those people that formerly worked in 

those medical 

institutions and hospitals around rural Saskatchewan are forced 

to leave. And then, as I say, it puts into jeopardy the school in 

those small towns. 

 

And once that happens, Mr. Speaker, all kinds of businesses 

start to be put in jeopardy. And anyone that's ever had anything 

to do with business in rural communities understands the 

serious impact that it is when just one family moves away — 

just one family stops buying groceries, for example, in a 

small-town grocery store — significant impact that it has. 

 

So you go around and around and around, and the economy 

just continues spiralling down. As you take away job after job 

after job, business after business after business, just continues 

the system of spiralling down to the point where that 

community, there's nothing left. And the people of rural 

Saskatchewan know all too well what that's about, Mr. 

Speaker. They've seen all too well community after community 

after community close up before their very eyes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it's not just the small communities that's 

being affected by this. Just take the opportunity — and I 

challenge members opposite to take the opportunity — to drive 

in downtown Swift Current these days. The downtown of Swift 

Current is literally being boarded up before our eyes. And it's a 

shameful thing, Mr. Speaker, that a government cannot 

recognize what their policies are doing to that city. And they 

have a member from that city, and it just astounds me that that 

member will not stand in defence of his community. Where is 

he in this legislature? Where is he when he's sitting at the 

cabinet table when it comes time to defend his city, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

The people in that community are beginning to realize what 

kind of impact these changes will have on them. They're 

beginning to realize what the closure of a hospital means, Mr. 

Speaker. And it's little wonder. It's little wonder that people 

who are on the planning committee, like Mr. Don Whiteman 

from Swift Current, are resigning from the planning committee. 

It's little wonder that he says: 

 

 

In fact, as things progressed, it became apparent "we were 

being (used as) a buffer for the government, and if things 

(went) wrong . . . the fault could be laid at the feet of the 

committee," . . . 

 

It's little wonder that he doesn't want to be the fall guy for this 

government, Mr. Speaker, because he recognizes, he 

recognizes the importance of health care in rural Saskatchewan 

and in small cities in Saskatchewan. He recognizes the 

importance of health care for the people of Swift Current, the 

community that he represents, Mr. Speaker. He recognizes that 

this government is setting forward a destructive policy that will 

have a significant impact upon his community. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Tory scare tactics. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — And the member keeps chirping from his 



April 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 933 

seat, Mr. Speaker, Tory scare tactics. No one is scaring anyone, 

no one is scaring anyone in this province except the Premier 

and the Minister of Health. That's who's scaring people. That's 

why everyone in this province is raising up and is concerned 

about health care reform. 

 

Join us, they say. Well we are not going to be a part, we are not 

going to be a part of closing rural hospitals. Not going to take 

any part in that at all. We're going to defend them till the end, 

Mr. Speaker. We're going to defend those rural hospitals as 

long as we have breath to speak in this legislature or at public 

meetings, Mr. Speaker. We are going to defend those rural 

hospitals in rural Saskatchewan. We're going to defend small 

hospitals in cities, in towns, villages, all over this province. 

 

And I have to think back about the pleasure that it was to help 

open one hospital. And since I was elected as member for 

Kindersley I've had the pleasure of participating in one hospital 

opening. And it was quite an event that day, Mr. Speaker, quite 

an event. 

 

And the people turned out en masse to the hospital opening in 

Eatonia. And again, Mr. Speaker, just a couple of weeks ago 

they turned out en masse once again, but it was for an entirely 

different reason. They were trying to save their hospital on that 

occasion. 

 

The paint's hardly dry on the building, Mr. Speaker, and this 

government already wants to close it for them. And it's 

interesting because you go out there, it's an absolute beautiful 

facility. Not a large, huge, urban type hospital or anything like 

that. This is a small, little rural hospital. I think it has five or 

six, I believe it is acute care beds and a number — I think it's 

10, maybe 12 long-term beds, something in that order. And it's 

full. Integrated type facility. And it's full. The people there 

utilized it to such a degree that it's full right now and there's a 

waiting-list for those long-term beds, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And further to that, Mr. Speaker, the people of that community 

recognized how important it was for them to have health care 

services, how critically important it was for them to have health 

care services in that area. So you know what they did, Mr. 

Speaker, prior to the construction of that hospital? They raised 

in excess of $1 million from the local tax base around there to 

help with the construction of that hospital. They raised that 

money in a time when that community probably can least 

afford it. 

 

Over the past 10 years that community has only seen, in my 

estimation, two crops, two harvests that would be considered to 

be good. The other eight harvests in that community and 

surrounding area were disastrous. I had the opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, prior to the election to tour that area with I believe it 

was four or five reeves. The member from Estevan, I believe 

the member from Morse was there that day. We toured all 

around that area. And the drought, you wouldn't believe the 

drought, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If you've never been in an area that's totally 

devastated by drought, you can't hardly understand the level of 

devastation that there is and the feeling of hopelessness that 

people have when it comes to that type of thing, Mr. Speaker. 

And they have kind of a dark sense of humour as a result of 

those kinds of things. And I remember one rancher telling me 

that it was so dry in his area, he said, so dry in my area, Mr. 

Speaker, you couldn't roll a cigarette off a quarter section. 

 

That's the type of dark humour that comes forward from that 

type of experience, Mr. Speaker. You couldn't roll a cigarette 

off a quarter section. Well, Mr. Speaker, that's pretty dry. And 

there's no question that the people of that area, they look at it 

and the only thing that they have left is to come forward with 

those kinds of dark type of humour and jokes, Mr. Speaker, 

because that's all they have left when you have that type of 

thing impact on you. 

 

And I remember as well that day we talked to the reeve — 

Adam Ehresman is his name — the reeve of the municipality of 

. . . oh it just escapes me, the municipality of Newcombe, the 

RM (rural municipality) of Newcombe. He was the reeve of 

that municipality, Mr. Speaker, has been the reeve for quite 

some time — I don't know how many years, as long as I can 

remember. Tremendously well-respected man, that's why he is 

the reeve; tremendously good farmer and that's why, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of his area have such profound respect for 

that man. 

 

He showed me, that day, his crop insurance records. He had 

them backed up for . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Very interesting story, but I do want to 

remind the member that he is on a motion that has nothing to 

do with drought and the other things that he has mentioned. I 

do want him to relate that to the motion that is before us. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well if I could be 

permitted to at least finish the little anecdote that I'm about to 

relate to you, I would ask that I could do that. It's just a short 

little while to the conclusion of that story. 

 

Anyway he brought out his crop insurance records that day, 

Mr. Speaker, and as I said, he's one of the best farmers in the 

area and I don't think there's any dispute about that. He showed 

us his records and what they indicated. Prior to 1982 he had a 

crop insurance yield history of 125 per cent of the area average 

which is the highest you can get under crop insurance 

regulations. And after seven years of consecutive claims, seven 

years of consecutive droughts, his coverage had been reduced 

to 70 per cent of the entire area. 

 

I think that illustrates, Mr. Speaker, how difficult a time that 

the people of that area have had and why, as I said earlier, it is 

so critically important to recognize the difficulties these people 

have had, and the difficulties that they had raising the money 

that it took to build a hospital in that area. Now he understands. 



934 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1993 

 He's nodding, and I appreciate that. Now he understands, Mr. 

Speaker, the importance of health care to those people. He 

didn't have five cents to rub together with another nickel, Mr. 

Speaker, to put into that hospital, but he dug down deep. He 

dug down deep to provide what he could for the support of that 

rural hospital. 

 

(1145) 

 

And his example isn't any different than a whole bunch of other 

people over there. As I said, he was one of the people that 

probably, in the early '80s, could best afford it. And then at the 

end of the decade, he was one of the people that could least 

afford it. And he was just an example, just an example of what 

everyone in that area was feeling. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that's not unusual for that area. We toured 

all over that vast area throughout there. And I recall the sod 

turning for that hospital was right around that same time. Can 

you imagine the type of feelings that those people must have 

had when they were turning the sod, turning the dry dirt, dry 

dirt for their hospital? 

 

And I'll never forget it, Mr. Speaker, when we would have the 

opening that it was quite a day last summer, just prior to . . . It 

was like the Lord himself decided he was going to bless that 

community. And there was a shower of rain. And the member 

from Biggar, well he can testify to this. He was there that day. 

There was a shower of rain just prior to the opening of that 

hospital that day. And it was a blessing to that community. Not 

only did it rain for one of the first times in a long time, it had 

. . . They were opening and cutting the ribbon for the hospital 

that day. And people sat there all day long — men, women, 

children. They closed the school. I told you that before. They 

closed the school; everyone was there. 

 

As it happens in rural Saskatchewan — we all know the 

traditions of rural Saskatchewan — the people of rural 

Saskatchewan all brought things like pies and cakes and 

refreshments for the afternoon, and there was a huge 

celebration. That's what happened that day, Mr. Speaker. There 

was huge celebration because . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

because, exactly, the community came together in a community 

effort and built that hospital. 

 

And you drive down the streets of that small community, 

Eatonia. You drive down the streets of that community and you 

see . . . It's not hard, Mr. Speaker, to pick out why that 

community is suffering the way it is. There just isn't any money 

around. There's building after building closed; home after home 

that's unpainted, even though people have tried their level best 

to keep up, tried their level best to provide for the area, provide 

for their children, Mr. Speaker. And yet now they're being told 

that this hospital that they have worked so hard for may have to 

close. 

 

And they don't understand, Mr. Speaker. They don't understand 

why they 

should work so hard, why they should work so hard to open 

that hospital, and at the stroke of a pen, on the whim of this 

government, on the whim of this government that it could be 

closed. They don't understand that. 

 

And that was clearly evident that night a few weeks ago in 

Eatonia, Mr. Speaker, when again the whole community turned 

out to the gymnasium in a local school and voiced their 

concerns. And it's hard to sit in an audience like that, Mr. 

Speaker, when people go forward to the microphone and can't 

speak because they're overcome with emotion. And that 

happened that night, Mr. Speaker. And I wish government 

members would have been there to witness that — the people, 

these great defenders of medicare. 

 

And I would ask the member from Indian Head sometime to 

come out to a meeting out in that area and you'd see. And I 

suspect he's witnessed that before in his community. It's a 

moving, moving type of thing, Mr. Speaker, for anyone there 

when long-term residents — or anyone, for that matter — 

stands up before a public gathering like that, before friends and 

neighbours, and can't speak because they're totally overcome 

with emotion. 

 

And I think it clearly illustrates to everyone the seriousness and 

the gravity of the situation, Mr. Speaker — the absolute critical 

importance that those people place on their hospital. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that same kind of concern was felt in Leader 

in another public meeting — same kind of concern. The people 

of that community . . . And I recall I went over to that meeting, 

Mr. Speaker, and that was right at the same time that that 

weather system was moving across Saskatchewan. It was a 

miserable night, to say the least. 

 

People travelled . . . I had to travel something in the order of 60 

miles from my home, and that wasn't unusual. There were 

people from a radius of about that distance that attended the 

meeting that night, and travelled gravel roads, and wondered, 

Mr. Speaker — and it's no exaggeration — I wondered that 

night whether I was going to be able to make it there to that 

meeting on time because the roads were in such terrible shape 

as a result of the storm system that was moving through at that 

time. Everyone wondered. 

 

But yet you'd think, Mr. Speaker, on a night like that people 

would say, I don't think I'm going to bother with this; I think I'll 

just stay home. But that isn't the case, Mr. Speaker. I think it 

illustrates how clearly important it is to the people of that area, 

how desperately important it was for them to come out to a 

meeting that evening and attend and voice their concerns. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the same thing happened there. There was 

something in excess of 500 people there at that meeting that 

night at the community hall in Leader. And what happened that 

night was interesting, Mr. Speaker. They had representatives of 

the various levels of health care there. They had someone 

representing long-term care. They had 



April 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 935 

someone representing acute care. They had someone 

representing the ambulance system, Mr. Speaker. They had 

someone representing home care and then they had the mayor 

of the community. And everyone had an opportunity, each of 

those people had an opportunity to give a brief outline — a 

brief, as I say, outline — of what they thought the impact 

would be on their community for these changes. 

 

And it's not me that said those things, Mr. Speaker, and it isn't 

me that organized that meeting. It isn't me that organized the 

meeting in Eatonia. It isn't me that organized the meeting in 

Brock. Just ask those people. They aren't going to give any 

credit to me for helping to put the crowd there because that 

simply isn't the truth, simply not the truth, Mr. Speaker. I had 

no part in the organization of those meetings that took place in 

those areas. Just phone the people out there and ask them if you 

don't believe me. 

 

I can give you the names: Marlyn Clary, the mayor of that 

community out there; Blair Eichorn, I believe his name is, is 

the other gentleman that organized the meeting. If anyone 

thinks for one moment, if anyone thinks for one moment that 

that gentleman is a strong Conservative supporter, well I would 

. . . you better talk to him because I don't think he is the 

strongest supporter that we've ever had the privilege of being a 

part of our party, Mr. Speaker. But I suspect he's beginning to 

second-guess his thoughts in the past, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ask the organizers, ask the organizers of the Eatonia meeting 

that night, Mr. Speaker. They were the administrator of the 

hospital, they were the mayor of the community, they were the 

chamber of commerce for that community. I had no part in it. 

Just phone them and ask them if you don't believe it. 

 

And the Premier and the House Leader were chirping from 

their seat, Mr. Speaker, after question period about the meeting 

in Brock, about how I had organized it and should be ashamed 

of the turnout for that evening. Well, Mr. Speaker, I invite you 

and other members of this legislature to phone the 

administrator of the town there. Ask, just ask her whether I had 

any part in that meeting. I'll tell you, she isn't one of my best 

supporters. She isn't a supporter of mine, I'll clearly indicate to 

you. She most certainly wouldn't want to give any credit to Bill 

Boyd, the member from Kindersley. She wouldn't want to give 

credit to the member from Kindersley; I'm sure she wouldn't. 

 

And I just forget the other gentleman's name that night. I 

believe he's on the chamber, the local chamber of commerce. I 

can't recall his name. He helped organize the meeting that 

night, Mr. Speaker. And I don't think that they will give credit 

to anyone but themselves for organizing that meeting. 

 

And the same thing, Mr. Speaker, is taking place in these other 

communities. The same thing is taking place in these other 

communities, Mr. Speaker. In my home town of Eston, my 

home town of Eston, I don't know who's organizing the 

meeting there. Honestly don't know who is organizing that 

meeting. I suspect 

the mayor and the town council and the economic development 

committee perhaps, or the chamber of commerce might be the 

ones that are organizing it. I don't know. It isn't in the 

advertisements that are being placed in the local newspapers 

there. 

 

It's being done because of the genuine concern that people 

have. I didn't take any time whatsoever to involve myself with 

organization of these meetings, Mr. Speaker, because I didn't 

need to because no one needed to drive this thing, Mr. Speaker. 

No one needed to try and initiate these meetings. They came 

forward as a result of the tremendous concern that the residents 

of that area have for their hospitals. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They want to see their budget. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — They want to see their budget — exactly. And 

it's interesting, Mr. Speaker, in the meeting in Brock that night. 

There was a hurried meeting earlier in that day in Kindersley 

where the representative of government, John Borody, I believe 

his name is, he convened this meeting earlier that day in 

Kindersley where they had the representatives of the planning 

committee there and all of the health boards. And he said what 

was supposed to happen in that meeting in the afternoon was 

that they were going to give them their budget. They're going 

to tell them what the budget was for those hospitals in that area. 

And apparently he didn't provide them with that information. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, at the public meeting that night someone 

asked, someone stood in their place — I don't know the 

gentleman's name even, Mr. Speaker — he stood in his place 

and he said, why wasn't the budget presented to the planning 

committee this afternoon? What was the hold-up here? And he 

got up, the government representative that day, John Borody, 

got up and went to the microphone and he said, because there 

was technical difficulties. 

 

Now I'm not sure what that means exactly, Mr. Speaker. What 

kind of interpretation would you place on technical difficulties? 

I'm not quite sure what that means. But I'll tell you, there was a 

lot of suspicious folks there that evening when he said that. 

There was a lot of suspicious people there that night, Mr. 

Speaker, because I think they knew what that meant. They 

knew that their hospital was being targeted. They knew that 

their hospital budget was being targeted, and they didn't want 

to release the budgets prior to that meeting, Mr. Speaker. I 

think that's the real reason the budgets weren't released. 

 

And the member from Kelsey-Tisdale winks, Mr. Speaker. He 

winks at me because he knows that that's the case all right. He 

knows. He knows; he knows that that's exactly why they 

weren't released, Mr. Speaker. He knows that the reason the 

budgets were not released was that that took place, Mr. 

Speaker. He knows that the budgets weren't released because 

they would have had hundreds of people at that meeting that 

evening. Because I'll tell you, in rural Saskatchewan the news 

travels fast; bad news like that travels fast, Mr. Speaker. They 

would've put together a 



936 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1993 

phone campaign that would've been unprecedented in that area 

if that budget had've been released that afternoon as was 

scheduled to be. 

 

But I guess the minister had technical difficulties. Does that 

mean that the typewriter or the computer that's printing out the 

information broke down? Is that the type of technical 

difficulties? Or does it mean that they forgot to bring them, 

they left them on their desk here in Regina, forgot to bring the 

budget along with them? Nobody believes it, Mr. Speaker. 

Nobody believes it. 

 

Kelsey-Tisdale over in the corner here, he knows. He knows 

exactly what that means. He's been around government, he's 

been around government long enough, long enough to know 

how these guys on the front bench operate. He knows that any 

sign of controversy has to be held back, has to be squashed, 

because they can't have people standing in these communities 

and asking why their hospital has to close, Mr. Speaker. Can't 

have it. 

 

Why, when they were promised that their budgets were going 

to be released, why did they decide all of a sudden to hold them 

back, Mr. Speaker? Because they knew that public meetings 

were being initiated all over this province, and they have to get 

this Bill through quick. They have to get this through fast, 

before the people of this province realize what's going on. 

 

(1200) 

 

And I think the member for Biggar realizes that that's the truth. 

He's nodding his head in compliance too. He realizes that's 

exactly what the truth is, Mr. Speaker. He realizes that the 

people of this province have been deceived by this government. 

 

Why? Can anyone give me a reason why they wouldn't release 

those budgets prior to those public meetings? I don't think 

anyone can. No explanation whatsoever, other than the vague 

term, technical reasons. That's the way that you address that 

question. Some vague notion that came forward that night to 

try and keep people from seeing the real reason for that hospital 

budget not being released. 

 

And they say . . . So the fellow asked him, he got on his feet 

again after he was given that, that story — I think is the only 

kind way you could put it — after he was given that story, he 

got to this feet and he said, Mr. Speaker, well when will they 

be released? And I . . . you know, what's wrong with asking 

that question? So once again, this representative of the 

government was forced to get to his feet and go to the 

microphone and he said, well he wasn't sure, but he thought 

maybe it would be about two weeks. He thought they'd be 

released in about two weeks. 

 

Well the technical reasons took quite . . . must be taking a quite 

a while to address, Mr. Speaker. Must be quite a problem that 

they have in the Department of Health right now with technical 

problems. I wonder what the technical problems are. I suspect 

the people 

of Eatonia, Kindersley, Dodsland, Eston are wondering what 

kind of serious technical problems they're having in that office 

today, Mr. Speaker, that is holding them back. 

 

When it came time to make the announcement of acute care 

bed levels in that area of rural Saskatchewan, they had no 

problem with technical difficulties. No problem whatsoever 

with technical difficulties. 

 

And it was interesting, another little anecdote, Mr. Speaker, 

from the meeting there. And the member from Saskatoon 

Broadway was there and she can testify to this. She was there; 

she saw it. In fact the story is, the story partly is something that 

happened that night. When a gentleman from the back — he's 

the reeve of one of the RMs around Coleville, I just forget 

which one he's the reeve of — he asked a question from the 

floor. He had seen a television program about, I think it was 

W5 he had seen a clip of that show, and they were talking 

about, Mr. Speaker, they were talking about air ambulance 

services in Alberta, helicopter air ambulance services. And 

they were saying that it's real efficient and fast and it's working 

quite well and they're going to be doing more of that air 

ambulance evacuations. And so he said he wondered whether 

the government in Saskatchewan was considering something 

similar to that because he saw the program and he understood it 

was working quite well. 

 

So he asked the question: is the government in Saskatchewan 

looking at something similar. And so I watched the Minister of 

Social Services and she sat there, nodding her head like this, 

motioning to John Borody at the front of the room, no question 

in anyone's mind what she was motioning. Yes is what she was 

saying indirectly to him. Yes, we're looking at that. Tell the 

people yes, we're looking at that. 

 

I don't know whether he didn't catch the signal or what 

happened, Mr. Speaker. The health care representative, John 

Borody, was standing on the stage at the front, and like I say I 

don't know whether he missed the signal that he was getting 

from the minister or what happened, but he got up to the mike 

and said no, we're not looking at that, it's too expensive. 

 

And because the gentleman asked the question and because he 

said he thought it was working quite well, he had understood it 

was working quite well in Alberta, that is why that minister I 

believe was nodding her head, because she knew that other 

people had seen that same show. She knew that other people 

believed that it might be an option for rural Saskatchewan. She 

knew it might be an option and that's why she was nodding her 

head. 

 

But unfortunately, as I said, unfortunately the government 

representative that was answering all the questions, he missed 

the signal, missed the cue. He didn't know that he was 

supposed to say yes. He didn't realize that the government was 

looking at it. This comes as a strange revelation to him that 

they're 



April 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 937 

looking at it. The minister indicated they were looking at it. But 

he sits, Mr. Speaker, in the Department of Health and he knows 

that they're not. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He's covering up the hide of his 

minister. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — He was covering up. That's right, Mr. Speaker. 

He knows that that is not taking place. He knows that that isn't 

taking place even though the minister would like everyone to 

believe it is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health care is extremely important to rural 

Saskatchewan and that's clear. People all over this province 

know that it's important. The member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg knows how important rural health care 

is. One has to wonder in his community, the community that he 

promised he would build a hospital if he was elected, one has 

to wonder: are those plans still on hold? 

 

Do you remember the Assiniboia-Gravelbourg by-election, Mr. 

Speaker, when the NDP ran all over down in that area and said 

the Tories are going to close hospitals, and the reaction? Do 

you remember that, Mr. Member? I'm sure you vividly 

remember it because you were right in the middle of it all at the 

time. I'm sure he remembers the concern that there is when you 

talk about rural hospitals and how effective your scare 

campaign was at that time to scare people into believing that 

the Conservatives would close hospitals. 

 

Well it's no longer a scare campaign. It's reality. It's a reality 

now, Mr. Speaker. It's what's going to happen if you guys get 

your way. It's going to happen. 

 

And the member from Regina Rosemont nods his head in 

agreeance. He knows that that's going to happen. How many 

hospitals are going to close, I ask that member. Is it 41? How 

many? More than that? Bigger number than that? Yes, he 

motions, bigger than that. One wonders how many . . . how big 

a thirst he has for hospitals, for destroying them. 

 

And the member from Kelsey-Tisdale, he chirps from his seat. 

He does that constantly in the background here, Mr. Speaker. I 

don't know whether you can hear him because I'm in between 

you and him. But he constantly chirps from the background 

that it's scare tactics again. Seems to me the only two words he 

knows — scare tactics, scare tactics, scare tactics, he keeps 

saying from his seat. 

 

But the reality is, how many beds in Kelsey-Tisdale . . . I think 

I'll take it upon myself over the course . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. What's the member's point of order? 

Order. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I think we've 

had previous rulings in this House on two points that I'd like to 

ask you to rule on. One is the phrase "chirps from his seat" 

which I think has been previously ruled as not language 

appropriate to the conduct of sensible debate in the Chamber. 

And 

secondly, Mr. Speaker, it has been a long-standing rule of the 

Assembly that it is not acceptable for members to refer to either 

the presence or the absence of other members in the House. 

 

The intention of both of those rules, Mr. Speaker, is to try to 

raise the level of debate to a debate of ideas, objectives, and to 

reduce as much as possible the personalization of debate which 

serves no one particularly well, Mr. Speaker. I would simply 

ask you to rule and to advise appropriately. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it would 

seem to me that certainly there will be ample time for all 

members to enter the debate. And when a member is on his 

feet, and I think as the Speaker has ruled time and time again, 

when a member is on his feet, that the member does have the 

floor. 

 

But certainly just to acknowledge some of the comments and to 

bring forward the debate, add to the debate, I don't think it 

takes away nor does it deter from the debate, and I would 

suggest that the point of order is not well taken. 

 

The Speaker: — Just to make a comment on this. I think 

Speakers have asked members not to refer to other members, 

whether they are chirping from their desks or not, but if the 

Speaker were to interrupt on those occasions, the Speaker 

would be on his feet a lot of times. 

 

But having said that, I would ask members, as I've done on a 

number of occasions, to please direct their comments through 

the Chair, not at other members in the House. And by making 

comments — whether another member is actually making a 

motion by signalling with his or her head and whether they are 

or are not — by referring to that member, you are actually 

referring to the presence or absence of that member. And that 

really clearly is out of order. 

 

And I would ask the member to try and refrain from that as 

much as possible and to direct his words and his presentations 

through the Chair. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate your 

advice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that on this side of the House we'd like to 

at some point take the opportunity, and I think that will be . . . 

It just occurred to me it might be a useful exercise if on this 

side of the House we examined the impact of these changes in 

various constituencies around the province. 

 

And I think of Kelsey-Tisdale and I think of Shaunavon and I 

think of some of the other constituencies in this province. And 

I think Assiniboia-Gravelbourg would be another good one. I 

think those ones would be excellent ones to take as examples 

and maybe do an exercise on the whole . . . Maybe the whole 

province wouldn't be a bad exercise to do, Mr. Speaker, and see 

what kind of impact these changes are going to have on some 

of those constituencies. 



938 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1993 

How many beds will be shut down in the Kelsey-Tisdale 

constituency? How many beds will be shut down in 

Shaunavon? How many beds will be shut down in the 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg constituency as a result of these 

changes? 

 

Is there some kind . . . I wonder, Mr. Speaker . . . The member 

from Souris-Cannington, he says, lots. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, 

is there some kind of a sliding scale in this thing? Is there 

something we're not aware of in all of this? Or is this being 

done the same all across the province? Or is there being some 

targets, areas that are being directed at, Mr. Speaker? 

 

In my area, it represents a 65 per cent reduction. Now I 

wonder, is that the same in the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg's constituency? Or is it the same in the 

member from Kelsey-Tisdale? Is that the same number of bed 

closures in his area, in those areas, Mr. Speaker — Shaunavon 

— or will it be less? Or will it be more, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Scare tactics, we constantly are hearing, Mr. Speaker. It's not a 

scare tactic. If we move in the Kindersley larger area there 

that's being proposed — Eston, Kindersley, Eatonia, Kerrobert, 

Dodsland; five hospitals — currently have, Mr. Speaker, they 

currently have something in the order of 90 acute care beds. 

 

And they're going to be reduced. They're going to be reduced to 

somewhere — if you use the funding formula that's being 

talked about, or acute care bed level formula that's being talked 

about of 1.1 to 1.5 beds per thousand — it'll be somewhere in 

the range of 17 to 25, which represents 65 or more per cent of 

those beds will be closed. 

 

And it's interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that those beds are 

currently being used. So one has to wonder, where are those 

people that are laying in those beds going to go? Where are the 

people that are sick and in need of medical attention and are 

laying in those beds, where are they going to go? No one has 

answered that question in this legislature. Where are those 

people going to get the medical services that they are going to 

need? 

 

Does the member from Kelsey-Tisdale know? Does the 

member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg know? Does the 

member from Shaunavon know where these beds are going to 

be made up from? Where they're going . . . Are these people 

going to be asked to go into Saskatoon or Regina for medical 

attention? That's the question that's on everyone's mind out 

there. 

 

And the same thing, the same thing exists with long-term beds 

in that area, Mr. Speaker. In my home community of Eston, I 

believe it's 35 long-term beds that there are at the Jubilee 

Lodge it's called, senior citizens home. I have an uncle that 

lives in that home, Mr. Speaker. He's in level 3 care right now, 

Mr. Speaker. He's lived there for a number of years. 

 

And I talked to the staff. I talked to the staff of that facility, Mr. 

Speaker, just a few short days ago. And I 

asked some of the people there, I asked the director of nursing 

for that facility if their beds are cut back from 35 down to, I 

believe it's going to be 24 — 11-bed decrease in that facility 

alone — if they have done any evaluation of the patients . . . of 

the people that are in that facility right now, of people that 

could be taken out of that facility and put into home care as 

been suggested. 

 

(1215) 

 

And her name is Diane Palmer. She lives at Eatonia, commutes 

to Eston. I'll give you her phone number, if you like. You could 

call her yourselves. Members, if you wanted to talk to me 

afterwards, can check with her. I called her and asked her that 

simple question. And she said, we've done an evaluation of all 

of the 35 people in this facility. The nursing staff and the 

administrative staff have done an assessment of all of those 35 

people, and they don't believe that there is one. They don't 

believe, in their opinion, that there is one person in that facility 

currently that could live under home care. 

 

And the reason is simple, Mr. Speaker — because a lot of those 

people have been long-term residents; they don't have a home 

to go to any longer. They've long since disposed of that type of 

possession that they had. They've sold their home because they 

wanted to retire and move into a facility that they were going to 

get care for in. 

 

And so I guess it begs the question: where are you going to put 

those 11 people that are being asked to move out of that 

hospital . . . or out of that long-term facility, pardon me. Where 

are they going to put them, Mr. Speaker? These are people who 

need level 3 and level 4 care. 

 

And I ask the member from Indian Head, does he have any 

ideas about where they're going to put them? Mr. Speaker, I 

don't know. I don't think he does have any ideas about where 

those people are going to go and neither does anyone else. 

They don't have a home to return to. In a lot of cases they don't 

have family that they could move back in with because their 

families aren't there. They aren't there any longer, Mr. Speaker. 

They're in other areas; they've moved on to other pursuits. 

Their farms have been sold or gone broke because of things 

like the changes in the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) program. They've left. They have no families to 

return to. And even if they did, Mr. Speaker, I suspect those 

people may not want to live with their families and impose on 

them. I don't think they would, Mr. Speaker. They're used to 

making their way in life, and they don't want to do that any 

longer. When they're 80-some years old or whatever and lived 

all of their lives by themselves with their spouse, they don't 

want to return to be a burden to their family. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that question came up at the meeting in 

Brock. There was a pastor there from Kindersley had taken the 

time to drive out to the meeting in Brock. I forget his name 

now, but he's a pastor from Kindersley. And he asked that 

question, 



April 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 939 

where are you going to put these people? And he got up and 

said he didn't . . . John Borody, the wizard for the Department 

of Health that was there that evening, that was going to answer 

all the questions, he simply asked the question of him, where 

are these people going to go? And he said he didn't know. He 

didn't know where they were going to go. 

 

So then he was asked, is there going to be adequate home care 

services? Can home care pick up the slack quick enough to 

address the situation that these people are in? And he said no; 

no, home care can't pick up the slack quick enough. 

 

But the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that what we are 

debating in this legislature is closure, but it's closure as a result 

of this Bill that's being brought forward. And so, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that people want to hear about this Bill. They want it 

debated in this legislature. They don't want closure to be put on 

this, Mr. Speaker. They don't want this debate to be restricted 

to, as the motion says, I believe it's two days. They don't want 

that. 

 

And that's why communities are holding these types of 

meetings around. And I invite the member from Moose Jaw to 

come to one. I invite you to come to my constituency and hear 

what the people are saying. Take the time to come out to 

Kindersley on the 13th or the 19th — I'm not sure of the 

schedule on that one. For sure the one in Eston is on the 15th. 

And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe the Minister of 

Health has already committed herself to that one. So it wouldn't 

be any inconvenience for you. You could ride out there with 

her. Just take the time. Just take . . . pardon me? 

 

An Hon. Member: — He was there two days ago. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Just there two days ago? In Eston? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Kindersley. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Were you at a health care . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Constituency executive meeting. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Constituency executive meeting. Yes, right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, interesting to note the other night in Kindersley 

there was a health care meeting, and I don't think he was there, 

to tell you the truth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Kindersley Inn. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Kindersley Inn. Well he may have been then. 

Kindersley Inn had a health care meeting and the people that 

came out of that meeting afterwards, and one of the ladies that 

came out, I had the opportunity to speak with her after the 

meeting, Mr. Speaker, and no budget had been released, Mr. 

Speaker. And they were wondering what was going on. 

Well here's an interesting piece of information that's been 

passed to me. We were saying . . . and this just goes to show 

you how efficient the staff of our caucus is. They've already 

been able to come up with some numbers for the 

Kelsey-Tisdale constituency, already came up with some 

numbers for Kelsey-Tisdale constituency about the hospital 

beds in that constituency. And here they are, Mr. Speaker. 

There are 7,500 people in that constituency, voters. Tisdale has 

68 beds. Tisdale has 68 beds, Mr. Speaker; Hudson Bay has 20 

and Porcupine Plain has 20, for a total of 108. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the changes in that area — 

and maybe the member would take the time to confirm this for 

everybody — it's 108 beds. And if I'm wrong on that figure, 

well maybe you could enlighten us a little bit when you get the 

opportunity; 108 beds is my information here anyway. 

 

And if they change the acute care bed levels to what's being 

talked about, in that area they'll have 11, be reduced to 11 — 

108 to 11. That's health care. That's NDP-style health care. 

 

Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. Just one example of what we see 

so far from one of the NDP constituencies of Kelsey-Tisdale. 

 

I wonder if the people of that constituency feel 11 beds is 

adequate. In Tisdale alone . . . and I've been to Tisdale I think 

once or twice. And it's a nice community, no question about it. 

Beautiful community up in the parkland — beautiful 

community. Should be a pleasure to live up in that community. 

Well is 11 beds going to be adequate? Is 11 beds going to be 

adequate for that entire region? 

 

Tisdale alone has 68 beds. Tisdale alone has 68 acute care beds 

in their hospital right now. And they're going to be reduced, 

they're going to be reduced from 68 in Tisdale, 20 in Hudson 

Bay, and 20 in Porcupine Plain, for a total of 108; they're going 

to be reduced to 11 — 11 acute care beds. 

 

And that's just an example, Mr. Speaker, of the kind of change 

that this health Bill will mean to the residents of this province. 

That's just an example of one other constituency. And I think 

we're going to take the time in a whole lot of other hospitals 

around this province, to investigate the bed levels and what is 

being proposed for their area. 

 

And the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, he could 

probably do the exercise for us right in this very legislature, 

because he's a doctor and he works in that area. I'll bet he 

knows right at the touch of his fingers, what the changes would 

mean to his area. And I challenge him to tell us what those 

changes will mean. 

 

Because we're going to investigate, we're going to investigate 

his constituency to find out what the bed levels are in that area. 

We'll do a little research and find out what the bed levels 

currently are in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and who really is the 

one 



940 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1993 

that's closing hospitals. Who really is the one in your area, sir, 

that is closing hospitals? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it'll be an interesting exercise for the 

people of Saskatchewan to take part in, to realize the impact all 

over this province. It's just not the west side of this province, 

the constituency of Kindersley, the one that I represent. It's 

constituencies all over this province. 

 

And the member from Kelsey-Tisdale, I would think he should 

be pretty concerned about this, Mr. Speaker. He should be 

pretty concerned about this. Because I would guess that the 

people of his constituency aren't going to be very happy with 

all of this. I don't think the people in Kelsey-Tisdale are going 

to be very happy when that member stands and votes in favour 

of this. I don't think they're going to be very happy when they 

realize that he's participating in closure to help put this through 

as quick as possible. I don't think they're going to be very 

happy with him at all. 

 

And I don't think that the good doctor from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, the folks in that area, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, are going to be very enthused . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When members refer to other 

members, they should call them as members and not use any 

other title. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — I'm sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I didn't catch 

what you had said there. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When a member refers to other 

members in the Assembly, he must call them members or hon. 

members. He must not refer to them in any other way. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, it would be interesting to know what 

he thinks about all of these changes. It would be interesting for 

the people of his constituency, I believe, if he would stand in 

this legislature and tell everyone in his constituency whether he 

agrees with this. Does he agree that there should be bed 

closures in your constituency? 

 

When he promised, Mr. Speaker, in an election campaign that 

he would be the one that could deliver a hospital; when he 

made the promise in an election campaign that he could deliver 

a hospital and no one else could and the Conservatives would 

close hospitals. Does he believe that today? I don't believe the 

member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg believes that any longer. 

 

And I'll be surprised, Mr. Speaker, if he votes in favour of this 

legislation. I'd be surprised if he supports this any longer 

because the people of his area know he promised them that. 

They know that he promised that. They know that he promised 

and he said in a by-election down in that area and other people 

who were supporting that party at that time, he knows that they 

said that the Conservatives would be the ones to close 

hospitals. 

Well the reality is, Mr. Member, that it isn't the Conservatives 

that are closing hospitals, it's you. It's you folks on the 

government benches these days that are going to be responsible 

for closing hospitals. And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, how many 

closures there'll be in Melfort constituency. How many hospital 

closures will be there? How many beds will be lost? None. 

 

Well isn't this being done equitably around the province? Isn't 

this being done equitably across the province? If there's 65 or 

70 per cent of the beds being closed in my constituency, is 

there 65 or 70 per cent of the beds being closed in the 

constituency of Melfort? Is there that many going to be closed 

in your constituency? How about some of the other 

constituencies? 

 

How about Indian Head? How many beds are going to close in 

Indian Head? And if there aren't any, why aren't there any? 

Why aren't there any beds being closed in Melfort or 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg if there's going to be a whole bunch 

closed in other areas? Is it because they have an NDP member? 

Is it because there's an NDP member? I can't think of his 

constituency or I would ask him. 

 

(1230) 

 

An Hon. Member: — Last Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Last Mountain-Touchwood. How many beds are 

going to be closed in Last Mountain-Touchwood? How many 

beds in that proposed health area? I'm sure they're busily 

working on a health area, if they can find anybody any more to 

serve on those planning boards. How many are going to be 

closed in that area, Mr. Speaker? Last Mountain-Touchwood, 

how many do you think there will be closed? One wonders how 

many will be closed in Last Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Maybe the member, the hon. member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood, would care to enlighten the House on 

how many beds will be closed in his constituency. How many 

beds will be closed there? Is there still a planning committee 

out there? Or have they all done like Mr. Whiteman at Swift 

Current has done? — tendered his resignation because he 

doesn't believe in your plans any longer, doesn't buy into this 

wellness story any longer, Madam Member from Melfort. 

Doesn't buy into this story and the rhetoric that your 

government has been handing out left, right, and centre. 

 

The great protectors of health care. Isn't that incredible? The 

great protector of health care from Saskatoon Riversdale, the 

Premier of this province. How many hospital beds in his 

constituency are going to close? How many beds in his 

constituency will be shut down as a result of the changes, Mr. 

Speaker? One wonders about that. 

 

Regina Elphinstone — how many beds are going to be closed 

in his constituency? How many constituency beds will be 

closed there, acute care beds? It's no 



April 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 941 

wonder, it's no wonder that the gentleman out at Swift Current 

resigned because he realizes what you're doing. He realizes the 

devastation, the impact that it's going to have on his 

community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And here's some quotes, Mr. Speaker. We'll just move back to 

the motion on closure for a moment. Here's some interesting 

observations from previous members in this legislature about 

closure: This debate is about muzzling the opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, muzzling the opposition, something that this 

government is not reluctant to do because we've seen repeated 

examples of how they've muzzled other people who have 

effectively spoken out against their policies, their cut-backs, 

and their harsh and cruel tactics, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That's a direct quote from a member of that government when 

they were sitting in opposition. And we've seen, Mr. Speaker, 

how this government and the Premier in particular, the Minister 

of Health, have dramatically muzzled other people who have 

effectively spoken out against their policies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It's interesting to note that associations around the province that 

they claim are supportive of this, are now beginning to drop 

off. They're beginning to fall off the wagon, this wellness 

wagon, Mr. Speaker. They're beginning to fall off of it because 

they realize that they've been deceived. They realize that 

they've been deceived. It's my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that 

out in various communities around this province, they're all 

evaluating whether they want to belong to the SHA any longer. 

They're all re-evaluating that. They're all evaluating whether or 

not they believe this any longer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And here's a letter that's interesting, that we received here just a 

short while ago from the Preeceville Union Hospital. This is 

about your wellness plan. This is about your wellness plan, and 

it's addressed to Hewitt Helmsing, president and chief 

executive officer, Saskatchewan Health-Care Association. It 

was dated April 7, yesterday — yesterday, Mr. Speaker. Here's 

what they're saying. Whose constituency is Preeceville in? Is it 

in Canora? That's the constituency. Okay. Here we go: 

 

 

Dear Mr. Helmsing: I wish to advise you that specifically 

regarding the matter of Health Reform that the Saskatchewan 

Health-Care Association does not represent the views of the 

Preeceville Union Hospital . . . 

 

Maybe I'll take the time once again, Mr. Speaker, to read that 

first sentence over because of the importance of it. The Premier 

of this province has stood in this legislature, and the Minister 

of Health have stood in this legislature and they said people all 

over the province support their views and the SHA support 

their views. And now we're beginning to see how many 

associations and how many hospitals are beginning to think 

that the SHA doesn't represent them very well any more. 

Dear Mr. Helmsing: I wish to advise you that specifically 

regarding the matter of Health Reform that the Saskatchewan 

Health-Care Association does not represent the views of the 

Preeceville Union Hospital Board. Implementation deadlines 

are too quick, the cut backs overly severe and will 

significantly affect the health care, economy and morale of 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

That is what the Preeceville Union Hospital is saying. And I go 

on: 

 

 

Your memorandum of March 31, 1993 attempts to downplay 

the seriousness of a very severe situation. Substantial cut 

backs are about to occur without the infrastructure required 

for support (services) . . . as wellness centres, salaried 

physicians, day hospital programs, home care expanded roles 

and funding. We are concerned that rural physicians will 

leave because of the devastation in workplaces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's just part of the letter. And I would like to 

continue to quote from this letter: 

 

 

The government plan indicates that for 20,000 people in our 

proposed Kamsack, Canora and Preeceville district, of the 

present total rated active treatment beds of 157 (that's the 

total number of rated active treatment beds — 157) only 

20-30 will remain after the dust cloud settles. Due to the 

health care needs, geography and large percentage of elderly 

in our district, those numbers of beds are unrealistic. 

 

That's what they say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and they go on to say: 

 

 

We are not opposed to change, reform in some measure is 

required, some positive points do exist (and we recognize that 

as well) . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: —  

 

 

. . . however the plan is unnecessarily harsh. The 

Saskatchewan Health-Care Association may no longer speak 

on behalf of the Preeceville Union Hospital regarding any 

aspect of Health Reform. Further, we do not agree with the 

recommendation to invoke closure regarding this necessary 

debate. 

 

Well, well, starting to come in now, isn't it? This is signed 

William G. Morken, chairman of the board, Preeceville Union 

Hospital. 

 

Interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that's in the Minister of 

Agriculture's seat, Canora. She's coming unglued fast, isn't it, 

boys? Things around the province are starting to heat up a little 

bit, aren't they? The 



942 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1993 

Preeceville Union Hospital doesn't agree with you any longer, 

doesn't agree . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would like to remind the member 

again, and he should be directing his words through the Chair 

and not to the members. The Chair is over here and I would 

like to ask the member to direct his remarks through the Chair. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I would not only like to direct my 

remarks to you, but I'd like to provide you with a copy of this 

letter so everyone — and we'll table it — everyone in this 

Assembly and indeed all of Saskatchewan has an opportunity 

to see what kind of changes are being imposed upon these 

people and the fact that they don't support it any long. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Don't support it any longer. And this is just, I 

predict, one single example of what's going to be taking place 

quickly across rural Saskatchewan. The tip of the iceberg 

budget of this government. The ice is beginning to float to the 

surface of these changes and what kind of impact they're going 

to have. The plan is unnecessarily harsh, Mr. Speaker. The plan 

is unnecessarily harsh. 

 

The Saskatchewan Health-Care Association may no longer 

speak on behalf of the Preeceville Union Hospital. And I guess 

the most important point in all this, Mr. Speaker, at the last 

sentence, with respect to what's going on in this legislature 

right now: 

 

 

. . . we do not agree with the recommendation to invoke 

closure regarding this necessary debate. 

 

Real people, real people are saying this. And, Mr. Speaker, this 

letter came in from the Preeceville Union Hospital, April 7, it 

was sent in to us. And, Mr. Speaker, the Premier knows about 

this letter. The Premier knows about it because he was sent a 

copy of it. The Kamsack steering committee knows about it, 

because they were sent a copy. The Canora steering committee 

knows about it, because they were sent a copy. And Isabelle 

Colvin, Saskatchewan Health-Care Association, knows about 

this, because she was sent a copy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's a clear illustration that people don't 

support closure. People don't support changes that are being 

proposed for their areas. 

 

I ask the people of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I ask the 

people of this Assembly, what kind of impact do you think a 

reduction to 20 to 30 acute care beds from 157 will have on this 

area — on the Kamsack, Canora, Preeceville district, which has 

20,000 people approximately in that area. What kind of 

changes, what kind of impact do you think it will have? What 

kind of impact will that have, Mr. Speaker? And I think they 

support the view that this closure should not go forward. They 

support that opposition in opposing this closure motion. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we've seen how this government and the 

Premier in particular and the Minister of Health has 

dramatically muzzled other people who have spoken out 

against their policies. I think that it's important to recognize, 

Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province aren't frightened 

any longer of this government; they're beginning to speak out. 

Even though the member from Melfort can threaten 

organizations like SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association), it isn't beginning to wash any longer, Mr. 

Speaker. They are beginning to stand up to this government 

because they know that this government does not represent the 

views of the people in Saskatchewan any longer, Mr. Speaker. 

They do not represent the views of Saskatchewan any longer, 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the only thing that might be the saving grace in 

all of this in the next election for this government is if they can 

cut out a whole bunch of rural seats. And that's what they 

intend to do. I tell people in this province today that that's 

exactly what they intend to do. They're going to cut out a bunch 

of rural seats so this health care reform won't matter any longer 

because there won't be enough seats to defeat Saskatoon and 

Regina any longer. 

 

SUMA has real and legitimate concerns, Mr. Speaker, and it 

spoke those concerns. They reminded this Premier about his 

commitment, before he proceeded with radical restructuring, he 

would have a plan to ensure the property tax base did not have 

to bear the costs of the health care system. The Premier made 

that commitment and SUMA reminded him of their concern to 

that commitment be kept. 

 

And I was at that SUMA convention, Mr. Speaker. I was at that 

SUMA convention and I heard the Premier speak. And I heard 

. . . After he made the comment that it would not be put on the 

local property tax base, the people that were represented at that 

SUMA convention applauded him. And so they should. They 

applauded him because they believed him at that time, Mr. 

Speaker. And what was the response? Just like the motion of 

closure, the government responded by trying to muzzle SUMA. 

 

(1245) 

 

The minister wrote a letter to the organization and threatened 

them. That's what she did. And we called, Mr. Speaker, if you 

think back, we called for her resignation at that time, and we 

still call for her resignation today because she threatened them 

just as surely as I'm standing here speaking this afternoon. She 

threatened them and she knows she threatened them. She 

threatened them on the direct order, I suspect, of the Premier of 

this province. 

 

He knew how critically important, how critically important it 

was to get SUMA to snap into line. He knew how critically 

important it was so he directed his minister to threaten them, do 

what it took to put them people back into line as quickly as 

possible. He said, you shut up or we'll take care of you and 

everyone knows when the member from Riversdale is holding 



April 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 943 

the pistol he's more than willing to pull the trigger. So the train 

left the station, Mr. Speaker, and the government muzzled 

legitimate community concern. 

 

And the Minister of Health, for the record, knows all about it. 

This motion falls on the coercion and threats of the last session 

where the now minister of politics, then the minister of 

Finance, told the chiropractors in no uncertain terms, you 

accept our policy or you will be cut out completely. 

 

Muzzling the opposition, muzzling the legitimate concerns of 

the community, this motion is an extension of the government's 

dealings with the College of Physicians & Surgeons. And we'll 

table this letter showing that the government threatened the 

doctors. 

 

You accept our policies or we will wage a public campaign 

against doctors. That will be the basic threat that was used to 

muzzle doctors in this province, Mr. Speaker. And now they 

come into this Assembly in absolute disgrace to try and muzzle 

the people's elected officials, elected representatives. And I say, 

Mr. Speaker, that even the Minister of Health knows the 

disgrace she is perpetrating with her complicity in this motion. 

 

Let me quote that member from August of 1989: 

 

 

Another thing that I wish to talk about, Mr. Speaker, is the 

fact that the motion violates the very spirit of democracy. It 

violates the freedom of discussion, free debate in this 

legislature on an . . . (important issue, Mr. Speaker). 

 

Mr. Speaker, can anyone in Saskatchewan . . . that the Minister 

of Health ever made a speech in the spirit of democracy? Then 

she pretended to oppose closure and defend free speech. This is 

a cruel joke, Mr. Speaker, a twisted gesture of hypocrisy. She 

demands that Bill 3 be shut down. She demands an end to the 

very free speech, so she misleadingly spoke in favour. She 

says, shut up my opponents and silence the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this minister has been out closing debate 

wherever she can. And the simple fact is that she knows it. 

Everyone, Mr. Speaker, knows that. And there's no disputing 

that any longer. She's using this closure motion to finish off the 

Premier's policy of decommissioning rural Saskatchewan. 

Rural revenge, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's what's happening. We believe there's a 

hidden agenda. We believe that it's important that the people of 

Saskatchewan recognize the damaging effects that this will 

have on a government, on this government, and on the people 

of rural Saskatchewan in particular. 

 

And we challenge — we challenge, as I said earlier — each 

and every member of this Legislative Assembly to go home 

and do an evaluation of the hospital beds and how they will be 

affected in their area. And it would be an interesting exercise, 

Mr. Speaker, if 

everyone came back and gave a little report on what those 

changes would be. 

 

Kelsey-Tisdale, we've already done the work for him so he 

won't have to. But in my constituency . . . And he says, Mr. 

Speaker, maybe someone should check the figures. Well fine. 

Check the figures if you don't believe our figures. Let's get the 

budgets out to the people in rural Saskatchewan, in rural 

hospitals, and then they'll know for sure what the budgets are. 

Then they'll know how many hospital beds are going to close 

for sure. Then they'll know if their hospital is being targeted. 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the important consideration that has to be 

done in this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's important that the people of rural 

Saskatchewan have an opportunity to be heard. 

 

That's why they're asking for the minister to come out to public 

meetings. That's why, Mr. Speaker, that there was a meeting in 

Weyburn the other night. That's why there was a meeting last 

night in Wapella. That's why there's a meeting in Kindersley 

next week. That's why there's a meeting in Eston, Kerrobert, 

Codette, I believe there's one organized for there. 

 

They're being organized all over because people are opposed to 

this government's actions, Mr. Speaker. We are opposed to it; 

we'll continue to be opposed to the government's refusal to hold 

public debate on this. 

 

The Premier says we are against health care reform, and he's 

wrong. He's wrong, Mr. Speaker. We are against the policy of 

this government to strip rural Saskatchewan of health care 

services. That's what we're opposed to. 

 

We're opposed to that, Mr. Speaker, and we'll continue to be 

opposed to it. And, Mr. Speaker, I would move: 

 

 

That we now move to proceed to consideration of Bill No. 

10. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The vote . . . because the vote was 

called on a superseding motion which now lapses because it is 

1 o'clock, our regular adjournment time, no vote will be taken. 

This House stands adjourned until 2 p.m. Tuesday. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 

 


