




















































Hansard: May 27, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1997 

 May 27, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 87 -- An Act to amend The Mental Health Services 

Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Indeed I was 

informing the members of the committee and particularly the 

member who is asking the questions at this point about the 

responsibilities of the minister under the current Mental Health 

Services Act.  He seems to have some concern about the 

responsibility vested in the minister and so I was, just before 

the supper break, providing the information for the member. 

 

He should know that this information is available to him in the 

full text of the Act, not the amendments, but in full text of the 

current Act.  I believe, Mr. Chairman, I had reached point (d), 

or the fourth point of the responsibilities which are described as 

to the minister, and I will continue to finish the section of the 

Act which is applicable hoping that this will satisfy the 

member. 

 

Point (e), or the fifth point, Mr. Chairman, again, quoting from 

the Act: 

 

 . . . the minister may: 

 

 (e) operate facilities, alone or in conjunction with persons 

whose objectives include the preservation or restoration of 

mental health; 

 

 (f) in the operation of mental health programs, employ 

psychiatrists, psychiatric nurses, psychologists, social 

workers, other therapists and any other personnel that he 

considers necessary, on any terms and conditions that he 

considers appropriate; 

 

And: 

 

 (g) appoint consultants and committees and authorize them to 

conduct inquiries and make recommendations to him 

concerning the provision of mental health services. 

 

And I hope that helps the member to understand that the 

minister does have responsibilities under the legislation.  Those 

responsibilities are appropriate and I would suspect that neither 

he nor any other member of this House would suggest that the 

minister should not have these responsibilities which are 

described in the Act. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, we're happy that you're prepared to accept your 

responsibilities, because I think the appointment of these 

designated people is something we need to continue to work 

with.  We will come back to that, Mr. Minister, but in the 

meantime I'm prepared 

to let one of my colleagues ask you a few questions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

specifically would like you to answer some questions 

pertaining to Valley View.  How does the Act pertain to Valley 

View and the residents that are there at present, and also the 

fact that various institutions around the province are 

downsizing or being closed that currently house people who 

have mental illness or disorders which have meant that they 

were mandated into an institution.  How will this specifically 

affect Valley View and the various resources around it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to inform the 

member that this Act and the amendments have very, very, 

little impact on Valley View.  I know in the course of 

discussion earlier today, I indicated that there were one or two, 

perhaps, residents of Valley View who are resident there as a 

result of the Criminal Code.  But that will be a very small 

number, one or two residents.  No other residents at Valley 

View are there as a result of detention under this Act and so 

these changes will have very, very little, minimal if any, impact 

on Valley View. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Would the consolidations that are occurring 

in the mental health field though, in the province of 

Saskatchewan, predicate that Valley View would be the type of 

centre that would expect to receive people from other areas?  

Say if Souris Valley is down, if the Saskatchewan Hospital in 

North Battleford is down, those type of things, would Valley 

View then be the logical location for consolidation, for instance 

of individuals that could be affected by this Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- No.  In fact in terms of the Act here, 

again there's little or no impact on Valley View.  I think the 

member is aware that Valley View is not funded by the 

Department of Health but is community services through Social 

Services.  The institute that may have some impact as a result 

of this legislation will be the Saskatchewan Hospital in North 

Battleford, where in fact, some extra money has now been 

provided for a forensics unit and so on.  There may be some 

implication there but not for Valley View. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I notice in the Bill where it 

talks about prescribed treatment of individuals by a physician 

and this would be according to court order.  Could you give me 

an indication of what type of treatment that we're talking about.  

Could you give me a range of the things that, for someone who 

has been declared criminally wrong but not capable of 

understanding the . . . what would be the prescribed treatment 

that would be put in place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the member 

could clarify for us the section that he's referring to.  I hunch 

that he's referring to treatment orders under the community 

treatment order process as opposed to the long-term detention.  

We'll be glad 



1998 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

to try and respond if we can just get some clarity. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I can't pick a particular section out, but I 

know in reading the Bill earlier, Mr. Minister, it talked about 

long-term treatment of that type of individual and I'm just 

wondering what kind of treatment.  There's been various things 

used over history, and I'm wondering what is in place today. 

 

If there are two residents at Valley View that would fit this 

requirement, they're obviously long-term residents, and they 

would be going through a treatment regime.  I'd like to know 

what that is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- In response to the member's question . . . 

and this is not too specific because I think what we're talking 

about here would be the whole range of treatment that could be 

available to an individual depending on his or her own assessed 

needs.  So you know, the range of treatment will go from the 

very intensive acute medical kinds of treatments to 

occupational therapies, physical therapies, recreational 

therapies.  So there's a broad range of treatment that will be 

offered depending on the assessment of the individual's 

particular need. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, is electro-shock treatment part 

of the regime in the province of Saskatchewan any more as far 

as individuals in this category?  I understand at one time that it 

was.  Is that still a prescribed treatment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, in answer to the member's 

question, the answer is yes, there will be yet examples of 

situations where electroconvulsive therapies are used.  I'm 

informed that the use of that therapy is much, much less today 

than it was in the past. 

 

Today when that therapy is used, it will be used only at the 

consent of the patient if the patient is able to provide that 

consent.  If the patient is not able to provide that consent and it 

is still prescribed by the medical advice, then there are some 

very specific and special rules contained in regulation before it 

can be used.  I think the bottom line is that yes, it is still used 

but much less frequently than it used to be. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, have lobotomies ever been used 

in the province of Saskatchewan in the treatment of mentally ill 

people or people who had violent tendencies, particularly those 

pertaining to this type of individual, been used in the province 

of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I'm informed, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Member, that in fact at one time in this province many years 

ago the procedure may have been used.  It is considered 

completely outdated and the best that we can guess that it's at 

least 30 or 40 years since there has been that therapy used. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So what you're saying, Mr. Minister, is that 

the last time would probably be about . . . prior to 1960 would 

be the type of range that we're talking about? 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I guess our best guess is it would be prior 

to 1960 would be correct. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, are you aware, or anyone in 

your department aware, that an order was given for a lobotomy 

on an individual at Valley View some time in the early 1980s?  

Are you aware of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- We do not have knowledge of such an 

order having been given.  It may be possible in that the officials 

here tonight of course are from the Department of Health and 

Valley View is administered through the Department of Social 

Services.  But those who are here tonight have no knowledge -- 

I have no knowledge -- of an order having been given in the 

1980s. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Would you or your department be able to find 

out if either through the Department of Health, or the 

Department of Social Services, that such an order was 

contemplated on a patient at Valley View Centre. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- We could certainly endeavour to find that 

out. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I am told that a former official 

of the Department of Social Services, who is currently a . . . in 

fact a deputy minister in your government, gave such an order 

in the early 1980s, contrary to what was accepted opinion. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I would like you to find that out for me.  

And I won't mention the individual's name.  But if that was the 

case, I would find that very peculiar seeing as this procedure 

was discontinued sometime prior to 1960.  And I would . . . I 

would worry, Mr. Minister, that if that were the case then the 

powers granted under this Act would bother me somewhat, 

given that that individual -- as recent as the early 1980s -- was 

prepared to order a procedure like that on an individual who 

was in the care of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1915) 

 

So I'm going to ask you, Mr. Minister, to find that out for me, 

and to tell me that this Act and its predecessor would not allow 

that procedure to happen to anyone that was a resident at 

Valley View or anyone else in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, it would be helpful, I 

think, in trying to track this information, if in confidence the 

member wants to share perhaps the client's name or other 

information that he may have; we will endeavour to track it. 

 

I want to say to the member that with the amendments that are 

before us, in the Bill before us, there is no extension to the 

range of treatment or powers of treatment from what we have 

had under the current Mental Health Services Act.  But with the 

specific issue that the member raises, if he could provide us 

maybe a little more specific information on a confidential 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1999 

basis, we'll certainly track it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, what I guess I'm asking you is 

that, given the power here of officials to detain, to treat, to 

incarcerate individuals, that this procedure would not be 

allowed under any circumstances by anyone in your department 

or Department of Social Services or anyone connected with 

persons detained under this Act.  Is that possible, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- The Act currently prohibits that kind of 

procedure to an involuntary patient.  I will refer you to section 

25(5) of the current Mental Health Services Act -- and this is 

not being changed or amended in any way -- which reads: 

 

 In no case shall a physician or any other person administer 

psychosurgery or experimental treatment to an involuntary 

patient. 

 

So that is prescribed in the Act now; that is the law in our 

province. 

 

And I think I'm accurate in what you said earlier, that this was a 

contemplated -- if in fact what happened in the early 1980's 

happened as had been suggested to you -- it was contemplated 

and wasn't conducted.  It was contemplated. 

 

In any event, the Act as it stands today prohibits it, clearly 

prohibits it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, you said involuntary.  As I read 

through the Act, relatives and persons with the power of 

attorney have the ability to commit an individual to treatment.  

And correct me if I'm wrong, that people who are in a power of 

attorney or a power of authority over individuals, could those 

individuals have such a procedure or order entertained by 

physicians or officials in dealing with an individual like this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Again, I refer to the Act where in fact the 

beginning of section 25 indicates there can be treatments 

prescribed with the consent of a patient's nearest relative, if in 

fact the patient is not competent to agree to consent. 

 

However, it is our best understanding that such a procedure 

would require much, much more than simply the consent of a 

near relative, that this would involve extensive consultations 

with a variety people in the medical community.  And in fact 

given that we are now in the 1990s, it is in our view highly, 

highly unlikely that the procedure would be authorized. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- In the best guess of your officials, Mr. 

Minister, would they also conclude that that was probably the 

case for the last 15 or 20 years, that this type of decision would 

only be arrived at through a committee of doctors, for instance, 

or in the case of a violent individual who had committed a 

violent crime against someone in society, that the early 1980s 

probably would have had the same rules applicable as the early 

1990s? 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I think the member recognizes we're into 

a kind of a realm of speculation here and it's difficult to 

speculate back a decade or back three decades. 

 

Our best information is that the procedure simply has not been 

conducted in Saskatchewan for over 30 years.  Our assessment 

of today and the assessment of our Justice officials today in 

1992-1993, is that no physician would likely engage in this 

practice without a court order or something to that effect. 

 

Now we can't be absolutely sure of views that were held in the 

early '80s, but the best information that we have is that the 

procedure simply has not taken place in the province for many 

years.  And so I think we're into the realm of speculation.  It's 

hard to be therefore very specific. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I would appreciate, Mr. Minister -- I'm sure 

there are people both within your Department of Justice that 

have been around 10, 12 years -- that you research that for me 

and see if the same rules that apply today as you bring these 

revisions to the Act in place would be in place in the early 

1980s. 

 

Mr. Minister, if such a thing were to occur in this period of 

time, would ministerial order be required?  Do you know? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- No, not currently or in the past has the 

minister ever had a role in these medical decisions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- It would be a hypothetically . . . for instance a 

family member and a physician and a consulting physician 

could come to a conclusion.  They would then approach the 

institutional staff or approach someone in the department 

responsible for the individual, and it could be arranged that way 

rather than having to go through either a minister's office or a 

court of law for instance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I think in terms of the current 

circumstance and the kind of treatments that are available 

today, we can't conceive of the procedure being even 

contemplated now by the medical profession.  If by some 

outside chance it were contemplated, it is not something that 

would ever come to the attention of a minister for a 

decision-making purpose. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- My information, and this may help you in 

your quest, Mr. Minister, is that the particular order was 

stopped by ministerial order, that the procedure did not go 

ahead by ministerial order.  And the reason I raise this with 

you, Mr. Minister, is because this was raised with me by 

individuals who have worked at Valley View.  And I don't 

think I need to qualify whether that is in the past or the present 

or anything else because that's immaterial to the argument, but 

that the knowledge was fairly generally widely held. 

 

And I thought it would be appropriate during 



2000 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

discussion of a Bill which deals with the placement of mentally 

ill people who have created criminal acts or acts of violence, 

was the appropriate place to raise it with you.  Because I think 

if there is any shred of truth in the accusation, and that current 

employees of the province of Saskatchewan who are in 

positions of authority were involved in something like that, I 

think it would be incumbent upon the public to know about it 

and judge accordingly. 

 

So what I'm going to ask you, Mr. Minister, is that you give me 

the background, if you can find any, the assessment of what the 

rules were in place between, say, 1980 and 1983, and what the 

view of people at that time was in the Department of Health 

and the Department of Social Services vis-a-vis lobotomies, 

whether given with the consensual agreement of relatives or 

not. 

 

And I know that's a fairly tall order, Mr. Minister, and if you 

wish to review Hansard, that's fine by me, but my requests, I 

think, are reasonable given the potential here that I think people 

who are both related to and have some concern about mentally 

ill people in the province of Saskatchewan would want to have 

answered. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I'll leave it at that and you can come back to 

me with the information and I hope it would be as expeditious 

as possible. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, we'll do just that.  We 

will review the Hansard record and try and track this as best 

we can.  And again I invite the member, if he has some further 

information that would make the tracking a little easier, we'd be 

glad to get it on a confidential basis. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

I've went through the Bill as best as I could and tried to 

understand exactly what it's all about.  I see some points but I'd 

like to . . . and I ask a lot of ministers this same question when 

they bring a Bill to this Assembly.  I'd like you to explain in 

your own words, not the words of your officials or the words of 

your caucus or cabinet, what is the reason for this Bill coming 

to this Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- As I indicated, Mr. Chairman, to other 

members of the opposition caucus earlier this day, there are 

three fundamental reasons for the Bill.  Number one, there has 

been a change in the Criminal Code where up until now 

individuals, by provisions in the Criminal Code, could be 

detained indefinitely if those individuals were detained for the 

situation where they were unfit to stand trial or not criminally 

responsible for their actions as a result of a mental disorder.  

They could be housed, detained, in psychiatric care for an 

indefinite period of time.  Criminal Code provisions have 

changed and so that there now is a cap on the number of years 

that an individual can be detained in this regard. 

 

(1930) 

 

It is my view and our view, that a limited number of 

these individuals who may find themselves being released into 

the community as a result of the change in the Criminal Code 

are still . . . do still present danger either to the community at 

large, to others, or to themselves.  And therefore, in a very 

limited number of cases a long-term detention order should be 

available to maintain these individuals under care both for the 

protection of the community generally and in some cases for 

their own protection.  That's one of the initiatives, the first 

major initiative of the legislation before us. 

 

The second is the initiative to provide a process, which we've 

described fully this afternoon, of community treatment orders 

where individuals who have had a history of living in the 

community, but perhaps failing to adhere to the regime of 

medication and their prescriptions, find themselves then in 

difficulty with family and workers, and very often with the law, 

will find themselves then back into an in-patient treatment 

facility where their medications are regularized and so on, and 

then returned back to the community.  This for some 

individuals becomes something like a revolving door.  The 

community treatment order will allow care-givers to provide 

those medications, will order the medications to be taken, while 

the individual is living in the community.  And so the 

individual in this case will be required to take their medications 

and on a regular basis have an appointment with their doctor, 

their psychiatrist. 

 

Now in both of these cases the legislation lays out very, very 

strict and specific criteria before either a long-term detention 

order can be made, or a community treatment order can be 

made, and at some length we've discussed that earlier this day. 

 

The third provision of the Bill are relatively minor amendments 

to the language of the legislation to make it more adaptable to 

the reform process which is happening across the province in 

the formation of district boards. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm sorry if I 

wasn't in . . . wasn't here and didn't hear that, your response to 

that before, if that's been asked before.  Anyway, I thank you. 

 

Just a question on the part about the Criminal Code being 

changed and the length of stay.  Is there a certain condition that 

mentally ill people would have to be in, that you could give a 

permanent . . . is it . . . is there . . . sometimes make a 

permanent stay for hospital care or are these always on an 

ongoing basis to be reviewed?  What is the procedure there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- The member should know that the 

maximum length of a long-term detention order is one year.  

And so there is the constant review process.  If after the course 

of the year, there may be a change in the mental or medical 

condition, then the status of the individual would be reviewed. 

 

If there has not been a change and it is indicated that the 

individual should still be detained, then the process would have 

to be gone through again.  The 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2001 

maximum long-term detention under this legislation is a year.  

And so the member can be assured there is an ongoing review 

process. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Like, I'll take you 

back when we didn't handle the mentally ill as well as we do 

today.  I recall back as a young man, in the home we had, in the 

hospital in Weyburn where I know that there was no way that 

they were . . . they were handled the best we could at that time.  

But there was sometimes people were committed and they were 

just there for almost for ever, and they pretty near couldn't even 

get out. 

 

But in this case here now -- and I understand reading the Bill 

about the one year, but I'm just a little interested in how we 

handle this -- we know that when people go in, there's some 

people that do go, especially with age and other problems and 

Alzheimer's disease and these things, when their mind goes 

completely and there's just no other . . . and they can't be 

handled in nursing homes and regular hospitals.  You're saying 

that even these people, the worst there is of this type of illness, 

that if they're . . . no matter how bad you are, and probably the 

doctors know that they're not going to improve but they're still 

reviewed every year?  And would there be a provision for them 

to always stay there, for ever?  For the rest of their life or 

whatever?  Can they always stay in that hospital for care if they 

don't improve?  Is that provision still there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I think in all cases, with every individual, 

our health care system, broadly defined, and indeed social 

safety nets, endeavour to provide the appropriate care for each 

and every individual according to their need. 

 

Now The Mental Health Services Act that we're now debating 

is very specific.  The clauses we're now debating are very 

specific, focused on those few individuals who are being held 

in our in-patient psychiatric centres or in other detention 

centres -- number one, when we're talking about the Criminal 

Code, those who are there because they have been declared 

unfit to stand trial or not criminally responsible.  In the case of 

individuals who may suffer from Alzheimer's or other physical 

or mental conditions, their treatments will be provided, not 

likely through mental health, but perhaps through continuing 

care. 

 

But the point is, each individual circumstance will demand its 

own treatment.  And that's what our system, of course, tries to 

provide. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So, Mr. Minister, you're saying in this Bill 

here, there's no change in any of that.  That's still all staying the 

same.  There's no changes to the time or care; that's the same as 

it was before.  You're not changing that then. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Yes, that's correct.  The kinds of care 

remain the same as we know today.  We are making this 

change to deal with the change in the Criminal Code and we 

are introducing the new 

concept of community treatment orders which is new, which 

we believe will assist people to remain living in the community 

rather than going through the revolving-door process of the 

in-patient treatment. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I'm quite familiar with several 

people that . . . individuals that have been in mental hospitals 

for . . . like I'm talking about 15, 20 years and they must be not 

improving . . . (inaudible) . . . Those people still get that 

check-over for that one year.  They're all subject to that one 

year, and then they just go on on a yearly basis, or . . . I guess 

the point I'm trying to make, is there some people that have . . . 

Like we have an individual I'm thinking now is at Valley View 

at Moose Jaw, and he went in there as a young man -- 14 or 15 

-- and it's about 20 years ago and there's no change.  Are those 

people still looked at on a yearly basis and decisions made? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, in the case of the vast 

majority of residents, for instance at Valley View, those 

residents will be there voluntarily.  They're not there as a result 

of an order under a Mental Health Services Act.  I'm confident 

that every resident in Valley View and the other regional 

centres and so on receive medical assessment on an ongoing 

basis. 

 

But I think we need to clarify that these individuals are not 

there under order of The Mental Health Services Act.  We're 

talking here about people who will be ordered for long-term 

detention.  The Act in this case provides an annual review of 

the order. 

 

But there will be many people in our institutions that are there 

at their family's placement -- in essence, voluntarily -- and have 

made their home there for many years. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I understand, we all understand the 

difference of . . . you're saying voluntarily is when maybe . . . 

the family maybe voluntarily placed somebody there.  That's 

what you mean by voluntarily, Mr. Minister?  Because in most 

cases the individual that's in this long-term wouldn't be of 

sound mind to put themselves there.  You were saying 

voluntarily when the family places them there.  Is that what 

you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Yes.  In essence that's what I'm saying.  I 

know that the member will be aware that over the last number 

of years there have been efforts to provide community-living 

opportunities for people that may have formerly lived in the 

institutional setting but now have opportunity to live in the 

community.  Those who will be living in the more institutional 

setting now will be I think those who require that kind of care. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well I hope this is in order, but I just haven't 

seen any other Bill or even estimates, that we could ask these 

type of questions.  Because it's not a subject, Mr. Minister, you 

know, that we really like to get into talking about.  It's a real 

serious illness and thank God that in today's world we accept 

people that are mentally ill as just another disease as if heart 

ailment or whatever.  We at least accept it.  Years ago it 



2002 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

wasn't that way and I lived in that era and I'm glad it's changed. 

 

So I'm going to ask a few questions about the mental patients 

and I hope it's in order.  It doesn't show up in the Bill but it's 

the only place I could see to ask some of these questions if you 

don't mind.  I'd just like to know how many individuals that 

have a mental disease that are in these type of special hospitals, 

and the total in Saskatchewan.  How many do we have in the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- We're having a little difficulty in 

definition of terms here, in that I'm sure the member will 

recognize there are those who will suffer from mental illnesses 

who will be . . . those mental illnesses may be very short term 

in their life.  They may be caused by one factor or another but it 

may be short-term mental illness.  There may be longer-term 

mental illnesses, and then there will be those who have some 

mental disabilities that may last a lifetime, that we have in the 

past, I think, described as the mentally retarded and so on. 

 

In trying to define precise numbers for the member therefore, 

it's a little difficult in terms of the mental health services 

branch.  This branch of the department tends to deal with those 

that have specific psychological and mental illnesses as 

opposed to those who may be housed, for instance, in a Valley 

View Centre in Moose Jaw.  So I'm wondering if the member 

could just refine his question a little and we will try and 

provide the specific numbers if we can get perhaps a little 

more, a little clearer definition of the information the member 

requests. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  What I'm getting 

at is not when someone just goes into a local hospital or just 

admitted by any doctor just for temporary treatment.  I mean 

approximately how many in the province of Saskatchewan 

would be . . . have to be in a special care for mental treatment, 

whether it's short term or long term.  And then I want to get at 

how many beds do we have in Saskatchewan to take care of 

these type of people.  That's the two questions that I want to 

ask. 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I hope this information is helpful to the 

member.  Of a population of a million people, in the course of a 

year about 100,000, or one in ten Saskatchewan residents will, 

broadly defined, broadly defined, receive mental health 

services. 

 

Of that, 20,000 patients will become mental health out-patients, 

specific out-patients of mental health clinics and treatments.  

Of the 20,000, 3,500, thereabouts -- these are approximate 

figures, I hope the member understands -- 3,500 will receive 

in-patient treatment. 

 

Now I think this is an important figure for the member and for 

all members of the committee.  The average length of stay for 

in-patient treatment in Saskatchewan is 23 days.  Now that will 

mean on an average day in 

Saskatchewan there will be 425 -- thereabouts -- individuals 

receiving in-patient care.  Now of that 425, 172 are resident at 

the Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford.  The remainder 

will be in-patient in our other facilities around the province. 

 

And I think what is important to note here is that the 172 

represent fundamentally our long-term mental health patients 

and they are housed in Saskatchewan Hospital, North 

Battleford.  And that, in comparison to other Canadian 

provinces and jurisdictions, is a very low number, a very low 

number, which indicates that we have developed in 

Saskatchewan a broad base of community services for those 

requiring mental health care.  That'll be the kind of things we 

have happening now in our group homes and approved homes 

and so on.  So on average on a daily basis in Saskatchewan, 

we'll have about 425 people receiving in-patient care. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Did I hear you right, Mr. Minister, 425 per 

day in the full province of in-patient care? 

 

Now at North Battleford how many total can they handle there?  

What's the total beds there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- It would be 185, 186, and we currently 

have 172. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- The question I would ask, Mr. Minister, if 

the long-term filled up these beds, 185 beds or whatever, they 

filled up in North Battleford, where would they go from there?  

We're talking about more or less the long-term here.  Where do 

they go from there if every bed was full?  Or does that ever 

happen?  Is it happening now that that 185 beds can't handle it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- In fact yes, the beds at North Battleford 

seem to be meeting our need.  North Battleford should not be 

seen as sort of the last stop on a journey, on a human journey.  

In fact, there will be some who will have longer-term stays -- 

yes -- and be at North Battleford, but there may still be for 

them -- and this has happened -- opportunities in the 

community or opportunities for more appropriate care closer to 

their own community and so some will in fact leave Battleford 

to find residence in some other situation. 

 

But our assessment today is that the number of beds in 

Battleford is in fact meeting the need. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So what you're saying, Mr. Minister, the 185 

beds is sufficient and has been and looks in the future like it 

will be able to handle the long care.  I guess my question was 

that, is there facilities to handle these same type of people, the 

long-care people, in Regina or Saskatoon or other hospitals?  Is 

there a facility if you have to have it? 

 

Like just say, for instance, all of a sudden you got . . . you only 

have to have another 10.  There's 172 there.  You only need 

another 12 people that came in, and you couldn't move enough 

out, where would they go?  Is there the same facility, the same 

kind of care? 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2003 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I want to assure the member that in the 

real emergent situation or the real emergency that he wants to 

deal with, we do have our regional centres around the province. 

 

But we want to make the point that we are endeavouring, I 

think, and I'm sure that members would support this, of a 

movement away from the notion of sort of ghettoization of 

people that have mental illness into a more continuum of care 

and a more integration of all of our health care facilities.  And 

so we know now that in some of our special care institutions, 

for example, there are special programs being offered for 

Alzheimer's, for instance. 

 

And so we're wanting to try and escape the notion of 

ghettoization but rather move toward integration of people in 

the system where the need exists. However, where the need 

exists because of behaviour or other indications for the very 

intensive mental health treatment, we do have North Battleford, 

and if it was an emergency situation, we have our other 

regional centres around the province. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- What do you mean by the regional areas?  

Which hospitals are those?  I mean, which . . . do you mean 

Saskatoon or Regina or other areas? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- The designated regional centres exist in 

Saskatoon, Regina, Moose Jaw, Swift Current, Weyburn, 

Yorkton, North Battleford, and Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That's quite 

surprising figures.  I don't think the public realize that, the 

figures you gave me there about the 3,500, the 100,000, the 

20,000, the 3,500 in-patients with only an average length of 23 

days.  That means there's a lot of short-term illness. 

 

Another question I'd like to ask you.  Do you have a breakdown 

. . . if you'd just give me approximately.  I don't expect your 

officials to be able to answer this right to the right, exact 

number because that would be impossible, but do you have an 

approximate idea how many mentally ill place themselves there 

on their own?  I mean, just themselves -- not by family, just go 

in there and put themselves in and ask for treatment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- The member will be pleasantly surprised, 

I think, that the officials have some -- just at the top of their 

heads -- some relatively specific numbers here.  I indicated that 

we would have 3,500 patients over the course of a year.  Now 

that would represent 4,500 admissions.  Some patients will be 

admitted more than once in the course of a year. 

 

So total number of actual admissions will be 4,500.  Of that 

4,500, 87 per cent are voluntary admissions and 13 per cent 

therefore involuntary. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I appreciate your 

officials . . . I don't know why I'm even asking these questions 

but they were just on my mind.  I appreciate your officials 

having these here.  I don't know why, I think I said, I'm not 

even sure why 

I'm asking these questions. They're just on my mind and I never 

had a chance to ask them before. 

 

And what about the numbers.  The last one I want . . . the last 

question I want to ask on this, Mr. Minister, is the numbers in 

the province that are placed there by . . . that's not voluntary, 

like through the Criminal Code, that are just put in there by the 

law and they can't get out.  They're left there until they're 

released by law. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Again, Mr. Chairman, we discussed these 

numbers this afternoon.  Those who are there as a result of 

Criminal Code -- that is either unfit to stand trial or not 

criminally responsible -- the total number in our province is 25 

being held in various institutions. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you. I'm sorry, that question was 

asked before.  Mr. Minister, is there . . . the question I'd like to 

ask now: the funding to look after all the mental patients we 

have in the province and to make sure we have good care for 

these people, is there any cut-back at all on funding?  Did the 

budget cut back on any funding whatsoever to this . . . to look 

after our mentally ill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I'm sorry the member wasn't here this 

afternoon.  Yes.  In fact, there has been a small decrease in 

funding this year, globally for mental health services, a 2 per 

cent reduction in funding.  That 2 per cent, of course, is a 

smaller reduction in funding than other areas of government 

have received, given that we understand the need for these 

services.  And we are doing our level best to try and find that 2 

per cent in administrative reductions rather than program, 

actual program reductions.  But there has been a decrease of 2 

per cent in this budget year. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well that's the question I wanted to get at, 

Mr. Minister.  If there's 2 per cent or 3 per cent, or whatever it 

is, is the care . . . is there any cut-backs in the nursing for these 

people, or equipment, or space, or would you say beds? Is there 

any cut-backs whatsoever that the fundings affect? 

 

Like these beds we're talking about throughout the province 

that will take in the mentally ill, is there any cut-backs 

whatsoever that came from the budget this spring. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- The member will, I'm sure, be interested 

to know that in last year's budget . . . he will remember that for 

mental health services was a 3 per cent increase last year.  And 

so some new initiatives, given that increase last year, there 

were some new initiatives particularly in rural mental health 

services. 

 

So last year there was a 3 per cent increase, this year a 2 per 

cent decrease.  The decrease has had some effect in Weyburn 

where we have reduced the number of beds in Weyburn 

actually to meet demand.  And that will, I think, have had some 

effect on staff there. 

 

(2000) 

 

We have reduced two psychiatrists and now offset 



2004 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

that with fee for service through MCIC (Medical Care 

Insurance Commission) and have taken substantial amounts of 

money from the central office.  And that has achieved our 

funding and in fact we've been able to redirect some of the 

funding to make sure that those new initiatives that were started 

last year can continue. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you just admitted that 

there has been some . . . I don't care whether you had 3 per cent 

last year or 6 per cent increase or whatever, there's still been a 

decrease.  And you said there's been some cut-back in staff.  

Why is there any?  Why would you ever even think of, when 

dealing with mentally ill people, even having a dollars 

cut-back?  When costs are going up it must cost more so it must 

be more than a . . . there must be more, Mr. Minister, than 2 per 

cent decrease because costs are rising.  So there has to be 

maybe a lot of care or else people are working longer hours for 

the same money.  I don't know what you're doing, but why is 

there any care whatsoever, why any cut-backs . . . a dollars and 

. . . even one dollar?  Why is there any money at all less to look 

after our mentally ill people?  Why is there even one penny? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I want to make several points, Mr. 

Chairman, in response to the member's question.  He will 

understand, I'm sure, that it's not simply through the mental 

health services division that all mental health needs in our 

province are met.  There's a whole variety of programs that are 

not funded by mental health that will have benefit to mental 

health of Saskatchewan people, whether it be through the 

programs offered in base hospitals, to community NGOs 

(non-governmental organizations) and so on.  So the whole 

package is not defined by the budget for mental health services 

department.  That's point number one. 

 

Point number two is that we have in this budget year tried as 

best we could to keep the reduction as minimal as we could in 

this area of our budget.  And as I said earlier, we're doing our 

level best and I think have been relatively successful in trying 

to find those cost reductions in administration and so on and 

not to affect actual program delivery to people.  And in fact 

we've been able to redirect some money to be sure that the 

initiatives that were started last year can continue. 

 

Point number three.  I'm not sure we want to define our 

services totally in terms of budgetary dollars.  I think you and I 

can both recognize that we need to find ways to provide new 

and better services for the same, if not less money, given our 

current circumstance.  And we think, for instance, that the 

community treatment order that we're debating in this 

legislation can provide some cost saving while providing a 

better service to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Point number four, and I reminded one of your colleagues 

earlier this afternoon of this point, of course we would not be 

desiring to reduce budgets in health care, education, social 

services, or any other area of government, but I think the 

member is fully 

aware of the fiscal situation of our province and we've had to 

make some very, very tough budget decisions. 

 

And again I repeat, the concern about being able to provide 

monies for these very valuable things, I wish it was more on the 

member's mind when they were in government, and spending 

money very quickly, as much as it's on the mind now. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's exactly what I 

wanted you to say, because I knew you were going to come up 

with that.  You just couldn't resist it. 

 

I need a page.  Page, please.  Would you take this to the 

minister?  He's seen it before.  But we're going to ask him if he 

can read. 

 

How many times do you ministers have to hear . . . you have to 

hear the story.  And look at that and show your officials that -- 

the $3.5 billion debt we took over from you people in 1982. 

 

Every minister that gets to their feet to speak, whether it be 

estimates or a Bill or question period, cannot get it off their 

mind about the deficit the Tories left you.  When you know 

right well that that's the figures admitted. 

 

And you can sit there and you can look at them and you can 

smile.  But it took me four hours to get that facts and truth out 

of the minister of Finance a year ago on appropriation Bill.  

And he admitted $3.5 billion. 

 

Our figures say close to $5 billion.  You take $3.5 billion in 

1982 funds and you put in 1993 funds and you've got your total 

deficit. 

 

And if you don't understand, if you don't understand it, Mr. 

Minister, I'll explain it to you why.  I'm going to explain it to 

every minister that gets on their feet from now till we go to the 

polls again because I don't think you hear good.  You don't 

understand good. 

 

If I buy some property in this province of Saskatchewan, and I 

pay cash for it, and I find out after I've got it, there's $100,000 

debt against it or whatever, or you can use the example that a 

farmer's got a piece of land and he's got a 100 . . . or a piece of 

property, it can even be a businessman with property -- he's got 

$100,000 debt, but has operating money over here.  His 

operating money doesn't quite balance the budget, so every 

year he has to maybe add another 10,000 to that deficit until he 

finally balances his operating budget. 

 

And there's where you've misled the people of Saskatchewan.  

Every one of you have misled.  That you tell people you're 

going to balance the budget in four years.  You're going to do 

it.  And people say, well if the Premier can balance the budget 

in four years, power to him.  And I say that too. 

 

But they seem . . . He's misrepresenting by thinking the 15 

billion is going to go away.  That 15 billion is going to keep on 

going.  The 3.5 billion you left us -- it will be $20 billion by the 

time we go to the polls again. 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2005 

Mark my words.  When we go to the polls, there'll be a $20 

billion deficit in this province.  And where did we inherit it 

from?  We inherited it from you people. 

 

And you've got to quit stopping.  And if you don't want this 

lesson every time, don't get sucked in, Mr. Minister, like you 

did tonight for saying that.  Because I did hear you say this 

very same thing to the member from Rosthern this afternoon.  

But I thought I'd get you to say it to me, and I'm going to give 

you a little lesson. 

 

If you ministers and your Bills, your estimates, question period, 

don't want to hear this story about the $3.5 billion, then don't 

keep saying that we have to have some cut-backs on the 

mentally ill because of the Tories.  It's because of you people. 

 

Now tell me, Mr. Minister, why would you even think . . . 

you're sitting there, the minister.  I wish the television camera 

was on him so the people in Moose Jaw could see the minister 

there laughing.  He's sitting there grinning and laughing as if 

it's . . . that it's just a . . . He's trying to think of something that 

he can say to come back to try to offset that the minister of 

Finance didn't say $3.5 billion. 

 

He's used the Consolidated Fund, the operating fund; he's used 

the Crown fund.  All . . . every growth debt, he's used it all, 

$3.5 billion.  He's used it all, and it's there and you can't get 

away from it.  So I want you to please quit talking about cutting 

back because of the Tory deficit. 

 

I want you, Mr. Minister, to tell me . . . tell me, Mr. Minister, 

why you even thought of touching health care whatsoever in 

your cut-backs.  Cut back on some place else.  Quit building 

highways.  Quit doing anything.  You could give your money 

to farmers.  You've just shut her right off, and you've had 

almost . . . The only people you haven't hurt in this province is 

the group of people you haven't met yet.  You've hurt 

everybody.  You've cut back and cut back. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, why are you, even for 2 per cent -- and 

don't stand up here and tell me, Mr. Minister, ah, we're just 

cutting back and we're going . . . You're so smooth and you're 

so nice and you're so quiet, and you stand up there so nice and 

you say, we're just going to trim the administration a little bit, 

just trim administration and we'll be able to carry on with the 

same care.  But on the same breath you said there's two doctors 

gone; there's some nurses gone.  For goodness' sakes, stand up 

here and say why the nurses . . . how many people were laid off 

in Weyburn. 

 

We know what's happened.  You had petitions from that area.  

So don't say that this isn't going to affect the mentally ill, 

because it is.  But tell us why you'd even cut back $1 for the 

mentally ill in this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe sometime ago 

the member indicated that he was sending over some material 

to check to see if I could read.  Well, I want to assure members 

of the committee, in fact I can read, and I'm going to quote 

from the material that the member sent over.  And I 

want all members to pay good and close attention to this. 

 

I have a quote on the material that the member sent over. 

 

 Mr. Minister, I'm not a finance man; you know that.  I was 

never a minister of Finance.  I never would be and I never 

had the capabilities of being one. 

 

Now that's a quote from the member from Arm River.  Well 

he's proven it again.  He's proven it again.  He doesn't have the 

capabilities of finance, because every time he gets up in this 

House and goes into his little spiel about the financial situation 

of the province, he knows that he's right off the mark. 

 

Now I will quote, I will quote the material that he sends over.  

It's a quote from the former minister of Finance indicating that 

in 1982," . . . the Crown corporation debt was $3.397 billion." 

 

There is no disagreement about that -- publicly documented.  

Everyone in the province knew it; widely reported; everyone 

understood it and knew it.  No news here. 

 

What the member from Arm River fails to point out in his 

comments tonight regularly in this House, was that in the 

Consolidated Fund in the province of Saskatchewan in 1982 

when he and his friends came to government, there was $139 

million cash, cash money in the bank. 

 

Now maybe the member from Wilkie disagrees with that.  

Maybe he can stand up and tell us that there wasn't $139 

million cash in the bank when those people came to 

government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that's verified by a report submitted to this 

legislature by the hon. Bob . . . now the member from Wilkie is 

wanting to ask some questions.  He'll have lots of time later 

tonight. 

 

A hundred and thirty-nine million dollars cash money in the 

bank.  And what did they do with that $139 million?  They ran 

it . . . they ran a deficit every year they were government -- a 

deficit every year they were government -- so they put us in 

debt in the Consolidated Fund upwards of $9 billion. 

 

Now when they were busy squandering the Consolidated Fund, 

they were also heaping up the debt on the Crown corporations.  

While they were heaping up the debt on the Crown 

corporations, they were signing us into loan guarantees and 

deals all over the continent that we're living with today. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is widely recognized . . . Mr. Chairman, 

widely recognized across our province, widely recognized 

across the nation, indeed, widely recognized across the 

continent that in terms of financial management, this Tory 

government in Saskatchewan in the 1980s is likely the worst on 

record anywhere. 



2006 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

Now they ran the debt up in this province at the rate of a billion 

dollars a year.  What are we paying in interest payments this 

year?  What's the payment this year? -- $800 million; $800 

million interest payment on the debt that you people ran up in 

this province.  And then he wonders why we need expenditure 

reductions.  We've got an interest payment of $800 million. 

That's half the whole budget for the Department of Health.  

That's almost the total budget for the Department of Education.  

It's more than we spend on Social Services, more than we 

spend on Agriculture -- $800 million paying interest on the 

debt that you people ran up. 

 

And then they have the gall to come into this House and say, 

well why are you cutting?  You shouldn't cut.  And then he 

says, you shouldn't cut mental health services.  The same 

government, member of the same government, in 1986-1987 

took 100 positions -- 100 positions -- out of mental health 

services in this province, and he's got the gall to come in here 

and say, why are you cutting 2 per cent?  Now I am going to 

say to him, I'm going to say it nicely because I intend to say it 

nicely: we don't like taking this 2 per cent.  We've tried to 

minimize the reduction to mental health services and we are 

trying to find it in administration. 

 

(2015) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I guess seeing this got to be a 

wide, varying debate here tonight -- we're into finances -- but 

we might as well just finish it a little bit.  I think you and I both 

learned that you can read and I can read but neither one of us 

are capable of being the Minister of Finance.  I've been a 

farmer, you've been a preacher, and we've never had any 

training whatsoever on financing.  And that's nothing against us 

as individuals, nothing against your credibility as a preacher 

and mine as a farmer. 

 

But I want to continue reading where . . . You read what you 

wanted to read so I'm going to continue reading because you 

brought in the figure of $139 million that wasn't there.  It's not 

mentioned in here.  Let's read what he says about the $139 

million.  I can't say his name in here, but the hon. minister of 

Finance -- that's the Deputy Premier today -- he states this: 

 

 Now, Mr. Chairman, on the Consolidated Fund (this is what 

you were talking about), which is the government side, 

taxpayer supported debt, do you know what it was, Mr. 

Chairman?  A hundred and ninety million dollars. 

 

In the hole.  That's not 139 million to the good so maybe I can 

read better than you, Mr. Minister.  Maybe I can read that. 

 

That's the things that you won't read.  You always want to read 

in here what you want to read.  Read the whole story.  I ask 

you, I invite you.  I only took one page out of Hansard, but 

that's four hours to get these figures out of him.  And so all I'm 

saying, and all I brought it up for 

is I'm asking you, Minister, to get off this here . . . because you 

just said tonight, you just said, Mr. Minister, oh we admit there 

was 3.9 . . . 3.3 . . . $3.397 billion.  Is that the same figure you 

used at election time, in 1991 election?  That these here Tories 

took us from a zero to 15 billion.  That's an absolute falsehood 

and you know it, Mr. Minister.  That's the point I'm trying to 

make. 

 

Three point . . . let's use your figure of 3.397 billion.  Then you 

add the 190 million, as where the minister comes out and says 

very clearly: 

 

 All told, when you consider the sinking funds which are 

provided . . . the gross debt for the province of Saskatchewan 

in 1982 was $3.5 billion. 

 

So for goodness' sake, let me say that because it's a fact.  It's 

me saying what your minister says. 

 

Anyway, how many nurses totally were laid off in the Weyburn 

hospital? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to be clear that the 

member understands we're not here talking about the Souris 

Valley Centre in Weyburn.  We're talking about the mental 

health clinic in Weyburn, not Souris Valley.  Okay?  At the 

Weyburn situation there were in fact eight person-years 

reduced.  It in fact affects nine people because there was a job 

share. 

 

Now the reduction there was because of the drop in demand for 

the beds.  Now had the fiscal resources been available to us, the 

staff we would have wanted to redeploy in community services.  

That luxury is not permitted to us because of the budget.  But in 

fact the reduction is a reduction in response to a lower demand 

for the beds.  The specific response to your question is eight 

person-years. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Yes, I'm pleased 

to hear that figure that it's not . . . I thought maybe it was higher 

than that and that's permissible.  But I don't like to see . . . I 

guess you can see that I'm quite upset about having any 

cut-back whatsoever in mental care. 

 

Anybody else that gets sick in the province -- I'm not saying 

that it isn't serious to have a cut-back -- but at least if they may 

be able to look for themselves and care for themselves and go 

out of province for help if they have to or whatever, but the 

mentally ill they have to be taken care of instantly.  When 

they're committed or whatever, they put themselves in or their 

family put, there's no such a thing that I can see of ever cutting 

back.  You can't have a waiting-list. 

 

I guess what I'm saying, there's certain illness you cannot have 

a waiting-list on.  If somebody has a stroke in Regina or 

Saskatchewan tonight, there's no such a thing as a waiting-list.  

You've got to have help . . . or a heart attack or a serious 

accident.  And I consider, Mr. Minister, the mentally ill to be in 

that category.  If somebody has just, just goes like that and they 

have to have help, there has to be help. 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2007 

And I don't like to see any cut-backs and I'm not going to ask 

any more questions, Mr. Minister, but I want to leave this 

comment with you that I don't like to . . . you can see I don't 

like you to be talking about this big deficit we left you.  You 

can understand what I'm saying and I mean that sincerely, 

because you didn't leave a zero deficit and then of course you 

shouldn't have any cut-backs on serious things like mentally ill 

when this government can find an extra $800,000 for the 

Deputy Premier to do I don't know what with.  And we're going 

to find out when it comes to his estimates and this is not up to 

you, Mr. Minister, to get involved in this. 

 

I just want to . . . I did have some questions.  Most of our time 

was on very constructive questions.  We got waylaid there by 

getting into the budget, you and I.  And I just want to thank 

your officials for having so many of those answers that I asked 

for and I thank you, Mr. Minister, also.  And now somebody 

else is going to ask you some questions. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

have a few questions I'd like to ask you and it's going back to 

what you were calling the community treatment order.  And my 

colleague from Rosetown, I think, developed with you and your 

officials the protection for the patient in the community 

treatment program and that's fair and it's good and it's very 

necessary and I accept that. 

 

However I would like to visit with you in regards to the other 

side of the equation and that is in the protection of the families 

and relatives in the cases where you have a patient taking 

community treatment and where the family or relatives, friends, 

whatever, do not agree with the assessment of the psychiatrist 

that's treating that person.  Can you outline to me what 

protection or what responsibility the attending psychiatrist 

would have in a case where you were giving a community 

treatment to a mentally disturbed person and where you had 

documented evidence that there was a disagreement between 

psychiatrists and social workers and stuff and something 

untoward happened.  In that circumstance, what responsibility 

would your department have or your treating doctors have in 

that case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm having a little 

difficulty.  I'm not sure I grasp entirely the member's . . . the 

totality of the member's question.  I think I hear him asking 

about how the family interest is protected if in fact the family 

of the individual is not in agreement with the prescribed 

community treatment order. 

 

In that situation -- and it could arise, Mr. Chair -- there are the 

review panels that currently exist.  And of course, each 

individual who would be involved with the community 

treatment order will have an official representative, an 

advocate.  There is always the process of appeal to the review 

panels.  And those appeals can be launched by family members 

and would certainly involve family members if they so desired 

it. 

Beyond that, if the review panel appeal is not successful, then 

individuals have the opportunity to appeal then to the Court of 

Queen's Bench. 

 

And so again, I say to the member, there are those appeal 

processes built into the system that would be available for 

family members should they not be in agreement with the 

community treatment order as prescribed by the medical 

profession. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The problem we 

have, and I have this . . . This is a problem that has been 

brought to my attention by one of my constituents, and that is 

where this person is being treated at home.  He has issued 

threats against the family -- death threats.  The attending 

psychiatrist says don't worry, he's all right.  He has limited 

mental capacity, but if nobody bothers him, he'll be fine.  The 

only time he's going to give you any trouble is if he becomes 

annoyed. 

 

Now the son is the one that the particular person seems to be 

annoyed at, and he went to the appeal.  He had a second 

opinion from another doctor who don't agree with the first 

doctor, and yet the first doctor says . . . won't accept another 

opinion. 

 

So here these people are and what I'm asking you . . . And now 

you're talking about going to court.  Well these people don't 

have the money to go to court.  And at the same time your 

department don't seem to want to listen to the concerns of the 

family.  The wife is so terrified she left the home.  So what I'm 

asking you is, is there another way for these people to get 

redress? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Ms. Chairperson, I want to say to the 

member: I don't want to get into a discussion here on the floor 

of the legislature of a specific situation.  I don't think he does 

either.  There may be some opportunity for us later on a more 

confidential basis to discuss the actual situation to which he 

refers.  And so it's a little hard to make specific comment if 

we're not going to talk about the specific situation, and I don't 

think we should here. 

 

But let me say that The Mental Health Services Act is very 

descriptive in its parameters and what can or can't be done 

under The Mental Health Services Act.  And again, as the 

debate has unfolded today, I'm sure we're all anxious that that 

be maintained.  There may be an option in the circumstance 

that you describe where there may be protections or remedies 

offered under The Dependent Adults Act, a different piece of 

legislation and some different processes there.  But I don't think 

I can comment any more specifically without knowing the very 

specifics of the situation to which the member refers. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I want to ask you 

why we shouldn't talk about it on the floor of the House.  These 

people have tried everything else and they can't get any 

recognition.  They can't get anything from the mental health 

people.  So there isn't any other 



2008 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

forum that they can go.  As I told you, they don't have the 

money to fight this to the Supreme Court of Canada, which to 

me is a very simplistic answer -- if you don't like what you get, 

take it to the courts.  Well, Mr. Minister, that don't happen all 

the time.  This person's psychiatrist is at least 50 miles away, 

and maybe 100 -- depends on which one they send out to him.  

So it isn't as simplistic as you'd like to make it. 

 

I have another question for you.  When you are administering 

drugs to a person in the community, or you're being 

administered drugs, who monitors whether that person gets the 

drugs or takes the drugs?  Who monitors that and passes the 

information up to where the doctor lives? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- On the first point, I disagree with the 

member.  If he thinks that this is the forum where we should 

have wide-ranging or detailed discussions about individuals in 

our province and their family situations and their mental health 

situations, I totally disagree.  Now I have not had any 

communication from that member, or, to my knowledge, 

neither has the Minister of Health.  I could be mistaken about 

this specific situation.  If he wants to provide that information 

on a confidential basis, we're more than happy to receive it and 

see if there's some assistance we can provide. 

 

But I totally disagree that here on the floor of the public 

legislature we would begin to discuss someone's medical 

condition, or a family situation, or mental health situation.  So I 

want to make that very clear. 

 

The member asked in terms of a situation where a community 

treatment order has been ordered and put in place, who is to 

monitor the administration of the medication and ensure that in 

fact the medication is being done.  With each community 

treatment order there will be someone named who is 

responsible for that role.  It may be the attending physician.  It 

may be someone else.  But there will be someone named who 

has responsibility to do just that. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm not too 

concerned about whether you agree with me or not.  That is 

simply . . . doesn't bother me one little bit.  And I would 

suggest to you, Mr. Minister, you've got a short memory.  You 

don't remember . . . I didn't bring anyone's name to this floor of 

the House, but when you were in opposition, your people did.  

So I would suggest that you take a little trip back on memory 

lane and think about how you performed and how you acted 

when you were on this side of the House. 

 

I would like to take you back to the Bill itself, Mr. Minister.  

And it was to do with a little of . . . my colleague from 

Souris-Cannington was working with you on.  And that is 

where you say that you're going to have a director.  I just can't 

pick it up right away, but . . . Yes there it is.  Yes, regional 

director -- that's what I was looking for.  You're going to have a 

regional director.  Could I ask you, sir, what is the 

qualifications of that person who you say will acknowledge or 

not that district director? 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, these are of course I think 

general criteria that we would be looking for in that kind of 

person.  It would be someone with some fairly advanced 

managerial and administrative kinds of skills. 

 

It would be someone who would have knowledge of the Act 

and the implementation and operations of the Act.  It would be 

someone who would need knowledge in terms of mental health 

services and mental health treatments, that sort of thing. 

 

It would generally, although not I guess necessarily, but I think 

it would generally be someone who's had some service 

background in the mental health area.  And I'm sure we would 

want someone who would be competent and capable of 

recruiting other good and competent people. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, that's quite a 

far-ranging criteria.  Could you tell me what level you would 

expect that person to have in mental health training?  I'm sure I 

agree that he'd have to -- he or she -- would have to have those 

qualifications. 

 

But what I'm interested in is what level would be acceptable 

and what level would not be.  This is what I'm getting at, 

because we could have a lot of qualified people who could 

manage, who are fiscally responsible kind of people, but didn't 

know very much about mental health.  This is what I'd like to 

find out: what level, in your mind, this person would have to 

have. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- If the member's asking for sort of 

educational criteria, maybe the best way we can describe it, is 

to describe the kind of backgrounds and criteria that exist 

among our current regional directors across the province.  And 

it's quite a range. 

 

We have some who come from . . . with a psychiatric nursing 

background; some who come with social services background.  

We have one, or some, that have in fact a Ph.D. doctorate in 

psychology.  We have someone who may have a bachelor's 

degree in social work. 

 

There's not a specific Ph.D. or master's level or bachelor degree 

that's prescribed here.  What is prescribed is a competent 

individual with the proper background and experience and 

skills for the job. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- I gather from that you don't have a criteria in 

your mind.  It doesn't have to be a psychiatrist.  It could be a 

psychiatric nurse.  It could be . . . But I can't quite figure where 

a social worker would come into this equation.  Social workers 

are indeed professional people and do a very good job in their 

place, but I would wonder how they would qualify in a mental 

health situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member has . . 

. will have reviewed some of the advertised positions that from 

time to 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2009 

time, when he was in government, were advertised -- from time 

to time are advertised now.  And very often he will see that 

these positions will have a requirement for some 

post-secondary education, perhaps a post-graduate education. 

 

But he will also know that very often the request for 

applications would be extended to those who have experience 

in the field or related fields. 

 

And I'm surprised that the member would stand in this House 

tonight and suggest that somehow people who are involved in 

social work wouldn't perhaps have skills in mental health.  In 

fact there are many of our social workers in the province who 

are very skilled, very skilled in dealing with mental illness.  I 

won't name some, but I know some personally.  So I want to 

assure the member that there are indeed social workers in our 

province who have real and practised skills in the mental health 

field. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm certainly not going to 

argue that.  What I'm trying to get at I guess is -- and it appears 

that you don't have . . . you haven't set a criteria here.  You say 

here that you will appoint, as a minister, or you will get a 

director, but you don't seem to have thought it out in your mind 

or in the Bill what qualifications this person must have.  And 

that's all I'm asking.  What level, what is the least . . . Now you 

can tell me that a social worker is qualified.  All right, I'm not 

saying they can't be.  But what I'm trying to find out is what 

level, what is the level that you are going to ask for in that job 

description? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Ms. Chairperson, we are going to ask for 

the right mix of skills, ability, education, and experience to 

meet the needs of the position.  We have been employing 

regional directors in this province for many years.  They've 

been hired for many years.  They don't all fit one educational 

mould or one employment or experience mould but each have 

been employed because of their combination of competencies 

that make them the right person for the job, and that will 

continue. 

 

If the member has some suggestion, perhaps he could be a little 

more positive in his questioning tonight.  I take it he thinks 

there ought to be some very specific criteria.  He thinks there 

ought to be for instance a Ph.D. or a masters in something or 

other.  Well help the discussion, Mr. Member.  Help the 

discussion and tell us what you think these very specific criteria 

ought to be.  Our view is that you set out the description of the 

position and then look for the right combination of education 

and experience to undertake the task. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, for the offer but 

you're changing the Bill.  You're the people that's bringing it 

forward and I was just curious to see had you given any 

thought.  Had you decided that this person had to be a 

psychiatrist or not?  That's all I asked. 

 

Now you went all over the map telling me that this person may 

have, should have, might have, could have.  Well to me that 

wasn't an answer.  And I don't think you have an answer.  I 

don't think you even 

thought about it, that's the problem. 

 

Now I would like to just go to another question, Mr. Minister.  

It says, under existing provision, it says: "The minister shall 

appoint for each region a regional director . . ."  And then down 

in existing provision 7 it says: "The minister shall designate a 

person for each facility . . ."  Is that the same person? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I want to just refresh the member's mind 

and knowledge of what is in fact happening with this piece of 

legislation in this regard.  We are simply making the change so 

that regional directors may or may not be direct employees of 

the Department of Health.  So in the circumstance of a district 

formation and some shift of responsibilities to that district, in 

that eventuality the individual involved here that will be 

designated may be in fact be an employee of the district rather 

than the department directly. 

 

This has no effect -- zero effect, Mr. Member -- zero effect on 

the qualifications question. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, but that isn't what I asked you.  We 

had gone into the qualification thing and you didn't have an 

answer there so I left it.  And I went to what is in paragraph 6, 

you say existing provision.  And it says there: 

 

 7(1) The minister shall appoint for each region a regional 

director to be responsible for the administration of all 

services (and so on) . . . 

 

Okay?  Now down here in 7 under the heading, existing 

provision 8(1): 

 

 The minister shall designate a person for each facility to be 

the person responsible for the administration . . . 

 

Now all I asked you, sir, was: is that the same person? 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairperson, not likely.  The answer 

would be, not likely.  There is an eventuality, I guess, it could 

be the same person, but that, I think, would be unlikely.  The 

regional director would not likely appoint him or herself as the 

director of a facility. 

 

Now there could be a circumstance -- I don't want to say never 

-- but there could be a circumstance where it would be the same 

person, but that would be highly unlikely. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  You obviously didn't 

read the two paragraphs.  It says, "the minister shall appoint," 

in both instances. 

 

Now I agree that the director wouldn't appoint himself I don't 

suppose, but what I'm asking you . . . It says the minister -- that 

would be yourself, sir, -- shall appoint a director.  And in both 

paragraphs it says the same. 



2010 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

Now I'm asking:  would that be the same person that you're 

appointing?  That's all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairperson, I thought we were 

debating the amendments, not the current Act.  All right, I'll 

read it for the member.  In 6(1), I believe that's where he begins 

to refer to, the current Act begins by saying, "The minister shall 

appoint an Executive Director . . .  Correct? 

 

Under the new provision: 

 

 (1) The minister shall appoint an employee of the department 

as director of mental health services and prescribe his or her 

duties . . . 

 

 (2) The minister may authorize the director to delegate to 

other officers of the department any power given to the 

director by this Act and the regulations. 

 

Are we on the same section? 

 

8(1), proposed amendment: 

 

 (1) The regional director may designate a person for each 

facility that is located in the region to be the person 

responsible for the administration of this Act in the facility. 

 

So the amendment would have the regional director 

appointing/designating a person for each facility responsible for 

the legislation.  Not the minister. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That's all for just 

now.  I'll maybe come back a little later. 

 

In the meantime, thank you very much for your help.  My 

colleague wants to ask you a few questions. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Madam Chairman.  Nice to see 

some fresh new faces in the chairman's chair.  I want to 

congratulate you on being there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, I had looked at this Bill rather 

briefly and quickly some time back and thought that it seemed 

to be a rather easy sort of a Bill to accept and to look through 

and to face reality; I thought it probably wouldn't take long for 

us to get through it and to allow it to become law. 

 

Unfortunately, it becomes more complicated when you sort out 

some of the sort of obvious things that hit your mind.  A 

peaceful man of the cloth handling a Bill would give one the 

impression that it's probably being properly done.  And in all 

fairness, I think we're very fortunate to have you handling this 

kind of a Bill and putting your feelings and thoughts into it, 

because obviously when we're dealing with problems to do 

with health, and especially with the mentally ill, no matter at 

what level, it requires not just good law, but compassion and 

understanding as well.  And I'm sure that you can bring that not 

just to the Bill, but to the interpretation of what happens as a 

result of the Bill. 

Unfortunately, as we've gone through this, the simplicity for 

me has disappeared.  And I find it now appearing to be a 

somewhat complicated matter to understand, and so I guess 

what I'm saying is that the longer we've gone on with this and 

the more I've listened, the more confused I've become as to just 

exactly how people are really going to be affected. 

 

I've got several little points to make -- nothing prolonged in any 

area.  So I'll be jumping along as we go from one area to the 

other because I've sort of picked up some problems in my 

thinking of what's been happening here. 

 

You talked about the incentive of community treatments for 

some of the folks, and I think that's a good concept.  I think you 

probably have a good idea here that folks that need to take 

medication have to be kept on it on a regular basis. 

 

I have personally seen an example where an individual required 

some medication in order to stabilize his life patterns, and when 

he didn't take his proper medication, of course the results were 

very negative.  If there has or had been, as this programs 

suggests, a way that someone would have checked each day to 

make sure that that medication had been taken, he wouldn't 

have slipped into those regressive periods in life.  It wasn't 

deliberate or planned, it was just that sometimes he'd forget.  

So I think you've got a good idea here. 

 

I'm wondering about a few things that could be done though 

when you suggest there sort of is a need to go to a doctor or 

someone like that. We suddenly find ourselves looking at a 

very high-cost professional being involved in what basically 

amounts to not much more than sort of a day care centre sort of 

observation.  And I'm wondering if we have to go to the length 

of having this sort of program put into the hands of that high a 

professional person. 

 

Couldn't we, for example, have someone like the druggist in the 

store who administers medicine, maybe have their assistant 

watch this person.  That just comes to mind because I happen to 

have some feelings about druggists doing a good job in their 

profession.  So maybe I'll let you comment on that, if we can 

sort of save some money by doing this on a less high level. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I thank the member for his question and 

his obvious interest and concern about this legislation and I 

think the whole field of mental health services.  I want to 

reassure and remind the member that in the case of a 

community treatment order there will very often be a 

designated case manager appointed in the order and that would 

be a caseworker to work with the client or the patient, the 

individual involved.  And that case manager, caseworker, 

certainly need not be a doctor. 

 

Now we also want to emphasize that it's simply not stability in 

terms of medication that is required.  While that's an important 

ingredient in the community 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2011 

treatment, we're also seeking to build stability in the workplace, 

stability in the home, all of which contribute to stability for the 

individual, and that caseworker would be working along on all 

of these fronts to try and provide that stability in a coordination 

of services. 

 

Now there will be a requirement that there be some scheduled 

appointments with an attending psychiatrist, attending 

physician.  And we think that is important, simply for the 

ongoing mental health of the individual, that there is an 

ongoing involvement.  But on a more frequent if not daily 

basis, it would be a caseworker who is primarily involved with 

the individual. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I guess that raises some questions, Madam 

Chairman, as to just exactly who we're dealing with when you 

talk about these case-loads, Mr. Minister.  First of all, you say 

by order.  I guess my first question is:  who would always be 

giving this order?  Are we dealing with a specific group of 

criminally insane people here or is this an order that comes 

from someone in the mental institution where we would be 

dealing with any level of mental disorder, all ranges of mental 

disorder, or are we talking about a specific target group like the 

criminally insane? 

 

The other question that people will ask me when they're 

thinking about this is: would all people who are under this 

order necessarily require psychiatric treatment on a continuing 

basis, or would they be able to go in for three-month check-ups 

or six-month check-ups? 

 

Now the individual I was talking to you about a few minutes 

ago didn't really have the kind of mental disorder that required 

constant counselling.  He needed simply to stay on that 

lower-than-stress level through his medication.  And by doing 

that, as long as it was consistent, he only really needed to check 

in with the doctor every three months or every six months.  

Now are we talking about a whole different class of people 

here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Ms. Chairperson, the answer is yes.  We 

are not here talking about with . . . in the area of the community 

treatment order, we are not talking about those individuals who 

are affected by Criminal Code provisions.  They are the subject 

of the other part of the legislation dealing with long-term 

detention. 

 

We are here talking about a certain number of people who are 

defined in fact in the Act in some relatively specific criteria in 

section 24, described as community treatment order.  I just 

might run through some of this with the member so it's clear 

that we are talking about not someone subject to Criminal Code 

provisions, but rather a person who is described by legislation 

as: 

 

 (i) the person is suffering from a mental disorder for which he 

or she is in need of treatment or care and supervision in the 

community and that the treatment and care can be provided in 

the 

 community; 

 

 (ii) (this person) during the immediate preceding two year 

period, the person: 

 

  (A) has been detained in an in-patient facility for a total of 

60 days or longer; 

  (B) has been detained in an in-patient facility on three or 

more separate occasions; or 

  (C) has previously been the subject of a community 

treatment order; 

 

And further: 

 

 (iii) if the person does not receive treatment or care and 

supervision while residing in the community, the person is 

likely to cause harm to himself or herself or to others, or to 

suffer substantial mental or physical deterioration, as a result 

of the mental disorder; 

 

And: 

 

 (iv) the services that the person requires in order to reside in 

the community so that the person will not be likely to cause 

harm to himself or herself or to others, or to suffer substantial 

mental or physical deterioration: 

 

  (A) exist in the community; 

  (B) are available to the person; and 

  (C) will be provided to the person; 

 

And I don't know if I need to read it all, but I think the member 

can understand that it's a very strict set of criteria that is set out 

here in the Act defining who are those who would be subject to 

a community treatment order. 

 

But I want to re-emphasize to the member's question, it's not 

those who are involved through the Criminal Code system or 

the criminal justice system. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you for that explanation, Minister.  I 

think it is important that we have the public understand that this 

Bill sort of does deal with two different levels, or two different 

directions, of needs within the area of mental health. 

 

We are dealing with ordinary folks sort of who are only more 

or less a hazard to themself in one section, and I guess we're 

dealing with the criminally insane in the other section; and 

there's a real big distinction there, of difference in terms of 

what the general public perceives as being important in how we 

deal with these matters. 

 

I'm wondering, now we've talked about making significant 

changes to the way that we're going to handle a lot of folks in 

our society, and some of it sounds really good in principle, in 

that we are going to now try to do these things on a local basis 

and have the community involved and try to keep folks on an 

even keel in their own communities and try to get them into 

work and jobs and those kinds of things, and make 



2012 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

them have a productive and, I guess, a real life.  And that's 

great. 

 

But with all these kind of changes, the taxpayer probably is 

starting to think in terms, how much is this going to cost me?  

So have you done some estimations of what the changes in 

your programs will cost the taxpayer in the long run, or have 

you actually identified that you can make real money savings 

for the taxpayer?  Which way will it go and what kind of 

dollars are we talking about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairperson, I have to admit, as we 

go through this day I am able to rise more quickly with the 

answers having answered the same question now I think four 

times to four different members. 

 

As I have said, I believe, on three other occasions during the 

course of this day and questioning about this Bill:  point 

number one, the efforts being undertaken by this Bill are not 

primarily financial in their intention; it's not primarily a piece 

of legislation that will either expend dollars or, on the other 

hand, save substantial dollars.  We believe the motivation for 

this legislation is for the care of Saskatchewan people. 

 

(2100) 

 

However, in terms of long-term detention, there should be . . . 

in the long-term detention portion of the Bill there should be no 

cost implications at all.  If people are now being detained on a 

long term and that long-term care is still required, there is 

therefore no change. 

 

In terms of the community treatment order, if by the 

community treatment order individuals are enabled to live in 

the community setting rather than finding themselves back 

through the doors of the in-patient facility, there may well be 

some cost saving -- understanding that the in-patient facility 

will be a more expensive situation than someone who is living 

in the community. 

 

Now because we have set some new criteria and some very 

strict criteria, there may be some small increase in costs for, for 

instance, extra responsibilities for the official representatives, 

some extra review panel hearings, and so on.  We estimate that 

those new costs would range somewhere between 13,000 and 

$15,000 total for the province over the course of a year. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Madam Chairperson, Minister, I'll have to 

apologize to you, being the fine gentleman that you are, 

because I did hear the answer earlier today and I was just 

checking to see if your answers are going to be consistent.  And 

I have to give you an A in this category because you are 

consistent yet and we're glad to see that because the taxpayers 

have a way of wondering if politicians are consistent in their 

answers and truthfully being honest with the costs of what 

things are going to be.  And so I just wanted to play that little 

trick of putting you to the test, and I'm happy that you've 

passed it so far. 

You were referring to a list a minute ago of criteria under 

which people qualify for certain programs, and I have to admit 

that when I went through it I wondered if most of the 

politicians around our world might not somehow qualify.  And 

I hope that's seen as humour by the folks out in the rest of the 

world, but I'm afraid that we all become very dangerously close 

to qualifying to the needs of these Bills at some points in our 

lives and today might be an example of that. 

 

I wondered if a person who was incarcerated as a result of a 

criminal action related to a mental disorder, if that person were 

sort of kept incarcerated and then was deemed, I suppose, by 

whoever -- I'm not sure of the right word -- or observed to be or 

decided to be well enough to go, and if that person decided that 

in their minds they weren't fit to be in society, can a person like 

that request to stay in custody or request to stay incarcerated in 

whatever facility, and be obliged . . . or must they leave once 

they are determined to be well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Ms. Chairperson, to the member 

opposite, he too is passing most of the tests that I'm applying 

here.  He seems to be asking many of the same questions, 

although I give him full marks on this one.  I think this is a new 

and unique question that we haven't had today yet. 

 

If I understand the member's question, it is this.  I believe he is 

asking of that situation where an individual who may now be 

receiving in-patient treatment, if it is the opinion then of the 

care-givers that this person is ready to re-enter community life, 

and that person then says that he or she does not feel ready, 

would he be or she be obliged to leave. 

 

In that circumstance I'm sure that the health care professionals 

involved, and others, would want to work with a great deal of 

compassion and understanding to try and understand why that 

individual did not feel ready to re-enter a community life.  It 

may be appropriate at that point that there be some interim 

steps taken.  I don't think it would be a situation where 

someone would be dramatically or Draconianly pushed out into 

the community.  A good deal of sensitivity, I know, is used by 

professionals in the field. 

 

On the other side of that equation, many people do present 

themselves to a psychiatrist or to other mental health 

care-givers requesting treatment and they are, for the most part, 

then welcomed and provided with what treatments are 

appropriate. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  I guess the reason I 

thought of this question was because of the fellow over in 

California who was a serial killer and whose right to ask for 

parole had arrived and he himself had said no, I don't want to 

be paroled; I don't want to go into society because I know if I 

go out of this institution I will kill again; I won't be able to 

control myself; I just know that.  And they, of course, decided 

to keep him in jail and I'm quite happy they did. 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2013 

And of course, in the terms of someone who is suffering from a 

mental problem in our circumstance who has that same inner 

feeling, I'm hoping that the system is capable of keeping that 

kind of a person out of trouble if they know themselves that 

they just can't stay.  Because I think it's a kind of a predestined 

sort of prophecy, I guess, or pre-arrived-at prophecy, that he's 

going to kill again.  He's going to talk himself into it just to 

prove that he was right.  So you can't dare let him out because 

he's going to say, I'll go kill somebody now because I want to 

prove that I was right; they should have kept me.  So I hope 

that you will put that into the context of delivering the meaning 

of your Bill so that officials will have that opportunity to make 

that decision.  That when some people feel that they can't 

possibly cope with society, that in fact you don't allow them to 

go out into society and force them, sort of, to make a terrible 

error and hurt somebody else. 

 

So with that, I want to just comment, Minister, about the fact 

that you've indicated that there are some financial cut-backs 

involved in your programs and your plans.  And while I see 

some really positive opportunities in the way you're delivering 

this Bill and the circumstances around it for saving money, I 

also worry as my colleagues did earlier -- and I want to say this 

in my words so that it is reflected to the community that we are 

all concerned -- we must be very careful not to fight the deficit 

on the backs of the sick, and most particularly on the sick that 

can't fend for themselves or argue their own point. 

 

I can justify charging people who have money for drugs that 

they need, or whatever, as you folks have done.  And I can live 

with that.  But there are some areas of illness that simply 

cannot be left to the payment of the individuals or it won't 

happen.  Society must accept the responsibility, and you as 

minister, I hope will understand that and assure the general 

public that you're going to do that. 

 

I have one little question I want to ask that's not related to that.  

And I have a concern that we may not have enough 

professionals in our province to handle some of these things.  

And my simple question would be: do we have enough 

psychiatrists in our province and in our system to be able to 

cope with the mental health problems of our population? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Madam Chairperson, again, I appreciate 

what is I think obvious concern that the member has for mental 

health services.  In regard to the provision of psychiatric 

services and psychiatrists in our province, while we may have a 

somewhat lower than average per thousand provision of 

psychiatrists in Saskatchewan, we do have without question the 

best geographic provision of psychiatric services and the 

services of psychiatrists through clinics and so on and their 

placement in the province.  Recruitment of psychiatrists is a 

perennial difficulty.  As the member will know it's not a new 

difficulty; it's a difficulty we've faced.  But we do have a 

significant number of psychiatrists in the province and we're 

very pleased about the kind of geographic placement of 

those services and their ability to service all areas of our 

province. 

 

I do want to say as well we don't want to focus simply on one 

discipline in mental health, that the provision of health care, 

mental health care services, is multi-disciplinary.  It's not 

simply psychiatrists, but there are many other care-givers 

providing services to those with mental illness. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I thank the Chair for that.  Mr. Minister, I 

understand that the modifications, amendments to this Bill are a 

result of changes to the Criminal Code.  Could you briefly 

describe for me -- and I have a couple or three questions on 

section 24.1 where the officer in charge of a facility can apply 

for a Saskatchewan order to detention of that person for a 

period not to exceed one year, an extra year of detention -- why 

that's necessary to comply with the change in the Criminal 

Code?  If you would . . . page 3, halfway down, why that's 

absolutely necessary.  That's the first question. 

 

Secondly, what the recourse is of the individual, the patient or 

whoever in terms of, if they find it particularly unfair to be 

detained for another year, what recourse do they have?  Or do 

they have additional recourses because we're modifying this 

because of the change in the Criminal Code?  Do they have 

additional power to protect themselves? 

 

And three, are you totally comfortable with the fact that the 

people making this decision, the officer in charge, understands 

the consequence of adding this enormous power to detain 

another individual for that period of time?  Have you had 

anything that would help you or convince you that they totally 

understand the impact of this on people's lives? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Madam Chairperson, to the member from 

Estevan, we believe the change in the Criminal Code does in 

fact necessitate change in our own mental health legislation.  

With the situation with the change to the Criminal Code, what 

in fact can happen as a result of the change is that an individual 

who is now held in an in-patient facility and is being held there 

because he or she was declared not criminally responsible 

because of a mental disorder, may in fact still present a real 

danger to the community, to others, or to him or herself if 

released as a result of the federal legislation. 

 

(2115) 

 

Again I emphasize to the committee that in the context of 

Saskatchewan this is a very, very limited number of people, a 

very, very limited number of people.  But even in the case of 

one or two individuals, should that one or two individuals find 

themselves in the community as a result of the change at the 

Criminal Code level, this could present a serious problem to 

others or to themselves. 

 

So we feel that the change is necessary, and I think and I would 

hope all members would agree.  However, we also recognize 

that we are extending therefore powers 



2014 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

under this Act to detain individuals, and those powers must be 

very, very carefully monitored and provided and so on.  And 

therefore the criteria, as set out in the legislation, it's very strict 

and the long-term detention order can only be for a period of 

one year at a time and no longer.  I've read earlier into the 

record the various criteria and then I would remind the member 

from Estevan of the opportunities that will exist for someone 

who has been placed under a long-term detention order to 

appeal. 

 

The review of the long-term order -- and I'll just read from the 

documents here -- the review of a long-term detention order 

may be submitted to the Court of Queen's Bench.  And also I 

would point out again that these long-term orders are not 

ordered by the head of the institution.  They are ordered by the 

courts, by the Court of Queen's Bench.  The institutional head 

will make the application based on medical evidence and so on, 

but they are ordered by the court.  An application for review 

may be submitted to the Court of Queen's Bench by any one of: 

the person who is actually being detained; his or her nearest 

relative; the officer in charge of the facility on medical 

evidence that things have changed; the person's official 

representative which again is likely a legal representative; or 

any other person that has sufficient interest.  There are no limits 

on applications for review of the decision.  And on receiving 

the application, the court is instructed to conduct that review, at 

which time the court may either affirm or rescind the restriction 

order. 

 

Now a new provision that has not existed to date but now exists 

is that for those who simply cannot afford the court procedures 

we will fund the application.  There would be funding 

available. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, why did you pick a period 

of a year and what triggers . . . There would be a saw-off, I 

suppose, if somebody was in an institution and due to changes 

in the Criminal Code they might be released.  They may or may 

not.  Why did you decide well it will be nothing or a year? 

 

I could retain them for another year or or we can apply to have 

them for another year.  Are they on the margin?  Well some 

you could say fine, let them go.  Some we would say no, it's a 

whole year.  And that year's very important because if you're a 

patient and you are forced to stay another year, obviously it's 

very, very serious because you're restricted and it may be 

unfairly, and that will be a second line of questions which you 

attempted to address. 

 

But why did you pick that period?  Why couldn't you stagger it, 

why couldn't you move it up, why couldn't you say well, we'll 

look at it quarterly.  There can be a review in a matter of 

months.  I mean if the intention of the legislation, the 

amendment here, is to be a back-up defence mechanism for 

society, does it have to be a year?  Could it be a combination of 

time periods or review that kept the public feeling all right but 

also let the patient know or person that was in the institution 

know that gosh, I'm going to have to try to fight this for a year 

and it is unfair. 

Let's take the side of the patient for a moment and say, maybe it 

is really unfair.  It's a long time, and as you know, going to 

court takes a long time and it's expensive.  And we can get into 

some of those questions, but why did you pick the year as a 

time period? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I think, Ms. Chairperson, if the member 

would carefully consider the legislation he would understand 

that in fact it is for a period not to exceed one year -- one year 

is the maximum.  It could be in fact be a long-term detention 

for something less than a year -- a month, two months, six 

months -- whatever I think is judged as appropriate by those 

who would be making the decision at the time. 

 

The legislation indicates that it's not to exceed one year.  And 

again, no matter what the definition of the time frame, the 

appeal process, the review process, can be launched at any time 

and there's no limit on the number of times that it can be 

launched. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Is there any indication how long the appeal 

process would take if the recommendation is that we'll keep the 

patient in for a month?  How long is the appeal process if we're 

going to make it for six months or we're going to make it for a 

year?  Is there any correlation or is there any comfort that you 

can give a patient that the appeal process . . . I mean any 

additional comfort that you can give the patient. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- The advice that I have, Ms. Chairperson, 

is that it would likely be a three-day process to get it to the 

court; at most, a five-day process. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- As a result of the Criminal Code changes, 

somebody expects, or the director of an institution expects, that 

an individual might be released, what will trigger that 

manager's decision to apply for this?  What will trigger that 

manager's decision to say no, I think we should just hold this 

off for a week or a month or six months?  What will be the 

criteria used by the manager of the institution to trigger this 

decision that we will keep this person in the institution for a 

longer reason? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Again, I will just read into the record the 

criteria, as they are set out.  Again I remind the members of the 

committee that an individual needs to meet all five of the 

criteria, not just one of the above, but all five together. 

 

And they are: a person must be suffering from a mental 

disorder for which he or she needs treatment, or care and 

supervision, which can only be provided in a psychiatric 

in-patient facility; a person, as a result of the mental disorder, 

be unable to fully understand and to make an informed decision 

regarding treatment or care and supervision; number three, a 

person, as a result of the mental disorder, will be likely to cause 

bodily harm to self or to others; number four, a person who has 

been detained for 60 or more consecutive days immediately 

prior to an application; and point number five, suffer from a 

severely disabling, 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2015 

continuing mental disorder that is likely to persist for more than 

21 days. 

 

So on the basis of those five criteria, the administrative head of 

the institution would review those five criteria.  And if that 

individual met all five, then could submit an application for a 

further long-term detention. 

 

It doesn't mean that the application would be awarded, but that 

the application would be made, along with corresponding 

medical evidence, to the Court of Queen's Bench and then the 

Bench would have to decide. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- That's fair enough.  Those five conditions may 

be evident and that's why the individual is there. 

 

What would cause the manager to say, given those five, I 

would pick that the individual should stay one more week, or 

one more month, or six months.  What kinds of variations in 

those would be left to the judgement of the individual 

manager?  How would they make the decision that say no, the 

Criminal Code has said this person could be released; I think 

it's okay.  Or no, I think the individual should stay 10 more 

days, or should stay up to a whole year.  What kinds of things 

can health care officials expect to see in terms of comforting 

criteria from any of the offices of government or the law that 

would make sure that people are being treated honestly, fairly, 

in terms of this additional incarceration? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Ms. Chairperson, in the current 

circumstance, detentions can be extended by a review process 

that would happen with two psychiatrists reviewing the patient 

every 21 days.  What we're endeavouring here to do is to 

provide a different mechanism for those very, very small 

numbers of people who are now occupying in-patient facilities 

because of the Criminal Code provisions -- unfit to stand trial, 

or not criminally responsible for their actions.  So these criteria 

are set out. 

 

And at some point, of course, we need to trust the professional 

judgement of the health care provider, the administrative head 

of the facility.  At some point you need to trust that person's 

professional judgement who works with these individuals more 

or less on a daily basis. 

 

Now in making the application therefore, this individual, the 

administrative head, takes his or her best case to the court.  But 

ultimately the judge decides based on all of the evidence.  And 

there certainly would be opportunity in that setting because the 

individual will have an official representative, will have legal 

representation.  The individual may have other family or 

interested people who would be part of the process who may 

bring their points of view.  But I think in terms of making that 

initial application, there is a point at which you need to trust the 

professional judgement of the on-site care-giver, in this case 

the administrative head. 

Mr. Devine: -- Well that's fair enough.  But you see, Mr. 

Minister, we're giving that professional the power to request to 

keep an individual another year. 

 

Now all we're want to know, and patients and family members 

of patients want to know, is that given this increased power, we 

would really like to know how you're going to exercise that 

power.  We understand the five basic criteria of why you might 

be there to start with, but when you start making decisions that 

you're going to keep them a little longer and a little longer and 

a little longer -- maybe this long or maybe six months or maybe 

up to a year -- we would kind of like to know what criteria 

you're going to base that on because the patient does not have 

increased power. 

 

But clearly somebody has increased capacity to put them in an 

institution or keep them there longer.  So, you're right, you 

have to trust the judgement of the people that are working as 

professionals there.  But you have handed them, with this Bill, 

the capacity -- an enormous capacity -- over another person's 

life. 

 

Are you saying to me that there is nothing new that you are 

going to provide these people, these managers, no new criteria, 

no new mechanisms, no new appeals, no new anything other 

than you have the power, if you want to call six months, you've 

got it and we'll leave it up to you.  I mean everything's the same 

except they have the power to keep them there for another year 

or power to recommend that they're there for another year.  

Everything is the same except the power of the individual 

director is certainly increased and then the judgement is all 

theirs.  Is that what you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- No, no.  I want the member to keep in 

mind that no new power to detain is vested in the 

administrative head of the facility.  No new power is vested 

there.  The power that has placed that individual -- if we're 

talking to people that are in that institution as a result of the 

Criminal Code provisions -- the power that has placed that 

individual in the institution is the power of the courts. 

 

In this case, what is happening will be the ability for the 

administrative head of the institution to make application.  This 

administrative head has no power to insist the detention 

beyond, and therefore the decision again is being made by the 

courts based on evidence, medical evidence, testimony and 

other criteria that the court would have before it. 

 

Now the administrative head is someone who will have 

competency, we hope, in the field of mental health and mental 

treatment and mental illness and would not lightly make an 

application for a long-term detention be it for a month more or 

six months or a year more, unless I'm sure that person felt there 

were very good grounds, that in fact all of the criteria, 

including the criteria which says that the person continues to 

require treatment or care which can only be provided in the 

institution . . . The administrator doesn't have the power to 

institute the long-term order, only now has the opportunity to 

make application to the courts. 



2016 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I understand that, Mr. Minister. The officer in 

charge has a new-found power to apply to the courts that he 

didn't have before.  That's what the amendment is.  The 

amendment here on section 24.1 is a new-found power to 

apply.  And if you have a new-found power to apply to keep 

people in an institution, then the public would like to know 

how are you going to treat those new-found powers to apply to 

have people to stay in the institution.  And why will you judge 

it for a week or six weeks or six months or take them in there 

for another year? 

 

Now you have provided nothing, no new qualifications for 

those officers, no new criteria for those officers, nothing new 

for the officers except the increased power to apply to keep 

people in for another year.  Now fair enough if you're 

comfortable with that.  I would think people would like to 

know that you have given that more thought and your officials 

have given it more thought; that if you have the capacity to do 

this, to apply, likely be successful, the individual has no more 

power, same power as they always had, they just have to 

defend themselves and they can be . . . the manager or the 

officer can apply and apply and apply. 

 

I just would like to know, if you're saying there's no new 

criteria, it's the same as it is; we'll just trust their judgement but 

they have power to keep people . . . apply to keep people in for 

another year.  Fair enough. 

 

But then at least it's on the record -- there are no new criteria or 

no additional safeguards on the discretion of these officers in 

charge when they have this new power to apply to keep 

somebody in for another year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I think the member from Estevan is 

exaggerating what he perceives to be a difficulty here.  Now 

recall, if we're talking about those who are now in an in-patient 

facility as a result of the Criminal Code before the change, 

these individuals were there for an indefinite period because of 

judgement of professionals that that kind of care, and 

judgement of the courts, that that kind of care is required in this 

case. 

 

Now because of the change at the Criminal Code level, there is 

an opportunity for these individuals to be reintroduced to the 

communities without the mechanisms to prevent that.  There 

are, in a very limited number of cases, situations where I think 

it would be the common judgement of all that in fact it would 

present a danger to the community, to others, and indeed to the 

individual to be released back into the community. 

 

So what have we done?  We have in fact set up five -- not zero, 

but five -- new, very specific criteria before any application can 

be made.  And it's not a situation where you just need to meet 

one of the criteria, you need to meet all five.  And I think the 

member will recognize that these are very stringent criteria. 

Now even having met -- in the judgement of the care-giver on 

site, the administrative head, in the judgement of that person -- 

all of these five very specific criteria have been met, it is still 

not within the power of that individual to extend the detention.  

That must then be presented to the court with medical evidence 

to back up the application and must meet then the judgement 

and test of the courts.  Now if the member is suggesting that the 

courts are not competent to do this, then perhaps he can suggest 

another mechanism by which it should be done.  I hope he 

would agree that there needs to be a mechanism. 

 

We are not providing to individuals, new powers; we are 

providing a new opportunity.  With that new opportunity, there 

are five very specific, very demanding criteria that must be 

met, and those criteria must be taken to a court of law and 

proven in that court of law with the appropriate medical 

evidence. 

 

So we feel the safeguards are here in the legislation that the 

member seems to be concerned about. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I mean these are always 

difficult cases, but I have a letter before me where obviously a 

person does not like the treatment that they are receiving.  This 

individual is forced to take injections, is not happy with it, and 

suffers because of it. 

 

If we assume that people who have been in treatment centres 

are the kinds of people that we could repair and they could 

improve . . . Assume for a moment that an individual was about 

to be released, and under your legislation the officer in charge 

-- as a result of changes to the Criminal Code the man could be 

released -- the officer says no, I think we're going to keep this 

person in for another year.  You can imagine the fear and the 

worry and distress that would happen to an individual who was 

under psychiatric care, if they found out that their officer in 

charge, who they know is going to either threaten them with or 

could apply to have them stay in for another year. 

 

Now under current conditions, the officer in charge could not 

apply to have them change and stay in another year, but under 

your Bill, they can.  So this is a new-found authority. 

 

I believe that the people are going to be fearful of this 

new-found authority and could be, unless you can provide 

some comfort that the officers in charge will be as careful and 

as compassionate as absolutely possible. 

 

So I guess what I'm saying here tonight, you have provided us 

with no new suggestions or evidence that you have thought 

through this enough to provide the kind of protection for 

people's rights; protection under the charter of rights; protection 

to individuals who are about to be released and then could be 

incarcerated for another year on the request of an officer, which 

they couldn't do without this legislation evidently. 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2017 

So again I guess I just want you to confirm that there's . . . All 

we have here is the new-found powers for somebody to apply 

to have a patient stay in an institution for up to another year.  

No new justifications; no new qualifications; no new 

mechanisms to protect the individual that is the patient.  It's just 

a Bill that says, well on the discretion of this officer, they can 

apply to keep them in there for another year. 

 

And if that's the case, I will tell you, from the letters that I have 

received, people that are and have been mentally ill who see 

this Bill could have some pretty serious concerns about how it 

could be implemented. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Well if the member for Estevan has more 

letters than the one that has been provided to us, I'd be glad to 

have him provide them and we can try and find responses.  I 

committed this afternoon we would endeavour to track and 

research the situation regarding the letter he is referring to now.  

I understand the member is raising a concern and fair enough, 

fair enough.  The situation again is this: what is being offered 

to administrative heads of institutions is an opportunity.  But 

before that opportunity can be exercised there are five very 

specific and very strenuous criteria that have been put in place, 

all of which must be met, all of which then is taken only as an 

application to the court. 

 

Now I understand the member may have concerns but he may 

have not been in the House earlier or may not have seen the list 

of organizations and individuals that have been consulted in the 

preparation of this legislation.  It is an extremely impressive 

list, totalling I think in number 35, of consumer groups, 

associations, caring and help groups, and individuals with long 

experience in the mental health field who have been consulted 

and feel confident that this Bill reflects the appropriate balance 

between the individual right and the broader rights of the 

community. 

 

Therefore with that kind of consultation we feel confident that 

in fact what is prescribed in legislation is here the appropriate 

thing to be done. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well your assurances, Mr. Minister, are fair 

enough at face value.  But you have new powers here and 

nothing new to protect the individual and no new criteria for 

the officer in charge.  So we'll just put that on the record: no 

new protection for the individual; new powers for the officer 

but no new criteria on how you use the new-found powers, 

because the officer can apply to have individuals incarcerated 

for up to an additional 12 months.  And I see nothing, and you 

have provided me nothing tonight, or anybody else that's 

watching television here that there are any new powers at all, or 

any new criteria for the powers, or any protection for 

individuals. 

 

Put another way: in terms of individual rights and the charter of 

rights, are you absolutely comfortable that you are not running 

the risk of infringing on or taking away or diminishing the 

rights of an individual that is 

in an institution that will now be faced with this new-found 

power by the agent or the officer who's in charge of the 

institution? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Ms. Chairperson, if the member now is 

concerned that there may be some constitutional difficulty, I 

want to assure him that in the preparation of this legislation the 

constitutional branch, Department of Justice, was very, very 

fully consulted and involved.  And our best legal advice 

indicates that there's not a difficulty, a constitutional difficulty 

here. 

 

Again, I remind the member from Estevan, we are providing 

here an opportunity to make application, an opportunity based 

on five very specific and stringent criteria that are new.  I 

remind him again -- if it takes 15 times reminding I'll do it 15 

times -- I remind him again, the decision to impose a further 

long-term detention order is a decision that will be made by a 

Queen's Bench judge.  Now if it is the suggestion of the 

member that somehow judges sit on the bench and just approve 

any application that comes before them, I don't think that's the 

case. 

 

He and I both know that the members of the judiciary take their 

responsibilities very seriously, and I am more than confident 

that in this case if an application is made, that the Queen's 

Bench Court will look very carefully, very carefully at the 

evidence, medical and otherwise, that will be there for the basis 

of the application.  So I would hope that his fears in this regard 

are therefore relieved. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, my concern is not with the 

judicial system.  My concern is with you and your colleagues.  

I have had you and people like you in this legislature tell me 

that you are going to protect the legal rights of farmers, for 

example.  And it's the farthest thing from their imagination. 

 

You've taken away their rights.  You say no, no.  The courts are 

fine.  You've even denied them access to the courts.  Frankly, 

this letter that I have, or other letters that come in from people 

across the province, and you're going to be getting from co-op 

members, is that they don't trust you on how you deal with 

legal matters.  It's no reflection on the courts.  It's what you do 

in here. 

 

You have denied the right of appeal to farmers to even take you 

on in court.  You removed that here completely, and they aren't 

in an institution.  They are supposedly free men and free 

women who live in the province of Saskatchewan, and you've 

denied them their rights.  Now in terms of a contract that is 

done between the Government of Saskatchewan, the 

Government of Canada, and farmers of Saskatchewan, you just 

run roughshod right over it and pass laws and change the 

institution where we speak tonight so that in fact there is no 

rights.  You can't blame the court at all. 

 

You're doing the same thing to co-op members.  Contract was 

signed between Federated Co-op, the provincial government, 

and the federal government 



2018 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

and it's a done deal, and you say, no, we are going to change 

that.  And you say, well don't you trust the courts?  It's got 

nothing to do with the courts.  It's what you are doing.  People 

aren't going to trust you. 

 

(2145) 

 

You've taken away their hospitals; you've taken away their 

nursing homes; you've taken away their highways; you take 

away the bus service; you've taken away their health care; and 

you say, well appeal to the courts.  Go, go take us to court.  

They don't trust you.  It's not the courts.  You are using your 

large majority to run roughshod over people.  Even when the 

people have a plebiscite and say, I don't want you to fund 

abortions, you say, no, I'll fund them.  You don't even listen to 

the plebiscite.  You don't listen to democracy.  You don't listen 

to the people. 

 

So this isn't about the courts, it's about your judgement.  People 

don't trust what you're doing.  And particularly if you are 

incarcerated in an institution and you are giving people more 

power to keep you there, they're going to say, man it's tough 

enough on the farm; it's tough enough being a co-op member; 

it's tough enough being a senior; it's tough enough keeping 

rural towns and villages alive, let alone if you were 

incarcerated and have the NDP (New Democratic Party) giving 

people more powers to keep you there. 

 

So don't palm this off on the courts.  We're asking you: are you 

protecting individual rights?  If you're protecting individual 

rights like you're protecting farmers' rights, and co-ops' rights, 

and seniors' rights, and taxpayers' rights, then there's no 

confidence that you're protecting anybody.  You may be 

covering your proverbial backside but . . . 

 

Mr. Minister, I don't need any lectures from you on protecting 

people, protecting farmers, protecting co-op people, protecting 

seniors, protecting anybody else.  And you've got some other 

Bills in here where you're going to take away rights for those . . 

. for the mentally handicapped.  You're going to take the rights 

away for those that need treatment.  And you'll say, well take it 

to the courts; sue me. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, you've . . . You have not increased the 

confidence of the public in Saskatchewan as a result of your 

new-found powers that you have.  In fact you've abused the 

powers.  So I will just reiterate what I've learned here tonight, 

Mr. Minister.  You have given new powers to officers in charge 

of people who are in institutions.  And you have no new 

protections for the individuals that are there, no new criteria for 

the officers that are going to use these powers, and you say, 

trust me. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I'll tell you tonight that an awful lot of 

people will not trust you, don't trust your judgement.  And 

certainly you have told us nothing here tonight that would 

convince me that we should have any confidence at all in the 

legislative amendments that you've tabled here. 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, we've had a relatively 

thorough discussion, I must say, of the amendments here -- a 

very thorough discussion of the amendments all afternoon and 

all evening.  I would suggest that from most members opposite 

the questioning has been helpful.  On occasion perhaps we've 

wandered. 

 

But only one member of this Assembly, only one member of 

this Assembly consistently comes into these discussions and 

makes a mockery of the discussions.  And that's the member 

from Estevan, the former premier, who will take a Bill like this 

and will lead us into every variety of political rhetoric that 

you'd ever want to hear.  And then of course it's typical of the 

member from Estevan, that having launched into this flight of 

rhetoric, then proceeds to leave the Chamber. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Point of order. 

 

The Chair: -- What is the member's point of order? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe it's the rules of 

this House that a member is not to indicate whether or not 

another member is present or not present in this House. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I think I did hear the minister or the 

Associate Minister of Health refer to the absence of a member 

and I ask him to retract that and I find the point of order well 

taken. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm happy to retract that 

reference.  Just let me say this, Mr. Chairman, in conclusion, 

because there's no use in responding to any points that the 

member may have made, now.  But let me in response just say 

that it is somewhat making a mockery of the process when 

we're having a relatively detailed discussion about a piece of 

legislation and the member from Estevan consistently, 

consistently, time after time, will launch into a long flight of 

political rhetoric.  I'm not sure if it has something to do with his 

bid for a federal nomination for the Conservative Party or what 

it's about, but I just make this passing observation. 

 

Now unlike the member from Estevan, I must say his 

colleagues have tended throughout the day to bring a variety, I 

think, of appropriate questions to the Bill.  I think we've had 

some relatively good discussion; if it has been repetitive fine, 

fair enough, but relatively good discussion.  And now I look 

forward to some other questions that may be more pointed to 

the Bill. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well perhaps 

the member from . . . Associate Minister of Health doesn't 

appreciate the comments by my colleague but those comments, 

Mr. Chairman, are very pertinent because he was reflecting 

what a good number of the people in this province feel when it 

comes to items being brought forward by the government 

opposite. 

 

I'd like to ask the minister some questions about one of the 

clauses in here dealing with provisions under the 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2019 

Criminal Code.  How many people within the province, Mr. 

Minister, would be affected by these provisions?  How many 

people are being detained under the Criminal Code conditions 

that would be affected by this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I think I'll ask for a ruling 

from the Chair.  I believe I've answered this question in the 

course of the day, this very specific question now three times.  

Mr. Chairman, is there a ruling that the Chair would make 

about repetition in questioning? 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order.  The associate minister 

makes a valid point and that is that members are asking 

questions which are apparent to the Chair which were asked 

previously during the day.  And members should be mindful of 

the fact that, you know, questions can be asked, but they should 

respect the fact that the committee has business to do and that it 

is not helpful to the committee to have members ask questions 

that have been previously asked because the answers to those 

questions might also be obtained from Hansard. 

 

And therefore the minister makes a good point, and without 

ruling on any specific question I would simply encourage 

members to consult with their colleagues.  If there are questions 

which have not been asked, to ask those.  If they want 

clarification on questions which were previously asked, that's 

fair enough, but should not repeat the questions which have 

been asked before and to try to elicit new material in their 

questioning. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Point of order. 

 

The Chair: -- What is the point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not quite sure how to 

interpret your remarks as a ruling or what, because the minister 

. . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I've made my ruling, and it . . . I've made 

my comments, and I sense that the member for Rosthern is now 

questioning what it is that the Chair has had to say in response 

to the query that was raised by the Associate Minister of 

Finance.  The Chair does not look kindly upon any member 

questioning the comments of the Chair. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:57 p.m. 

 

 


