


















































Hansard: May 13, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1657 

 May 13, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills 

 

Clerk: -- Mr. Thompson, as chair of the Standing Committee 

on Private Members' Bills, presents the fourth report of the said 

committee which is as follows: 

 

Your committee has considered the following Bills and has 

agreed to report the same without amendment: 

 

Bill No. 01 --  An Act to amend An Act to Incorporate 

Aldersgate College 

 

Bill No. 02 --  An Act to incorporate the Bethany Bible 

Institute and to amend An Act to incorporate 

Mennonite Brethren Church of 

Saskatchewan 

 

Your committee recommends, under the provision of rule 61, 

that fees be remitted less the cost of printing with respect to 

Bill Nos. 01 and 02. 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member for Wilkie: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Members' Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you, I'd like to introduce you to a group of students 

from Westberry Elementary School in Kindersley.  They're 

seated in the east gallery.  They're 43 grade 7 students, and they 

are accompanied by their teacher, Candace Friesen and Doug 

Klassen as well as Mr. Krahn. 

 

I will be meeting, Mr. Speaker, with them after the proceedings 

this afternoon to visit with them for a little while.  So would all 

members of the legislature please join with me in welcoming 

them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you to 

other members of the Assembly a group seated in your gallery, 

a group of 16 United Kingdom exchange participants and their 

13 Saskatchewan hosts. 

 

The United Kingdom visitors are participants in the 

Commonwealth Council on Education Administration Study 

Exchange and are returning a 

visit made earlier to the U.K. by education administrators from 

Saskatchewan.  They have spent the past week visiting schools, 

comparing administrative and teaching practises, and reviewing 

legal and financial frameworks for the administration of 

education. 

 

I'll be meeting with our visitors following question period and 

ask all members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming 

them to our legislature today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The 

opposition would like to join with the Minister of Education in 

welcoming the guests from the United Kingdom.  We hope that 

they have a fruitful visit here and enjoy Saskatchewan's 

hospitality.  Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Seated in the west 

gallery are 55 students from Vincent Massey School in my 

riding in Saskatoon, and they're accompanied by their teachers, 

Tad Cherkewich and Morris Sulatyski, and some parent 

volunteers.  They've seen some of the sights in Regina and will 

be touring this building.  I'll be meeting with them, and I'd like 

all members to join with me in welcoming the students from 

Vincent Massey to the legislature today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have guests in the 

east gallery today, Mr. Speaker.  They are my family, and I 

want to introduce them. 

 

My father had nine brothers and two sisters.  Of those nine, two 

of them were twins, and they are today seated in your gallery.  

They're both 71 years old, and they are Edgar and Ruth 

Martens, and the other brother is Art and Leona Martens.  I 

want to have the Assembly acknowledge that.  And there were 

three pastors in that family, too, Mr. Speaker.  My father was 

one, and these two men are also a part of that elite group.  And 

I want to say to the Assembly that I'm proud of these men and 

proud of what they've done for Saskatchewan. 

 

My Uncle Art is from Surrey, British Columbia, and my Uncle 

Ed is from Regina.  I don't think . . . just on a partisan nature, 

he lives in the north-west part of Regina, and I don't think he 

voted NDP (New Democratic Party) either. 

 

I'd like to have the Assembly join me in welcoming them here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to join with 

the member from Morse in welcoming his uncle, Mr. Martens, 

who lives in the north-west part of the city of Regina.  I'm very 

pleased to see him here visiting and I look forward to someday 

perhaps having 



1658 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

a long chat with him about future considerations. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'll be 

especially good; I feel like I have holiness looking on over my 

shoulder here today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you, and through you to 

the rest of the members of the Assembly on behalf of the hon. 

member from Rosetown-Elrose, seated in your west gallery, 

Mr. Speaker, 30 grade 8 students from Rosetown Central High.  

I'm not sure in what part of the gallery they're seated, but I 

know they're over there. 

 

And also with them are their teachers, Elwood Fleming and 

Mr. Wayne Bright, and also their bus driver, Mr. Dennis 

McGonigal.  I'll be meeting with them later for discussions and 

questions I'm sure that will arise as a result of the presentations 

here today and also for a photo later. 

 

So if you'll join with me in welcoming them, I'd be pleased.  

Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Firing and Rehiring of Government Official 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I direct 

my first question this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier.  

Mr. Premier, can you confirm that as part of your government's 

political house cleaning an individual by the name of Ian 

Laidlaw was fired from SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation) without cause.  And can you also 

confirm that as a result of this dismissal, the government was 

forced to pay $110,000 in severance to Mr. Laidlaw.  Can you 

confirm that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I can confirm for the 

member that Mr. Laidlaw is no longer with Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation.  I will attempt to get the 

details of his departure from the corporation and will send them 

over to the member opposite when I have the details. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- In addition -- Mr. Speaker, thank you -- again 

to the Premier or his . . . their election, I guess, of answering 

the question to the SPMC minister then. 

 

Mr. Minister, $110,000 severance pay to Mr. Laidlaw, you will 

confirm that.  And also at the same time, Mr. Minister, will you 

commit to giving me the answer: how much are you currently 

paying Mr. Laidlaw? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, the member knows I 

have taken notice of the question.  And when I have the details, 

I will forward the details of his question to him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again to the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, can you confirm that Ian Laidlaw, after 

being fired by your government and receiving $110,000 

severance package, is now working in the Premier's office in 

the policy and planning secretariat?  Can you confirm that, Mr. 

Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I will take notice of 

that question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, we have a strange turn of events 

where the minister responsible for SPMC is now answering for 

the Premier and the Premier's secretariat.  I was not asking for 

that.  I was asking the Premier's office.  The Premier is in 

charge of the policy and planning secretariat.  Is this gentleman 

now working for you, Mr. Premier, was the question. 

 

After having been given $110,000 severance package, fired 

without cause, and then you rehire him after you've put in 

$110,000 into his jeans.  Now I have no problem with Mr. 

Laidlaw.  I want to know why are you spending an extra 

$110,000 of taxpayers' money just like you did for the Deputy 

Premier when you gave him $800,000 in order to do your 

political running of the election coming up, Mr. Premier, 

wasting money. 

 

And at the same time the Minister of Health is closing 

hospitals. 

 

We want an answer to that question, Mr. Premier.  And I want 

your commitment that we will be getting full information and 

confirmation of the facts the way they stand.  Will you make 

that commitment, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, as I've indicated to the 

member opposite, I am not aware of the details of Mr. 

Laidlaw's departure from Property Management Corporation 

nor the separation pay that may have happened. 

 

I have taken notice of the question and we will forward the 

appropriate information to the member I would assume later 

this day or tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Purchase of Video Lottery Terminals 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 

responsible for gaming.  Mr. Minister, can you tell this 

Assembly if the position of communications officer for the 

Gaming Commission was open to the 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1659 

public?  And can you tell us when the position was advertised 

and how many applications were received for the position 

please? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I can answer that by 

saying that I am aware that there was an internal review within 

government of people who would be qualified for this position.  

Mr. Nystuen, after his internal review, chose this particular 

person to put under his employment. 

 

I would want to say to the member from Morse that I am aware 

that Mr. Nystuen is very satisfied with the choice he has made 

and I happen to agree that he has, after the internal review, 

made the right choice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister.  

Why are you trying to load up the Gaming Commission with 

NDP supporters?  First it was the chief NDP fund-raiser 

appointed to the chief position at the Gaming Commission.  

Now the chief communications position is given to another 

NDP supporter. 

 

The commission is supposed to be an independent, impartial 

commission, and that's not what it appears to be, Mr. Minister.  

Mr. Minister, I ask you, for what purpose are you stacking the 

Gaming Commission with loyal party supporters?  Could you 

tell us that, please? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to respond to 

the member's question.  I'd like to respond with respect to Mr. 

Nystuen in the first place, in the first.  I believe that he is a very 

appropriate choice in that, as you will know, we are going 

through a consolidation process with the Gaming Commission 

and the Liquor Licensing Commission.  Mr. Nystuen has 

worked on the reorganization of government for many months; 

and for that, amongst other reasons, I felt he was a very 

qualified choice. 

 

I want to say as well to the member from Morse that the 

Gaming Commission has many employees, many good 

employees who are qualified and who are serving the 

government in their capacities as employees of the Gaming 

Commission.  And I want to say as well to the member for 

Morse that I have no idea of the political affiliations that the 

majority of those employees have.  But I want to say this: in 

1991, Mr. Member from Morse, 50 per cent of the people of 

this province voted New Democrat, so I think it would only 

stand to reason that there would be a few New Democrats . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Minister, it's my belief that you've been stacking this 

commission with partisans for very, very specific reasons.  For 

several months we have been trying to get your government to 

come clean on this issue, Mr. Minister.  We've seen a lot of 

smoke, but so far we have been successful . . . you have been 

successful in concealing the flames. 

 

Today, Mr. Minister, we have been afforded a peek at that fire 

by an anonymous source, and I ask these questions -- will you 

note very carefully how you answer them.  Mr. Minister, is it 

not true that the former minister of Gaming, the Minister of 

Finance, ordered a security check for GTECH and VLT (Video 

Lottery Technologies Inc.) before they were selected?  Would 

you provide that answer for us this afternoon, please? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say, and I 

want to begin by saying that I think the member has got a 

scratch in his record, and the needle is skipping.  We've gone 

through his question time after time after time.  He knows full 

well that there has been a security check done on these 

companies; he knows that.  I've answered that in the legislature 

many, many times. 

 

And I want to say to the member from Morse the answer is the 

same as I have offered it many times in this legislature.  The 

answer is the same today, and it will be the same tomorrow.  

There have been in-depth security checks done, and the 

information received at that time was what we chose to base 

our decision on.  The answer hasn't changed, and I say to the 

member from Morse, the answer won't change.  So why don't 

you get off of this . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, is it not true that the former 

minister of gaming, the current Minister of Finance, ordered 

the security check after GTECH and VLT were assigned that 

they were going to get the contract?  Isn't that the truth? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer is very 

simple and very straightforward and the answer is no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, it is obvious 

to everyone but you that security checks should have been 

completed before these companies were selected, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you provide us with this, with this . . . Mr. 

Minister, you have said that you have not read the report -- an 

appalling admission of irresponsibility, Mr. Minister.  I'm sure 

you don't want to read it because we have been told that there is 

very 



1660 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

little in that report, Mr. Minister.  We have been told that you 

couldn't get any cooperation from other jurisdictions to provide 

a security check for those two companies. 

 

Mr. Minister, if not you, who in your cabinet took the 

responsibility to read that report?  Did the Minister of Finance 

read the report?  Please answer that question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm going to correct 

the member on a number of issues.  First of all I want to say 

that the report is the property of the Gaming Commission.  He 

knows that that is a quasi-judicial body and is remaining in that 

fashion, and that's how we treat it. 

 

And I want to say that he might want to make a phone call to 

his cousins in Alberta and ask them if in fact they have shared 

information that they have with respect to procurement of 

VLTs (video lottery terminal).  These companies they are 

dealing with as well.  And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, just in 

closing, that this is a broken record. 

 

And I want to just read into the record a letter, an open letter to 

the member from Morse, the Hon. Harold Martens, with 

respect to his performance in this legislature and as a member 

of the legislature.  And I'm just going to quote the last 

paragraph.  And it says: 

 

I'm disappointed to see an elected member of our 

government (misrepresent) information (and for what 

purpose?).  Shouldn't you, Mr. Martens, be encouraging all 

citizens to work together to alleviate the financial  conditions 

of our province, rather than, through misinformation, incite 

citizens to be at each other's throats?. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I wish 

the member who's responsible for the Gaming Commission 

would have read with the same diligence the report that was 

issued.  And in fact it's our information that we have that the 

report in fact did this.  I ask you this question, Mr. Minister:  

can you confirm that the report recommended that GTECH 

should not be dealt with?  Did that report indicate that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say this again 

to the member from Morse.  The report that we got indicated 

that these were the two people short-listed after the security 

check, the in-depth security check was done, and that's the 

information that was passed on to me. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we followed that 

procedure.  We believe that it was a similar procedure to what 

your cousins in Alberta used who are dealing with these 

companies. 

So I ask you, Mr. Member, if you're so concerned about 

process and if you're so concerned about these corporations, 

maybe you should phone your cousins in Alberta and ask them 

what kind of information they received and what they passed 

on to their minister when he made the decision to start dealing 

with them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I'd like to know whether you 

read the report, whether you could provide that information to 

this Assembly.  But also can you tell this Assembly whether 

any Saskatchewan Gaming Commission officials had an 

opportunity to attend a meeting held in Reno, Nevada, in the 

past two weeks?  Would you tell us that please? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I can say that members of the 

Gaming Commission were in the United States on a trip and 

met with officials and with people involved in the industry 

down there.  I can confirm that, yes I can, Mr. Member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, did members from the 

economic branch of the Department of Economic 

Development, through the member from Regina Elphinstone, 

did they go down to that same meeting -- would you tell us that 

-- in Reno? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Minister, it is my belief that 

someone from the Department of Economic Development was 

as well at that meeting.  But I can't confirm the name.  I don't 

know that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And now, Mr. Speaker, would the minister 

confirm that also at that meeting were VLC (Video Lottery 

Consultants) people from the company supplying video lottery 

terminals to the province of Saskatchewan?  Were they also at 

that same meeting?  Would you confirm that, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I can't confirm that 

because I don't believe that to be the case.  As I indicated, they 

were there to meet with government officials and with people 

involved in the industry, but I cannot confirm that they had met 

with people from VLC. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Minister, would you 

also confirm that the Gaming Commission were involved in a 

conference in Whitefish, Montana, at a gaming commission 

dealing with video lottery terminals?  Will you confirm that 

also? 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1661 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I certainly can 

confirm that.  They, as part of their responsibility, would want 

to know the goings-on of the industry.  And in order to do that, 

I think it's important that they meet with other people involved 

and knowledgeable in the industry.  And I think it's most 

appropriate that they took a van and away they went down and 

had this meeting. 

 

And I want to say that I commend the member.  He has been 

very diligent in terms of following the calendars and the 

itineraries of the employees of the Gaming Commission, and I 

certainly commend him for being on top of these things. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister.  

What was the purpose of the meeting in Reno, Nevada?  Was it 

to discuss the video lottery terminals that VLC was going to 

provide?  And after that, when you came home and discovered 

that they had been involved in charges being laid by the FBI 

(Federal Bureau of Investigation), were you aware of that at the 

time? And is that why you sent them down there, to check that 

out?  Were you aware that they were being brought before the 

U.S. (United States) courts by the Federal Bureau of 

Investigation?  Were you aware of it at the time that you sent 

your people down to Reno?  Were you aware of that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the member has 

got a very, very vivid imagination and I commend him for that 

as well.  I want to say that he knows full well that we are 

intending to open casinos in this province in partnership with 

aboriginal people and with exhibition associations.  And I think 

to do that, Mr. Member, it's probably appropriate that they talk 

with other officials involved in gaming, and that they look at 

other operations that are functioning throughout this province. 

 

I want to say that the purpose of the trip to Reno was to have a 

look at casinos, and I think that's very important.  I want to say 

what's more, I may as a matter of fact just offer to the member 

to inform him prior to the departure on any other trips that they 

may make, the times that they're going, the places that they're 

going, and the number of people that there were going, so that 

he can be more satisfied that we are in fact doing our job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Job Creation Strategies 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I direct my 

question to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, in the press release of 

November 3, 1992, with respect to the Partnership for Renewal 

document that was unveiled that day, it was stated and I quote: 

 

. . . the document lists 23 objectives and 31 strategies, each 

with a target date for action. 

Could you tell us, sir, how many of those target dates have 

passed and how many of the objectives have been met to date, 

and I'm looking for specific numbers of jobs and measurable 

increases in economic activity in the province, because I've 

already read your April glossy progress report, and its 

ambiguity equals that of the original document. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 

for that question.  The answer is that PACE, the Provincial 

Action Committee on the Economy, has as one of its mandates, 

the task of monitoring the timetables and the objectives set out 

in the partnership paper. 

 

When you say your glossy, it's a glossy which is based on the 

monitoring by PACE, and on the Department of Economic 

Development.  If the numbers are insufficiently clear or there's 

some additional information which is required, I will ask the 

Minister of Economic Development as a consequence of your 

question to dig up the additional information and provide it in 

due course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, it's become 

obvious that the results reported from the undertakings to date 

appear to be simply no more than consultations, more studies, 

more policy, and more expenditures for the bureaucracy.  But 

certainly no new jobs for the private sector. 

 

And I ask again, what new jobs have been created as a direct 

result of your economic strategy?  And will you publish a list 

of those jobs, along with your explicit targets for job creation 

for the remainder of the year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 

targets for the remainder of the year, I cannot answer this 

specifically.  I don't know what the Minister of Economic 

Development has in mind. 

 

But I would remind the hon. member that what we have here is 

a blueprint which requires diligent pursuit by the business 

community working in concert with the trade union 

community, and others, over a period of time in pursuit of jobs.  

We've had some successes, some such as Sears as an example.  

We've had a number of successes in smaller operations right 

across the province of Saskatchewan.  I don't have the list in 

front of me.  SED Systems is another one which the member 

will be aware of.  There are some fairly good examples of job 

creation. 

 

How much of this is exactly due to the blueprint, how much of 

this is due to other circumstances, I don't know.  But I do say to 

the hon. member that what is important is that the blueprint, 

which I think she endorsed herself, be followed diligently and 

those objectives and timetables be pursued diligently and met 

as best as possible. 

 

That's what the minister is trying to do, that's what the 

government is trying to do, and that's what PACE is 



1662 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

trying to do in its assisting of us and in its monitoring of our 

objectives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

there have been several occasions now when your government 

has taken credit for projects with which it has had nothing to 

do.  And while that's going on, there are 44,000 people in our 

province, many of whom are just graduating from our 

universities and post-secondary institutions, who are waiting 

for very specific parts of your job creation strategy that's going 

to put them to work. 

 

Now this is important not only to them, but to you as 

government, as your revenue predictions for this year's budget 

are contingent upon an increase of 16,000 jobs in the economy.  

Now again I ask, how do you intend to deliver on this strategy 

to meet your targets and to stop the horrendous outflow of 

talent from this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you again, Mr. Speaker.  First 

of all, I would again invite the hon. member to assist the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan.  I think she is quoted as 

saying that she has and will have an idea a week about the 

provision of new jobs; she said this several weeks ago.  So we 

are still awaiting for the idea.  And I would invite you to 

submit -- you don't have to do it in any public statement -- a 

letter, however you want.  Put it to PACE.  We look forward to 

your ideas a week and I'm sure there'll be 52 new ones by the 

time the end of the year is over. 

 

But the other aspect of the question is, how do we intend to 

pursue it?  Well there is no way of pursuing it other than the 

way that we have been pursuing it.  You roll up your sleeves; 

you've identified the blueprint in the partnership program; you 

go after the businesses and try to encourage them to get on with 

the job. 

 

And we have successes, whether it's Spar, whether it's the 

Hitachi expansion, Norquay Alfalfa Processors, Babcock & 

Wilcox, AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) -- you are a 

supporter of that -- Sears Canada, Hudson Bay Mining, TRIS, 

Mercury Graphics.  I've been invited to an opening of Mercury 

Graphics.  And the list goes on. 

 

Now the member may say that's not enough.  I agree with her.  

It's not enough; there needs to be more.  But there is progress.  

And this is a very hard job and what it requires is the support of 

all of us and we look forward to your idea each and every 

week. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  With all due 

respect, Mr. Premier, your government wouldn't know a good 

idea if it were handed one -- and several have been -- to it.  In 

the same release, Mr. Premier, it was indicated that you would 

be, and I quote: ". . . (reviewing) taxation to ensure productive 

investment is encouraged . . ." 

Can you tell us which of your taxation measures you 

anticipated would ensure this "productive investment."  Would 

it be the increased tax on ethanol, the increased tax on retail 

sales, or perhaps the decision not to reduce the tax on the 

locomotive fuel tax to a competitive level which ended up 

costing this province 300 jobs at the CP (Canadian Pacific) rail 

centre in Moose Jaw? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

again welcome the question from the hon. member.  She invites 

me to indicate what taxes are an incentive to business, and I 

will say that we have offered $31 million in this one year in tax 

incentives: the tax investment credit; the reduction of the small 

business tax corporation rate; the input factors with respect to 

the sales component on manufacturing, and a number of other 

incentives which are listed in the budget.  We have given $31 

million by way of those incentives, which the hon. member 

conveniently of course ignores and gives us no credit for.  I 

guess she's entitled to do that. 

 

Instead she indicates the tax increases which had to be put on 

by virtue of the huge debt which her friends to the right of her 

have burdened this province. 

 

But she can't have it both ways.  She can't say that we should 

tackle the deficit but not increase taxes and not cut back in 

programs.  Because if that isn't a prescription for voodoo 

Liberal economics, I don't know what is. 

 

So while we may not see a good idea if it hits us in the face, try 

us -- try us with one idea on a good economic project.  And you 

might begin by trying us and the people of Saskatchewan with 

just one good, logical, consistent, economic policy from the 

Liberal Party -- just one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, I think one of 

the things that perhaps you need reminding of is you indeed are 

the government and you indeed are in charge of economic 

development for this province, and I am not.  Although that 

may be reversed far sooner than you would care to imagine. 

 

Mr. Premier, on page 19 of the partnership document, you 

commit, and I quote, to:  "Provide new sources of business 

start-up and expansion capital" for the province by developing 

"a new provincial economic development institution." 

 

I would like you to update us, please, Mr. Premier, on what 

progress has been made.  Have detailed plans for an economic 

development bank been presented to the business community?  

And when can small business expect to have access to this new 

source of funding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the specific question of 

the economic development bank is very much under 

consideration by the government.  I must 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1663 

tell the hon. member that it is not as easy a concept, although I 

think it has a lot of merit, in structuring as perhaps she would 

think or perhaps even as I would have thought initially. 

 

We are, as part of this package however, encumbered by the 

fact that in the 1980s SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Corporation), which has been the bank of last 

resort in this context for small business, has been virtually 

brought to the edge of bankruptcy as a result of a variety of 

deals made by the Conservative opposition, whether it's 

GigaText or the various other deals -- the let's-make-a-deal 

mentality that took place. 

 

So we have to look at this very carefully to make sure that what 

we provide to the business community is doable; that it is based 

on sound economics and good fiscal policy.  And that is one 

area where, in the pursuit of the timetable, we may or may not 

be exactly on.  But it requires careful examination.  So we are 

in favour of this. 

 

In the meantime, SEDCO is available.  In the meantime 

SEDCO, we hope, will be providing business opportunities on 

a more economic basis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Point of order, Mr. Speaker, before orders of 

the day.  Mr. Speaker, yesterday, as you will recall, we entered 

into some consideration into conditions which the Speaker 

would consider points of order.  At that time in interest of 

decorum within this Assembly, I deferred and said I would 

bring it up at a later date, and I'm doing exactly that now, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The point of order relates to the Speaker's refusal to hear points 

of order after two have been made.  And Mr. Speaker indicated 

that he had heard two points of order and that he felt that one 

was not well taken, and therefore you stated, sir, that it was a 

matter of judgement call whether or not further points would be 

heard. 

 

Mr. Speaker also made a statement that was particularly 

disturbing and I will quote yesterday's Hansard, page 1638: 

 

I did take two points of order from the member, one which I 

felt was not a valid point of order.  And I have listened to the 

member in the past raising points of order which, on a 

number of times, were not valid points of order.  And I felt 

that the member had raised his point of order . . . 

 

And there are several things in the words that I would suggest 

are contrary to the rules and practices of the Assembly. 

 

Firstly, the record clearly shows that the point of order I was 

seeking to raise had not in fact been raised.  So a 

feeling by the Speaker that the point had been raised is an 

unreliable basis upon which to determine whether or not to 

hear a point. 

 

Secondly, the reference to the fact that I have raised points of 

order in the past, some of which you have not found well taken, 

is at best a mysterious comment.  The central issue however 

and the critical issue for every member and the integrity of the 

Assembly is the right of a member to raise points of order and 

the substance of the rules of this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been consistently ruled that a Speaker may 

not prejudge a point of order.  And even in those extremes 

where points are being raised for dilatory purposes, the Speaker 

must first hear the point so that he may determine whether or 

not the point is in fact dilatory. 

 

Now I haven't gone back to get the exact references, sir, but I 

invite you to check your own previous rulings on similar 

issues.  And if memory does serve me correctly, you will find 

that you have ruled that you are obliged to hear a point before 

you can know whether it is dilatory, whether it is well taken, or 

whether it is argumentative.  And certainly, Mr. Speaker, that is 

the existing practice in every Assembly in Canada. 

 

Now in the interests of time, Mr. Speaker, I will not cite the 

extensive references.  But in general we can review the various 

filibusters in this Assembly, the GST (goods and services tax) 

debate in the House of Commons, the free trade debate in the 

House of Commons, and various similar debates in other 

legislatures.  In all cases that I'm aware of, Mr. Speaker, 

Speakers have consistently ruled that they are bound to hear a 

point of order.  To have it otherwise, prejudges what a member 

has to say. 

 

In your remarks yesterday, sir, you made reference to the fact 

that I had already raised two points of order and other points of 

order in the past, and that you thought some of them not well 

taken.  I submit that you thereby clearly prejudged my point, 

which as circumstances proved, was an inaccurate 

prejudgement. 

 

The second part of your explanation for refusing to hear my 

point was that the House was in a state of disorder and not 

amenable to hearing points of order.  But I submit, Mr. 

Speaker, that the rules are clear on what course of action the 

Chair is to follow when in its judgement there is a grave 

disorder in the House.  The Chair is not to bend or amend or 

reinterpret the rules in the case of disorder.  Rather the rules 

and practices clearly state that if in the Speaker's judgement the 

disorder is sufficient to cause concern, the Speaker may, and I 

quote, "adjourn the House." 

 

My complete point of order, then is this -- just a couple of short 

points -- (1) there is no provision for a Speaker to use a 

judgement call to determine whether or not he will hear a point 

of order; (2) a point of order must be heard by the Speaker who 

only then may dismiss it, and if the Speaker finds a member is 



1664 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

persistently challenging the Chair, the Speaker has clear 

avenues of discipline available to him, none of which include 

refusing to hear a point of order. 

 

If the Speaker finds the disorder in the House to be extreme, 

the avenue open to him is to adjourn the House for grave 

disorder, and refusing to hear a point of order is not in fact an 

open . . . an avenue open to him. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that while the 

Speaker does have a wide latitude in some matters, you have 

recently ruled that discretion only extends to situations where 

rules and practices themselves are not clear.  And on that I refer 

you to your own ruling of April 14, 1993 which in part said the 

Speaker can only intervene "in circumstances where the rules 

do not exist or did not apply." 

 

And that is not the case in this instance.  And, Mr. Speaker, I 

ask you to rule accordingly.  Thank you for the time. 

 

The Speaker: -- Is the Acting House Leader, is he wanting to 

speak to the point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I'd like to speak just briefly to the 

point of order, Mr. Speaker, if you would, or unless you're . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- The member may proceed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, I have some appreciation 

for the member's point of order.  But viewing what happened in 

the House yesterday, the House was getting a little unruly and I 

think that the Hon. House Leader opposite uses his case to the 

extreme in making his point of order with you today. 

 

The House not only operates, as you'd well know, Mr. Speaker, 

on the rules of the Assembly, it also operates by the precedents 

and the rules set down in Erskine May and Beauchesne's.  And 

over the years, over the years there are circumstances where 

Speakers not only in this Assembly but in the British House of 

Commons and the Parliament of Canada have made rulings that 

differ somewhat from the tradition.  The tradition is also a very 

important part of how we set the practices of this House. 

 

And although the Hon. House Leader of the opposition points 

out that you had the ultimate authority to adjourn the 

Assembly, I think that would be a truly unusual circumstance.  

And we viewed it on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, that 

you're making every attempt to conduct the good business of 

this Assembly rather than make the decision to adjourn the 

House. 

 

And so I think, although I have some appreciation for what the 

member opposite says, I think he's taking his case to the 

extreme and we should get on with the business of the House 

today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: -- First of all I want to thank the member from 

Rosthern for his point of order.  It was a very lengthy point of 

order and I'm not critical of that at this particular time, but I do 

want to have a look at his point of order, and I thank the Acting 

House Leader for his comments.  And I will bring a decision 

back to the House at a later time. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And I know you will do a good job. 

 

The Speaker: -- Thank you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 72 -- An Act to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 72, An 

Act to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 

Act applies to all public sector pension plans.  The major 

reason for amending the legislation at this time is to provide an 

additional qualification for the restricted retirement option.  

Employees of government departments and the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation whose positions are 

abolished and whose age plus years of service are greater to or 

equal to 80 now qualify for the restricted retirement option.  

This is in addition to the existing provision of age plus years of 

service greater to or equal to 75 with age greater than 55 years. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 72, An Act to 

amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I just would like to comment that I 

think the Bill is straightforward, and we don't have a lot of 

problems with it.  But it would be appropriate to at least review 

it before we move further, and so I move adjournment of 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 73 -- An Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, at the end of my remarks, I'll move second reading of 

Bill No. 73, an amendment to The Crop Insurance Act. 

 

I rise in the House today to describe the changes to The Crop 

Insurance Act.  These changes, Mr. Speaker, are in keeping 

with the government's goal to reduce spending, to ultimately 

reduce this province's deficit 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1665 

through improved efficiencies.  Mr. Speaker, the existing 

legislation requires the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance board to 

consist of not less than six nor more than eight persons with a 

minimum of four members to constitute a quorum.  The 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance board was one of the several 

boards restructured or eliminated as part of the March 1993 

budgetary reduction process. 

 

The proposed amendments to the Act will provide flexibility in 

the provision of a board for the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those proposed amendments will mean that the 

board will consist of those persons appointed by the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council with two members constituting a quorum.  

By amending the Act to allow the board of directors of 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation to operate with a 

quorum of two members, government spending will be reduced 

without sacrificing producers' opportunities to have input into 

crop insurance programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge members of this House to support the 

amendments to the Act, and I move second reading of Bill No. 

73 amending The Crop Insurance Act, 1993. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, if I 

understand it correctly, I believe the minister has indicated that 

this Bill is going to reorganize or do away with the board or to 

make changes to the Crop Insurance board. 

 

And I can certainly appreciate the move by the government to 

try and cut on funding.  But at the time when agriculture is 

having significant problems, one would wonder why we would 

significantly look at changing the format for producers and at 

least their voice on the Crop Insurance . . . or involved in Crop 

Insurance. 

 

But we would like to have a closer view of the Bill and review 

it a little closer as well before we move further, and therefore I 

move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 75 -- An Act to amend The Freehold Oil and Gas 

Production Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise in the 

Assembly today to move second reading of The Freehold Oil 

and Gas Production Tax Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

The Act being amended establishes the authority of the 

imposition of a tax on non-Crown oil and gas production in the 

province.  The amendments to the Act are being made to 

update the legislation and to achieve a greater consistency 

between the fiscal rules applicable to Crown and freehold oil 

and gas production. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the investigation powers of the minister under the 

Act are being amended to avoid any 

violation of the search and seizure provisions of the Charter.  

The investigation powers currently defined are considered too 

broad as they purport to allow the minister to, I quote: 

 

At any time . . . enter upon any premises for the purposes of 

making enquiries . . . 

 

Such provisions could arguably exceed a person's reasonable 

expectations of privacy.  Accordingly, the scope of these 

provisions has been narrowed. 

 

Furthermore, a new appeal section is being added to the Act, 

Mr. Speaker, to provide greater consistency with the provisions 

of The Crown Minerals Act.  Under the new appeal section, a 

taxpayer will be able to appeal certain determinations made by 

the minister to the Board of Revenue Commissioners.  The 

appeals to be allowed will be limited to those determinations 

which may apply to a specific taxpayer. 

 

For example, a taxpayer could appeal a determination 

involving the expenditures to be allowed in calculating the tax 

applicable to a specific enhanced oil recovery project.  

However a taxpayer would not be able to appeal the general tax 

rate which is to apply to all freehold enhanced recovery oil 

produced within the province. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, variations . . . various regulations-making 

powers are being added to the Act to clarify and strengthen the 

province's authority to tax freehold oil and gas production.  

Among other things, these new provisions will allow 

regulations to be made that prescribe formulas, determine tax 

rates and amounts of tax, authorizing average prices used in tax 

formulas to be set by minister's order, and prescribing the 

manner in which certain notifications are made, and providing 

for the determination of prices to be used in calculating taxes 

payable. 

 

I wish to point out, Mr. Speaker, that we have consulted with 

the industry associations on the specific amendments being 

proposed.  As a result of that consultative process, certain 

changes were made to accommodate concerns that were 

expressed.  The industry associations are therefore in 

agreement with the Bill as it is presented here. 

 

With those brief comments, Mr. Speaker, I would move second 

reading of The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax 

Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  After listening to the 

minister, the minister made a number of comments regarding 

what the Bill was attempting to do.  And it would seem to me 

that it would appropriate for the opposition to take a little more 

time to peruse comments and review the Bill, and therefore I 

move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

              Bill No. 76 -- An Act to amend The Oil and Gas 



1666 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

Conservation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment 

Act, 1993.  This legislation ends the oil and gas revolving fund 

and associated well levy effective March 31, 1993. 

 

The elimination of the oil and gas revolving fund is part of an 

ongoing government review of special funds to provide more 

complete disclosure of the province's revenues and 

expenditures.  Under current legislation certain costs of 

regulating and providing services to the oil and natural gas 

industry, including the services of the Oil and Gas 

Conservation Board, were assigned to this fund. 

 

Revenues to the fund come from two equal sources: one source 

was a contribution from the budget of the Department of 

Energy and Mines; the other source was the proceeds of a levy 

on each well operated by the oil and gas industry. 

 

As with all such funds, the revenues and expenditures of the 

revolving fund were not subject to the scrutiny of the 

Legislative Assembly as they should be.  With the elimination 

of the oil and gas revolving fund, the costs of all these services 

will be included in the budget of the Department of Energy and 

Mines, as was the case prior to 1991-92 when the fund was first 

introduced.  The well levy fee was eliminated as part of a 

broader package of revenue initiatives in 1993-94 budget, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This legislation also provides standard transitional provisions 

to wind up the revolving fund.  The assets and liabilities of the 

fund as of March 31, 1993 will be transferred to the General 

Revenue Fund.  Also after March 31, 1993, any further activity 

relating to the wind-up of the fund will occur in the General 

Revenue Fund. 

 

The legislation also ensures that the financial statements for the 

year ending March 31, 1993 will be audited by the Provincial 

Auditor and tabled in the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, eliminating the oil and gas revolving fund will 

provide greater disclosure of revenue and expenditures to this 

Legislative Assembly.  This initiative is in keeping with the 

recommendations of the Gass Commission to improve public 

accountability. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Oil 

and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to 

thank the minister for just filling us in a little more on some of 

the details and the information regarding Bill No. 76.  And the 

minister I believe indicated that it's a way of being more 

comfortable and more open and presenting the facts as they are 

perceived in a more accountable way to the legislature through 

the Provincial Auditor. 

 

There are a few other areas that I think we should review a 

little further before we move to Committee of the Whole, and 

therefore I move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 40 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Employees' 

Superannuation Act 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask the Minister of Finance to introduce 

her official and make any comments she may like to make. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman.  I'd like to introduce Brian Smith who's executive 

director of the Public Employees Benefits Agency. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, would 

you be able to just give me an overview of the purpose of the 

Bill and deal with that.  I think we'll move fairly quickly if you 

explain what it is.  I believe it's to do with the retirement 

packages for police officers and firemen and that sort of thing.  

So if you'd identify that, we'd like to hear that. 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes I'd be pleased to 

do that.  The municipal employees' superannuation plan 

provides pension benefits to municipal employees, to school 

board employees and designated police officers and 

fire-fighters.  One thousand employers and 7,500 employees 

participate in the plan.  There's a commission, a nine-member 

commission, representing major employers and interest groups, 

and they oversee the plan's operation. 

 

The reason for amending The Municipal Employees' 

Superannuation Act is basically for housekeeping purposes.  

The amendments will ensure consistent application of the 

pension plan rules to all members of the plan. 

 

I think what's key is that the commission that oversees the plan 

has reviewed and approved of these amendments.  These 

changes will not result in any additional costs to the plan. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, on the 7,000 that are in the 

plan -- so I understand it accurately -- they're not presently 

receiving benefits.  Those are the people who are . . . total who 

are under the plan.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, that's correct.  

They're the contributors to the plan. 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1667 

Mr. Martens: -- The thousand different agencies across the 

province who are a part of the employers, do they provide the 

same amount of benefit to the plan as the employee provides to 

the plan?  Do they equal or match the contribution that is made 

by the employee? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, the contributions 

are equal. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

The Chair: -- I would simply ask then that the minister thank 

the official for his assistance with the committee's 

consideration. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to thank the 

official and I'd like to thank the opposition for moving the Bill 

through quickly. 

 

Bill No. 35 -- An Act to amend The Certified Nursing 

Assistants Act 

 

The Chair: -- I'll ask the Associate Minister of Health to 

introduce his official. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm happy to have with 

me this afternoon Lorraine Hill who is the senior associate 

deputy minister of the Department of Health.  We may be 

joined by one or two others through the course of the 

examination of the Bill. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  It's 

been a long time since I've been called that, but I appreciate 

that. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Act that we have before us is the Act to 

amend The Certified Nursing Assistants Act which involved 

essentially changing the name of the health professionals 

known as the certified nursing assistants to licensed practical 

nurses. 

 

And in your opening comments on the second reading, you said 

that you felt that this would better reflect their present role in 

the health system as such.  And I'm going to give you an 

opportunity now to explain to this committee exactly how you 

envision that happening.  Could you enlighten us, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think as the 

member will know, the professionals we have up until now 

called CNAs or certified nursing assistants, over the years have 

seen some evolution and change in the role they play in our 

health care system.  And I think it's accurate to say that that 

role has been expanding.  There has been some expansion, for 

instance, in the provisions that have allowed CNAs to be 

sharing in the dispensation of medicines and so on. 

I want to remind the member also that the CNAs, or now as a 

result of this legislation, the licensed practical nurses -- LPNs, 

will still continue to work under the direction of registered 

nurses or psych nurses and physicians. 

 

It's also I think important to note that what we're doing here 

brings the profession in Saskatchewan into line consistent with 

now the provinces of B.C. (British Columbia), Alberta, 

Manitoba, and Ontario.  And I understand the name change is 

also being pursued in the Maritimes. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that explanation.  

Further on in the legislation and so on, it becomes obvious that 

there is going to be a fairly lengthy period of time allowed for 

this change-over -- as long as three years, as I understand it. 

 

Do you feel that there is going to be any kind of confusion, 

misunderstanding -- who's an LPN, who's a CNA, and it goes 

on and on.  What impact do you foresee this having not only 

with the nurses themselves and perhaps even doctors, but the 

general hospital population as such, with this change-over and 

the long period of time that you're going to take to implement 

that? 

 

Could you delve into that issue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I think that's a good question, Mr. 

Member.  It is important, because it's been a long-standing title, 

the CNA title.  And it will take some time, I think, in both the 

professional community and in the public mind to understand 

the name change.  The three years given to effect the name 

change, during this period of time the professionals under 

question here -- CNAs or LPNs -- will be able to use either 

term, and their association, their professional association, has 

planned and will conduct a thorough program of education and 

public education so that over the course of the three years we 

can become used to the new title. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I don't know.  I can't suggest a better way of 

doing it, but all I'm suggesting to you is that with the possibility 

of being called a CNA or an LPN, and both synonymous at the 

same time, I just submit to you that that is going to create a 

certain amount of confusion and perhaps in sometimes in the 

eyes of the patient, him or herself, who doesn't quite know 

what calibre of treatment that they are getting. 

 

I have two further series of questions, I guess, and that is that 

while this name change was being contemplated, who did you 

consult with and what was the reaction from particularly the 

interested groups on this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- In the course of the preparation of this 

legislation -- and I know this discussion has gone on not just 

very recently, but for some time -- understandably the certified 

nursing assistants' association were certainly consulted and 

discussed with, and of course are fully supportive of the 

change.  Other professional associations that have been 



1668 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

involved in the discussions would include the Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses -- SUN, SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered 

Nurses' Association), the professional association representing 

nurses, the psych nurses, and the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons. 

 

I know from my own discussions with the SRNA and SUN 

there was some concern about the use of the title "nurse", so 

that there could be some confusion. And so it is clear I think in 

the legislation and in intention of the application of the 

legislation that the title be licensed practical nurse and that it 

will always be described as a licensed practical nurse.  So it is 

clear that this is another area of health care professionals 

separate and apart from those we now commonly describe as 

nurses. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, Mr. Minister, I was aware that there was 

some concern from SUN and SRNA and the registered nurses.  

What is their impression of it now?  You said that they had 

some concern, that you switched it over so that it would be 

very evident that they are licensed practical nurses.  So what 

I'm asking you is: what is their position today? 

 

The Chair: -- If I can just add to the question of the critic from 

the opposition, if the minister would also, while he is 

answering, introduce the official who joined him as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I apologize for not 

introducing my other official who has joined us since the 

proceedings began.  To my left is Mr. Drew Johnston who is a 

senior analyst with health planning and policy development 

from the Department of Health. 

 

I think to be fair, point number one, the other organizations I 

believe are aware that this legislation is before the House.  

There's no sense that they're being surprised here.  I think to be 

fair, there may still be some concern, particularly over the use 

of the title "nurse."  We believe we have addressed that with 

the insistence that the title be "licensed practical nurse." 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, and welcome to Mr. 

Johnston as well.  I don't want you to interpret my next 

question as being facetious or flippant, but I will ask you this in 

all sincerity. Are we on a trend here, or is this a one-shot deal?  

In other words, I guess how I could phrase this next question is: 

does this mean now that will registered nurses soon be asking 

for a name change, let's say, to licensed practical doctors? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- No.  The answer I think shortly put is no.  

There's been no suggestion of any other professional name 

change made by any other group of health care professionals, 

that I'm aware of.  So I don't think we need to be concerned 

that somehow the now registered nurses would be coming 

forward asking for a licensed practical physician, or anything 

like that. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1515) 

 

Bill No. 36 -- An Act to amend The Registered Nurses 

Act, 1988 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

could you confirm for me that my interpretation of what this 

Act intends to do is correct, and that is that it will allow the 

Saskatchewan Registered Nurses' Association, the SRNA, who 

has had a member whose disciplinary action . . . the 

disciplinary committee has taken action in disciplining the 

member before it could take that to the Queen's Bench, but that 

was the end of it.  So what this Bill will now do is allow that 

member then to appeal that decision.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, it would allow either 

the member or the SRNA, both would have then the right of 

further appeal. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And this appeal would only be justified on the 

basis and the facts of law? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- That is correct. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, how does this relate to other 

professionals and other organizations?  Is this going to be 

unique or is this something that is kind of standard throughout 

different professions? 

 

I know that you may not know too much about, let say, the STF 

(Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation) or College of Physicians 

and Surgeons, but certainly you must have done some research 

along this line, whether it's compatible with existing other 

professions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- It is a provision available in some 

professional legislation.  The one I am familiar with, it is part 

of the professional legislation that governs physicians.  I think 

also it's part of that which governs the profession of law.  But 

I'm certain it's part of that which governs physicians. 

 

It's not entirely . . . it's not in every professional piece of 

legislation, but at least for physicians it is there. 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask as well -- the minister has been joined 

by another official -- to have the official introduced to the 

committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, I'm now pleased to welcome 

Wilmer Berg who is here, who is director of vital stats and will 

be helping us out with The Vital Statistics Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wasn't 

aware that my questions were creating such a flurry in 

officialdom over there.  But I don't think we 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1669 

have too much of a problem with this, Mr. Minister.  It's just 

that I want to understand thoroughly and completely what 

you're trying to accomplish. 

 

So my understanding is that this was the major issue involved 

in this amending of this Act on the registered nurses.  But 

there's another point as well.  Could you clarify that one for 

me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Yes.  There is one small amendment 

within the Act.  The current Act is actually in error.  It defines . 

. . it uses the term "council" as describing the body that makes 

the decision on disciplinary matters, and it is actually the 

discipline committee that makes those decisions.  So it's simply 

a small amendment to correct that error. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister.  

My understanding of this Bill is that essentially what you're 

doing is removing the marital status of the newborn in terms of 

naming that newborn.  Is that correct? 

 

The way I understood it, before, parents had the option of 

either taking dad's last name; they had the option of taking 

mom's last name; they had the option of taking mom and dad's 

last name hyphenated.  But that was about the extent of the 

options that were available. 

 

Under this legislation, the way I understand it, mom and dad 

don't have to choose any of those names, but can choose 

whatever suits and fits their fancy.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member's 

description of the Bill describes one part of the Bill.  Another I 

think which is perhaps the most significant part of the Bill will 

now ensure that both parents -- father and mother, whether 

married or unmarried -- will have their particulars recorded in 

the birth information with vital statistics.  That's not currently 

the case. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Okay.  I hadn't caught on to that one, Mr. 

Minister, and I thank you for that information. 

 

In the case of a dispute, mom and dad and they can't decide, 

what happens under a situation like that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I thank the member for his question.  It's 

a question I had not asked of the officials or of the Bill.  And 

I'm glad he's brought the question forward. 

 

The response and the indication that I have is that if 

the parents are married and share the same surname, then that 

will become the name for the child.  If there is a dispute, then 

the child would be given the hyphenated combination of the 

two surnames in alphabetical order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- All right.  I guess that's the wisdom of 

Solomon coming out there.  So it seems fairly reasonable.  

What prompted, Mr. Minister, you to come forward with this 

type of an amendment?  Was there a demand for it?  And if so, 

by whom? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- In essence, Mr. Chairman, this Bill is in 

response to the Unified Law Conference of Canada, which is 

endeavouring to bring consistency to laws that exist in each 

and every provincial jurisdiction that we know will be shared 

by each and every provincial jurisdiction.  And so the Act 

before us essentially reflects the recommendations of the 

Unified Law Conference of Canada. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, has there been any change in the 

definition and how you handle stillbirth? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, this was . . . Yes, that is 

part of this Act and it was upon the recommendation of the 

College of Physicians and Surgeons that the definition of 

stillbirth has now been clarified and simplified on the 

recommendation of the college. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much.  Regarding my limited 

knowledge on the topic, could you give me the simplified 

version of that and perhaps I could understand?  Or is that what 

we find in the Act itself, the definition as is stated there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- It is the definition which applies in the 

Act itself. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 62 -- An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 

1981 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act.  Could 

you, for the benefit of the committee, explain why this 

amendment was brought forward. What are your major 

intentions in it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Essentially, Mr. Chairman, the Act is 

intended now to clarify in legislation what is in fact the current 

practice of the College of Physicians and Surgeons, and the 

college has encouraged this legislative change to take place. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, could you give me then the 

reaction then of the SMA, the Saskatchewan 



1670 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

Medical Association, and your consultation with them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, the two, I think, the two 

primary concerns that the SMA have raised is that the 

non-publication order in this Act is not by the Act extended to 

physicians.  In this Act, Mr. Chair, we are endeavouring to 

provide . . . I'll just say that little bit again. 

 

I think there are two concerns that the SMA have.  One is in 

essence that the non-publication provision which is being 

legislated here is not extended to physicians.  What we are 

doing in this Act is providing a protection, that would have to 

be achieved through a court, to prevent the publication of 

someone who may have raised a complaint or someone who 

may have served as a witness in the situation of a complaint.  If 

the court allows, their names will not then be published.  And 

we think this is important, particularly in the situation if it's 

sexual misconduct or harassment and that sort of thing.  Now 

it's my understanding that in fact the physicians' names are not 

published as a part of the disciplinary process. 

 

Now the second, I think, issue that the SMA is raising has to do 

with some of the costs that are set out here in the legislation.  It 

has been somehow . . . more through legal precedent, I think, 

than anything else that some of these costs are now being 

assigned.  And so we're simply recognizing that in the 

legislation. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You're right, Mr. Minister, that is a concern 

that the SMA has raised with us, particularly section 47.8(1) 

where it provides that in the case of disciplinary hearing: 

 

. . . the identity of any person and any information that could 

disclose the identity of that person or persons shall not be 

published in any document or broadcast in any way. 

 

Yet doctors do not receive the same treatment.  And yet I 

understood you to say that the names of physicians are not 

published, and here's the concern being expressed by the SMA.  

Could you clarify that for me please? 

 

Because the information that we're getting is that doctors feel 

that it is important to disclose the names of a doctor only if he 

is found guilty, because we know what the media can do with 

accusation and reports the name and details of the doctors that 

have been accused but have not been found guilty yet. 

 

So in many instances, doctors are telling me that they have 

been found innocent later on, yet still they can lose their 

practices or their practices can certainly take a beating because 

of the negative media impact that that can have.  So I'd like to 

have your reaction on that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I do want to be clear and 

I'm afraid I was not clear in my first 

response. 

 

The Bill before us does not change what currently exists.  And 

in fact the member is right, that in the current circumstance 

these disciplinary matters are public and therefore the 

physician's name can be made known. 

 

The protection being offered through this piece of legislation is 

to those who may launch an action or who may serve as a 

witness.  But again I remind the member that this protection is 

only available after application to the court.  It's not something 

automatically granted. 

 

It is felt that this kind of protection is needed for those who 

may launch a complaint or those who may serve as a witness.  

But this protection through this legislation is not being offered 

to the physicians. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, does that mean then that you 

also feel that the names of doctors who are for example 

suspected of sexual abuse, that their names must be published 

as a protection to potential patients? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- It's not a situation where anyone's name 

must be published, but it is the situation that the media or the 

public are available to attend the disciplinary hearings.  And so 

there is no change proposed in the legislation to that current 

practice. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- But is it not true, by the way this process has 

been set up, that we are going to be potentially destroying 

legitimate doctors with a legitimate practice, and because of the 

publicity that is going to result, of the sensationalism or 

whatever of the hearing itself, that this is going to impugn 

negatively on the doctor's practice?  Is this not a consideration? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- It certainly was a consideration I know in 

the discussions leading up to this legislation.  I think maybe 

make one or two points.  Overall we believe it is fundamentally 

in the public interest that there be sort of the public 

accountability and so on.  I note that no other citizens or 

professions that I'm aware of in our society would be offered 

that kind of protection.  The protection that we're offering here 

though is to the applicant or to a witness, but again I remind 

you it's not an automatic thing.  It would have to be decided by 

a court, by a judge if that protection was to be allowed. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You mention public accountability, Mr. 

Minister, that this could perhaps be one of the reasons why you 

would be prepared to let an accused name be circulated in 

public, because of some perceived threat that might potentially 

be there.  But that I don't think should be a reason for you to 

allow this publishing to go on just to protect the lives of 

innocent children or in case of sexual abuse of women or 

whatever the case happens to be. 

 

Because the way I understand it there is by the 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1671 

disciplinary committee itself an opportunity for the doctors' 

disciplinary committee to revoke temporarily the licence of any 

doctor that is a potential threat until such time as the hearing 

has taken place.  And subsequent to the hearing, appropriate 

action can be taken upon the guilt or innocence of that 

particular doctor without his name being splashed over the 

newspapers and so on. 

 

Or there are other options that doctors could use such as having 

an appropriate chaperon present, that the doctor could still be 

carrying on his practice, because I think we're still operating 

under the assumption that we're innocent until proven guilty. 

 

If there are alternate methods by which safety of patients can 

be assured, surely we can follow those alternate methods as 

opposed to taking the drastic measure of making this whole 

thing public and splashing it all over the place.  By making that 

kind of a change would that not only be putting doctors on the 

same plane as members of the Law Society.  I don't think there 

would be much of a difference there.  My understanding is that 

that would put doctors on equal footing with them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I recognize the point I 

think that the member is making, and it certainly was 

considered.  Originally I believe in the discussions with the 

college, this protection was being recommended by the college 

and discussions were held around some similar . . . or some sort 

of protection for the physicians. 

 

Through the course of the discussions and the debate and the 

formation of the legislation it was decided that we would move 

at this time with the protection which the college has requested 

for either the person who has brought forward the complaint or 

witnesses, to move forward in legislation at this time.  And I'm 

prepared to say here today we will continue the discussions 

with the college in the future regarding the role of doctors in 

this equation. 

 

I do note that when any one of us is subjected to the public 

court system, of course this is the risk.  If any one of us is 

charged, then there is a risk that we are presumed guilty before 

proven guilty.  And I think we understand that as a difficulty, 

particularly in these days of heightened media exposure.  But it 

is true I think for all of us in the public court system. 

 

But I say again, and I've consulted here with the officials, that 

we will continue this discussion then with the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons and the SMA. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's exactly . . . your 

additives there at the end, and the SMA as an afterthought, I 

think that's where the problem is arising here. 

 

The college may be saying one thing, but my understanding is 

that the SMA, the fraternal organization of the doctors, the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association, are the ones that are not 

happy. 

 The majority of doctors in this province, by far, if the SMA is 

representative of the doctors of this province and I think you 

would agree that they are, they are the ones that are expressing 

these concerns to me and they want them addressed. 

 

So I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, if you would be amenable to 

an amendment that will address the concerns that the SMA has.  

And I think you have a copy of the amendment that I'll be 

proposing when we get into that clause -- clause 11 I believe it 

is, Mr. Minister.  And you have the amendment before you. 

 

But maybe the appropriate time, Mr. Chairman, would be to 

discuss that particular issue when we come to it on a 

clause-by-clause study. 

 

But I just reiterate, Mr. Minister, it is the concern of the SMA, 

Saskatchewan Medical Association, that is asking you to have 

some consideration to the impact that it's going to have on the 

lives and the practice of potentially many, many doctors in this 

province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Well there is no change in regard to what 

has been the practice over the last many number of years.  

There is no change in that regard.  It's my information this has 

not been to date a significant problem or a significant . . . there 

are not significant numbers of examples where this has been a 

problem. So I don't think we should leave the impression that 

somehow we're changing something here by the legislation that 

will make the current system or the current situation different. 

 

In fact the current situation, in terms of the doctors, will 

continue just as it is.  This does add protection though to those 

who may launch an action or who may serve as a witness.  But 

again I say, only after having the approval of the court. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you.  Mr. Minister, I can 

only reiterate what I've said on a couple of occasions.  This is 

the feeling of the majority of the doctors in this province, that 

it's going to potentially do harm to those individuals.  And this 

is a concern that they have expressed to me and I've relayed to 

you, and I will be making an amendment in a little while to 

accommodate those concerns, and then you can react as you 

see appropriate under that condition. 

 

Mr. Minister, there's one other section that I would like to raise.  

A further concern from the SMA, and that regards section 54 of 

the main Bill. And that is regarding paying for the investigation 

costs, court costs, etc., and so on, where there's a statement 

saying that all other costs related to the investigation and 

hearing -- I'll repeat that -- all other costs related to the 

investigation and hearing. 

 

And I don't have to be a doctor or anyone else to appreciate the 

potential implications of a statement like that that's wide open 

and giving a blanket opportunity for the organization to pass on 

whatever costs may seem suitable, which in fact might not be. 



1672 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

And this is a concern that the SMA has that this statement is 

much too wide open and can easily be misinterpreted, could 

easily be exaggerated so that there are undue costs and burdens 

associated with any kind of hearings.  And quite frankly, the 

SMA would like to see that terminology, those words deleted, 

namely, all other costs related to the investigation and hearing. 

 

I would like to hear and be interested in your response. 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, we have had the legal 

folks look this over and look over legal decisions that have 

been made in the courts regarding the payments of costs.  And 

we believe it does clarify it sufficiently and appropriately. 

 

I look at the existing provision under The Medical Profession 

Act, and it . . . I could just read the current provision: direct the 

person to pay the costs of and incidental to the investigation 

including fees payable to solicitors, counsel, and witnesses or 

any part of those costs. 

 

And so the current situation is not significantly different or 

there is not a great broadening here in my view.  The provision 

now would have: ". . . and all other costs related to the 

investigation and hearing, or any part of these costs."  And it's 

my understanding that this provision is being put now into the 

legislation simply as a result of legal decisions, court decisions, 

that have been made, and now the legislation will more closely 

or adequately reflect those decisions which are in fact reality 

now. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- But surely, Mr. Minister, you would agree 

that if there's going to be a statement saying all other costs, that 

it's completely open-ended.  That's the wording that I have 

here: all other costs related to the investigation.  And this, in 

their opinion, is too wide open.  That's all that they're asking. 

 

This, Mr. Minister, just a supplement question to that comment, 

this legal opinion that you were referring to, has this legal 

opinion been transmitted directly to the SMA? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I'm told, Mr. Chairman, that yes, in fact . 

. . I'm not sure if they were formal legal opinions, but certainly 

the legal discussions through Justice and the college and so on 

were shared with the SMA, that that discussion has taken place. 

 

Number two, I would want to point out to the committee that 

whatever costs we're discussing here are those costs which are 

awarded by the courts.  And therefore, number three, there is 

the avenue of appeal, that if one feels that the costs are 

inappropriate, one in fact can appeal those costs and have them 

each appealed individually, and I'm told that in fact has 

happened on occasion. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Are you also, by implication, 

indicating that the SMA agreed with you and with that 

opinion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- No I'm not, by implication, suggesting 

that the SMA agrees entirely with the provision here.  And I 

think you're aware of that and I'm aware of that.  But we are 

confident that it does reflect . . . that it has the support of the 

College of Physicians and Surgeons and in fact does reflect 

what is practice and reality now and is an appropriate 

legislative description. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 11 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a House 

amendment I would like to make at this time on clause 11 of 

the printed Bill.  And the amendment reads as follows: 

 

Amend clause 11 of the printed Bill by deleting subsection 

47.8(2) as being enacted therein. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Chairman, that you have a copy of that 

amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 11 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 12 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 18 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Pursuant to the 

discussion that we have had on this clause as well, I will move: 

 

That clause 18 of the printed Bill be amended by striking out 

the words ", and all other costs related to the investigation 

and hearing" where they appear in clause 54(1)(i) as being 

enacted therein. 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 18 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 19 to 25 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to take this 

opportunity to admit that we don't win very many votes in this 

House.  We have tried our best.  And the minister is doing what 

he feels is best, so I would like to thank him for his 

forthrightness and his answers, and the officials, so that we 

were able to expeditiously solve these problems on these four 

Bills that were at hand.  So thank you, Mr. Minister. 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1673 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the Health 

critic from the opposition for his line of questioning this 

afternoon.  I think we both, in the course of the committee, 

learned some things today.  And I want to sincerely thank the 

officials from the Department of Health who have been here to 

assist us all. 

 

Bill No. 58 -- An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities 

Act 

 

The Chair: -- I'll ask the minister to introduce her official. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I have to my right 

John Edwards who is director of municipal policy and 

legislative services. And to his right is Lorne Tangjerd, senior 

policy analyst with the Department of Municipal Government. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, 

Madam Minister, we don't have a great deal of problem with 

this Bill.  First of all though I'd like to welcome your officials 

as well to the Assembly this afternoon. 

 

And we don't, as I said, have a lot of problems with this Bill.  I 

wonder if you might however take the time to tell us what 

problems you feel were associated with the previous Act, and 

what this Bill does to try and restore those . . . or try and 

change it to move it in the right direction.  You might want to 

take a few minutes to address that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, thank you.  The purpose of the 

changes to The Northern Municipalities Act is essentially to 

parallel last session's changes or amendments to the urban Act, 

and also the amendments to the urban Act that we have 

proposed for this session. 

 

And these amendments include updating provisions relating to 

petitions for a binding by-law by the voters, fire prevention 

by-laws, dangerous dog by-laws, conflict of interest, authority 

for municipalities to do custom work, and broadening the 

authority for intermunicipal agreements. 

 

There is one special clause related to northern municipalities 

which states that the entry to municipal status will be changed.  

We have now northern settlements and we are changing the 

status where a community will become a northern hamlet, and 

there's some requirements around that threshold that will be 

changed.  And we're also making a provision that will limit 

municipal funds to be applied only for municipal purposes. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, are there any costs associated 

with the changes that you're proposing to the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, Mr. Chair.  To the member opposite, 

no, there are no costs that will be affecting 

any of the taxpayers of these municipalities. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I think that 

concludes any of the concerns that we have.  We think this Bill 

is properly done and addresses any of the concerns that the 

northern municipalities may have had. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 39 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chair, I move that the Bill to amend 

The Northern Municipalities Act be moved without amendment 

and I would like to thank the member opposite for the 

questions and the officials here today. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, we thank you as well for your 

cooperation and the officials for their cooperation in coming 

down this afternoon.  Thank you. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 60 -- An Act respecting Condominiums 

 

The Chair: -- I ask the committee to come to order and the 

Minister of Justice to introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  With me today 

is Madeline Robertson of the Department of Justice and Ray 

Petrich, also from the Department of Justice, who is the master 

of titles. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, and 

welcome to your officials here this afternoon.  Mr. Minister, I 

wonder if you would mind taking a few minutes -- maybe not 

as many minutes as you took in your speech the other day 

about it -- but just a few minutes of your time to outline the 

problems that this Bill addresses. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  To the member, 

the member from Kindersley quite properly pointed out the 

other day when this matter was in second reading that the 

genesis of this Bill was when the previous government was in 

power.  A great deal of the work that was done on this Bill was 

done during that time and I ought to have given due credit to 

the previous government when I was on my feet at that time. 

 

The member therefore will know that there has been a 

continuing concern, a mounting concern, about the fact that the 

previous legislation, which is some 25 years old, was not 

adequately covering some of the matters that the experience of 

condominium living was unearthing in Saskatchewan and the 

numbers of concerned increased steadily over the years.  So 

quite properly the previous government began to have a look at 

it, and as the member has observed, this 



1674 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

legislation was by and large completed during the term of the 

previous government. 

 

And I have no quarrel with that at all.  I mean that is the way of 

it.  We were prepared to proceed with it last year and didn't 

because of pressure of time but we're very pleased to bring it 

before the House this year. 

 

The significant problems that had been drawn to the attention 

of the Saskatchewan government and which have been 

addressed in this Bill include really a wide variety of things.  

The operation of the corporations that are the condominium 

corporations is a significant area of reform, where all sorts of 

requirements that are obvious to us now had been omitted from 

the original legislation.  And we have moved to patch up some 

of those deficiencies. 

 

For example, the requirement to hold an annual meeting and to 

hold regular meetings; the requirement to provide certain 

financial information by the condominium corporation to the 

condominium owners, and that sort of day-to-day operational 

requirements have been attended to in this legislation; the 

requirement to establish reserve funds to provide for major 

repairs and replacements; the simple matter like being able to 

file a caveat against the title to the land to show that you are the 

owner of a condominium unit is a reform that is obvious and 

necessary. 

 

There is in the Bill provisions to provide a procedure for 

owners to amend the condominium plan with the issue of 

tenants and powers with respect to tenants where condominium 

units are rented to other persons.  Matters like parking spots 

and that sort of thing are attended to, and various matters 

relating to municipal taxes. 

 

I haven't covered it all by any means, but these are matters 

which were drawn to the attention of the Government of 

Saskatchewan over many, many years and we are pleased to 

have found time on this legislative agenda to get this Act 

passed and address some of those problems. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, are there any costs 

associated with these changes to the taxpayers of the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I can't think of any.  I think the answer 

is none. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, well 

any time that you bring forward a Bill that the previous 

administration had any part in, we're pleased to see that.  And 

we're also . . . it holds some hope out for the province of 

Saskatchewan that it may eventually move in the direction that 

we feel it should move. 

 

And so for that reason we think that there isn't any problems 

with this Bill and are pleased to see that you would be 

continuing in the trend of moving in the direction that we'd like 

to see it move. 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Could I suggest, Mr. Chair, that we 

approve this Bill in committee by parts? 

 

The Chair: -- Would that be agreed?  We shall. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 116 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, we 

thank you for your forthrightness on this Bill as well as the 

officials for coming down this afternoon and helping out.  We 

appreciate that.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I too would like to thank 

Ms. Robertson and Mr. Petrich for coming and assisting us 

today. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 40 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Employees' 

Superannuation Act 

 

The Speaker: -- When shall this Bill be read a third time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- With leave now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 35 -- An Act to amend The Certified Nursing 

Assistants Act 

 

The Speaker: -- When shall this Bill be read a third time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- With leave now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- No leave required. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 36 -- An Act to amend The Registered Nurses Act, 

1988 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill now be 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 62 -- An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 

1981 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1675 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 58 -- An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities 

Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 60 -- An Act respecting Condominiums 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(1615) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Research Council 

Vote 35 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister at this time to please 

introduce the officials who have joined us here today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Chairman, behind me I have Ron 

McGrath.  He's the controller at the Research Council.  

Immediately behind me is George MacKay, the vice-president 

of the Research Council.  And to my left here, Jim Hutch, 

president of the Saskatchewan Research Council. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, and officials, I don't anticipate that we will be here 

very long. 

 

One of the things that I had the opportunity to do last year was 

to satisfy some of my questions that I had had about the SRC 

(Saskatchewan Research Council).  I have a reasonable 

working knowledge, thanks to my association with Mr. Hutch 

in times past and with some of the personnel working there and 

my association with NRC (National Research Council). 

 

And I can certainly appreciate the work that the SRC is doing 

for Saskatchewan and for many of the businesses that access 

the expertise that we have in that organization and some of our 

associations that we have with other research councils across 

the province.  So we spent a fair length of time last year talking 

about the wide parameters of the operation of the SRC. 

 

And I guess just a general question that I would have to 

allow you, Mr. Minister, to have a response and perhaps update 

me and other people that are interested in the SRC.  Have there 

been any significant changes within the operation of the SRC, 

or different directions that you may have chosen, or new 

programs that you have embarked upon that you would be 

wanting to share with the people of Saskatchewan?  Mr. 

Minister, I just give you that opportunity to do that now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. member 

for the opportunity to put on the record some of the things that 

we think are fine professional achievements by the 

Saskatchewan Research Council.  There are no major changes 

in direction of the Research Council.  Over the past year there 

have been, I suppose, exciting projects but certainly nothing 

that would indicate a definite change in direction. 

 

I think over the years I don't remember controversy 

surrounding the Saskatchewan Research Council.  I think all 

governments, whether it would be the hon. member's previous 

government or ours or some previous government before that, I 

think have all been very proud of the accomplishments of the 

Research Council as it complements the government, the 

people of the province, and industry as well.  I know that 

there's a good deal of work that the Research Council does.  It 

involves the private sector, and there's very high regard for the 

Research Council in the private sector as well. 

 

I guess one of the things in response to the hon. member's 

question that I would want to put on the record is just the vision 

of the Research Council, their mission statement, and that is 

that the Saskatchewan Research Council will play a major role 

in helping Saskatchewan rebuild its economy.  It's technical 

expertise, capabilities, and laboratory facilities create wealth 

and jobs by helping to establish new businesses, to save and 

expand existing businesses and to manage our natural resources 

that are necessary for our economic renewal. 

 

The Research Council in terms of economic development has 

funded over 150 projects -- I guess that would be last year -- to 

the tune of some $1.2 million for small business through the 

IRAP program (industrial research assistance program) and 

established the strategic technologies in automation and 

robotics program to assist the development of Saskatchewan 

business in engineering and advanced technologies. 

 

The Research Council has assisted small businesses with 

engineering and fabrication of plastic moulds and electronic 

design support.  They are a key player in development of 

diamond exploration techniques appropriate for Saskatchewan 

geology and the utilization by Saskatchewan mineral 

companies. 

 

The Research Council has a collaborative research on the first 

horizontal well project in Saskatchewan with, I believe it's 

Sceptre Resources in 1987, and does ongoing work with the 

industry.  After five years of 



1676 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

horizontal wells, they now account for some 13 per cent of 

Saskatchewan's total oil production, with over 300 wells 

drilled.  That represents somewhere in the area of 150 to $200 

million of activity per year. 

 

And as an example of the Research Council transferring new 

technology to small business, they've developed a new bulk 

kitchen wrap dispenser called E-ZEE Wrap for a Perdue 

company and generated a half million dollars in sales, created 4 

full-time and 10 part-time jobs.  And this product won the best 

new Canadian product award at the Toronto housewares show. 

 

In the area of agriculture, the Research Council has been in the 

forefront of water supply location and water quality 

improvement.  They've developed low-cost, drought-resistant 

feed supplies.  We're very proud of the bovine blood sampling 

and the DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) research for disease 

resistance to ensure purity and quality of livestock.  They 

closely have been monitoring the environment through such 

technologies as remote sensoring, water and soil analysis, and 

stack testing to help control air pollution. 

 

They've been working with farmers to reduce livestock feed 

costs by improving the feed value of crop chaff and flax straw.  

They've done field demonstration projects and research 

programs on behalf of organic farming in the province to 

improve production.  And they are looking at . . . or they've 

worked in regional processing methods to diversify the rural 

economy. 

 

In the environment the Research Council performs a number of 

activities to enhance and protect the environment such as water 

quality analysis, toxicity testing, radon testing, stack testing, 

and other testing for the environment. 

 

They have given the province the ability to act quickly through 

emergency monitoring services in the case of chemical 

accident spills.  And the lab has helped maintain a safe 

environment for all Saskatchewan people. 

 

They also participate in monitoring our lakes and our rivers and 

our water supply to ensure that our drinking water meets or 

exceeds the provincial standards that have been set by this 

legislature. 

 

And with that, Mr. Chairman, I think that I would take my 

place.  And if the member has any further questions, specific 

programs or the budget of the Research Council, I'd be happy 

to answer those specific questions. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman.  I 

concur with the comment that you made.  And I have to admit 

that the SRC, I think, is one of the few organizations that are 

under the thumb of government that has been able to escape the 

tentacles of government to a large degree now.  I would 

assume, Mr. Minister, that it is because of the excellent 

officials that operate that and are above-board and beyond any 

kind of reproach.  But however, having said that, we just want 

to prove that now for a little while. 

 

My first question, Mr. Minister, relates to a question . . . is the 

same question as I asked last year and that is the funding for 

the SRC.  And I asked the minister at that time if he could 

supply me an answer as to the balance of funding that came 

from government and that which came from private business. 

 

And this is the answer that I got.  Grants from the provincial 

government, 28.4 per cent -- those are direct grants from the 

Consolidated Fund; industry contract, 51.2; provincial 

government contracts, 11.4; federal contracts, 9 per cent.  And 

the minister said, so in essence I guess we say there's 72 per 

cent of the total funding of SRC comes from contracts and 28 

per cent, in round figures, comes from government funding 

through the Consolidated Fund.  Could you apprise me of any 

changes in that percentage in the way in which the SRC is 

funded? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Chairman, the . . . I'm not sure that 

we have an absolute, final figure on the '92-93 fiscal year, but I 

would give our best estimate to the member. 

 

From industry the funding for '92-93 is estimated to be 53 per 

cent, and this is money that the professionals at the Research 

Council go out and earn by the good work that they do.  The 

federal government is 9 per cent; provincial government, 12 

per cent; and the operating grant would be 27 per cent, and 

that's our best estimate.  At some later date I'd be happy to 

provide the member with the final figures on that. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'd look forward to getting those, Mr. 

Minister.  I guess what I was more interested in than anything 

is to the trend and whether the . . . And I'm pleased to see that 

you said that 53 per cent was from contracts -- is that correct? 

-- 53 per cent was from contracts, I believe you said.  And my 

information was that last year that was 51.2.  And in addition to 

that there's the provincial contracts and the federal contracts, 

making a total of about somewhere in the neighbourhood of the 

low 70 per cent. 

 

And that, I think, is encouraging and I think that reflects the 

confidence that the industry has in the SRC and that the SRC is 

doing a good job.  And I would hate to see the reverse being 

true, where SRC would have to start relying more upon 

government, direct Consolidated Fund grants, to keep it going.  

And so certainly that is a positive trend. 

 

First of all, Mr. Minister, I would like to thank you for the 

response that you gave us in response to the global questions 

that we've been asking every department and the answers that 

you have provided.  However, as is often the case in this 

business, detailed answers beg more questions.  And we'll just 

embark on a few questions that I have in response to your 

global answers. 

 

I noticed in -- what is the heading of this, personnel report? -- 

there is an increase of $60,000 being added 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1677 

to the total salaries for out-of-scope, temporary, or casual 

workers.  What is the reason for that increase of $60,000? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The item that you refer to on the . . . I 

believe you were asking about the out-of-scope temporary, 

casual category?  Yes, that is increased by about $60,000. 

 

This is the hourly, short-term people that are taken on on 

contracts.  And I think you'll find over time, as the Research 

Council is able to raise more money by the professional work 

they do in the private sector, that you'll find that that amount 

will tend to increase.  So as the percentage of work and 

revenues generated from the private sector, that amount should 

likely go up correspondingly over time.  And that's the situation 

here. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- There's an inflection in that answer and that is 

that you would say that the more out-of-scope temporary and 

the more out-of-scope casual workers there are the better, 

because it signifies that the SRC is doing more business with 

industry on a part-time, piece-time, contract basis.  And the 

natural offshoot of that kind of . . . the reality of that type of an 

arrangement is more out-of-scope temporary and casual.  But 

that is a comment that you can address later on. 

 

With respect to that same issue, Mr. Minister, I notice that 

there is an increase of out-of-scope temporary casuals from five 

to eight as opposed to March 31, '92 and March 31, '93.  What 

would the reason for that be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- At the Research Council it's viewed as a 

positive move to have an increased number from five to eight. 

 

And what that means is that they've actually got more private 

sector work to do and they don't necessarily need people on full 

time.  But what sometimes happens is that these people will 

have other jobs, but they have a particular expertise and they'll 

be hired to offer that particular expertise to the Research 

Council. 

 

Another thing that we have to keep aware of is that quite often, 

or at least in some cases, people who may have another job and 

do this part-time or casual work for the Research Council will 

eventually work into enough time and have an expertise that's a 

growing field; that they'll eventually become a permanent 

employee of the Research Council.  So we view this as a very 

positive move within the Research Council. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Exactly, I couldn't agree more, and that's the 

point that I wanted you to make as well -- is that that is a good 

sign. 

 

And I'm just saying to all members here, just because we're 

talking about temporary work, just because we're talking about 

casual work doesn't mean that that in itself is a bad thing.  And 

I appreciate you coming out and saying exactly what you said, 

because 

it's not very often that we hear members from your side saying 

things like that.  And in particular, in the SRC that is absolutely 

true and accurate.  So I have no contention with that at all. 

 

Mr. Minister, my next question is on the same topic, on the 

same page, and that is dealing with out-of-scope permanent this 

time.  And I just want you to comment on a discrepancy, an 

apparent discrepancy in the trend that I would have assumed, 

almost like an anachronism here, and that is that on March 31, 

'92 you had 212 permanent and you spent $8.276 million.  

Then on your report dated March 31, '93 you have one more 

employee, bringing it to 213 and your expenditure was $8.176 

million or a drop of $100,000.  I'm not complaining about the 

drop, but I would want to . . . I'd be interested in the 

explanation that you could offer.  Was it personnel changes -- 

lower-classified, lower-paid personnel?  What was the reason? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- First off, I want to address something to 

the hon. member that you mentioned first.  The trend here for 

temporary casual is a different situation than the temporary 

casual situation you'll quite often get on people who have a lot 

less training, such as restaurant employees, for example, where 

it's sometimes very difficult for them to exist with that type of 

employment. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You guys are predictable. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you for accusing me of being 

predictable.  It's a very different situation at the Research 

Council where almost all the people who work there are very 

highly skilled professionals. 

 

The explanation for the increased number of out-of-scope 

permanent employees increasing by one but yet a drop of 

$100,000 in the payments can be explained by people who 

either retired or resigned during the year, and people came in 

on a lower end of a wage scale, thereby there was some savings 

there. 

 

This is not necessarily something that would happen over a 

long period of time.  I don't think there's any trend being set 

there.  It's just the way that it worked out during the year as to 

who was no longer employed and different people coming in 

that were hired at a bit of a lower rate than those that had left. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm not going to make this connection, but if 

you are saying that you saved $100,000 by getting in less 

qualified, perhaps, and less experienced personnel, and 

therefore you didn't have to pay so much.  And before we just 

found out that there was an increase in activity, and the SRC 

was actually getting more special contracts.  I guess that speaks 

well for the young blood that's coming in, but at the same time 

I hasten to add that it also speaks well for the older blood that's 

there and recognize it and correctly manipulates the system for 

its benefit. 

 

Another question I had, Mr. Minister, is regarding 

reclassification and conversion of employees.  And I noticed 

that there have been 13 employees that have 



1678 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

been reclassified since last year at this time.  And the question I 

would have for you, Mr. Minister, is: what was the reason for 

those reclassifications, and did those reclassifications include 

salary increases for some of those employees, and if so, how 

much?  Now if that poses a problem at this time, I would want 

your commitment that I would get a list of those names with 

those monetary figures that I am requesting. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- You too, hon. member, are predictable 

in that you twist my words a little bit when I answered the 

previous question.  When I answered the previous question 

we're not talking about intentionally bringing in less 

experienced people, but just because of the nature of some 

people who resign or retire, of course they do have greater 

experience because they have gained that experience working 

at the Research Council. 

 

And when a new person comes in, of course different people 

have a different learning curve, and some people it would take 

them maybe a little bit longer to get to that level of experience 

within their job.  I think that's normal in going into any new job 

or starting out a profession.  So there are some people that 

would, I acknowledge, have less experience, but it's not done 

by design.  It's because of the nature of refilling positions as 

people either resign or retire from their positions. 

 

Specific to this question that you ask about the 13 

reclassifications, I don't have an actual list for the member, but 

the Research Council will undertake to provide you with that 

list once they get back to the offices in Saskatoon.  They'll send 

you the list. 

 

What happens in reclassifications at the Research Council is 

that when there is an expanded work area in terms of the work 

that they're actually doing, or there's an expansion in the 

knowledge that they've acquired in working on projects over 

the years or months, that there is some reclassification and with 

that goes a comparable salary increase. 

 

And the way that this is determined, I would want to inform the 

hon. member, is that there is a committee that's set up to review 

this.  The committee is made up of employees with one 

management person on the committee, and they have the sole 

responsibility to make that determination as to whether or not 

there should be a reclassification, and if there is a 

reclassification what is the increase in salary that should go 

with that. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Okay, Mr. Minister, I will look forward to 

getting that response and those answers from you. 

 

I notice also, Mr. Minister, that on personnel report number 

three there are no names of employees that have been 

terminated, and I'm assuming severances were paid to, but 

there is not any total that I can find on severances that were 

paid.  I'm asking you, if these severances were paid, why are 

those totals not included? 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- For the fiscal year April 1, 1992, until 

March 31, 1993, there were no severances paid out by the 

Research Council and therefore, they're not reflected in the 

sheet that I gave to the member. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I notice also, Mr. Minister, that several 

employees have been listed as resigning.  Were any of these 

people requested to resign?  In other words, were any 

resignations requested and now are there any of these 

employees that might be considering or taking court actions 

against the government . . . against the employer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- There was no one asked to resign from 

the Research Council.  These people resigned for a wide range 

of reasons; some cases, we don't necessarily know.  But no one 

was asked to resign.  There are no legal actions regarding 

employment or any other matter as far as we know at the 

Research Council. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, could you give us the reasons 

why six employees resign.  I mean, that's a fairly substantial 

number of people that are resigning from the department.  

Could you supply those reasons for us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- If you just look at the list, I don't wish to 

talk about the names of the people individually but I can . . . If 

you refer to your list, the first two on the list that resigned is 

what we would refer to as technology transfer.  Both of those 

individuals are in the same business but have started their own 

business.  They do the same work but they've started their own 

business.  One of the people still comes back -- the first one, 

for sure -- still comes back from time to time to do specialized 

contract work for the Research Council. 

 

(1645) 

 

The three middle ones in each of those cases were very young 

people that worked as lab techs.  And they obviously found 

employment elsewhere, where they found that there was 

possibly some chance of promotion.  We don't really know 

what happened to those three people, but in each case I'd want 

to inform the hon. member that they were quite young people 

just beginning their careers. 

 

In the case of the last person on the list, this person was here 

for two years from France.  They were on a two-year contract 

with the Research Council.  And I'm not even sure that 

resigned should be the proper term there, but at the end of their 

two-year term they returned to France. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Regarding the 

manuals used by the Research Council for the board of 

directors and for the government, I've had my staff go to the 

library and to get copies of these manuals if available.  And we 

found that they were not available; there are no manuals here.  

Are these manuals selective, are they secretive, or what's the 

reason why these manuals would not be available? 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1679 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I guess they're internal documents 

for the operation of the Research Council.  There is, I don't 

think, anything of a confidentiality nature to them.  If the hon. 

member wanted to look at the manuals, you'd be more than 

welcome to do that.  If we knew that you wanted specific ones, 

or you wanted all of them, I suppose we could bring them to 

you; or sometime if you wanted to arrange to stop into the 

offices in Saskatoon, they would be made available to you. 

 

The Research Council is very proud of their manuals and they 

certainly have nothing to hide about them; it's just not been the 

practice to provide the manuals to libraries within the province. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm going to take you up on that offer, Mr. 

Minister, because if I'm going to be responsible for shadowing 

the SRC, I'd like to know a little bit more about them.  And 

that's why I wanted access to them and I didn't have it.  So I'll 

take you up on that offer and I will look forward to receiving a 

copy of those. 

 

On the occupancy chart that you have provided for me, as of 

March 31, '93, I notice that there's a fish hatchery in Saskatoon, 

267 square metres and under environment. 

 

This fish hatchery is, I am assuming, doing research.  Could 

you fill me in a little bit about the type of research?  Which fish 

are you researching and what is the relationship between that 

research and the fish hatchery . . . not fish hatchery, but rather 

the fish farm that was located in Waldheim?  And if there was 

any correlation or any symbiotic relationship between the SRC 

and that Arctic Fish Company, as it was called, in Waldheim? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Chairman, when they say fish 

hatchery, that just indicates which building it is.  It's no longer 

used as a fish hatchery and the Research Council has not been 

in the fish hatchery project for at least a couple of years. 

 

In terms of the relationship to fish hatcheries in the private 

sector throughout the province, the Research Council provides 

ongoing consultation and services to people in the fish hatchery 

business, so I'm not sure there's any direct relationship to the 

fish hatchery at Waldheim.  But it wouldn't be unusual for the 

Research Council to have done some work for them. 

 

Before I sit down I want to assure you that if you wish to 

review the manuals at the Research Council in Saskatoon that 

Mr. Hutch would be more than happy to set up an appointment 

for you.  The only thing that I would ask if there is at some 

point in time information that's of a confidential nature, that 

you'd respect that. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think I know how this 

operation works and confidentiality is not something that I 

have to be reminded of, or lectured on.  But I will just assume 

though that there's nothing fishy going on in that aspect.  Sorry 

about that. 

 

One further question, or one area of questions -- 

depending on whether it will be one question will depend on 

your answer.  Mr. Minister, I could not help but notice on 

another section where there's a list of computers that the SRC 

has purchased for the '92-93 fiscal year, and I notice that there's 

a total when I add them up of over $127,000.  They're buying 

various computers and the computers when I look the list over 

are of varying kinds of different companies.  There must be at 

least a half a dozen different ones. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: how are these computers 

purchased?  What's the format and the procedure?  Are they 

tendered?  Or how does the SRC go about purchasing their 

computers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- In terms of how the computers are 

acquired, I don't think it's the tendering system that you're 

thinking of, if I can sort of project across to you what you are 

thinking.  What happens in most cases but not necessarily all, 

the employee or the department requesting the computer are 

asked to get three quotes.  Sometimes it's difficult to get three 

quotes if there's highly specialized computer equipment that's 

required. 

 

And there's a great variation in the types of computer 

equipment.  For example, a geologist may have quite a 

different need for a computer system than a project . . . And I 

look at a release here from April 20, 1993 where there's an 

ultrasound research project to benefit feedlot operators, which 

would be very different from a computer that a geologist would 

want to have, or someone to use for general office duties. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I buy that argument to a certain extent.  

But surely in software and so on, there are lots of companies 

that make specialized software.  Even in my own industry of 

the hog industry there are different companies that will supply 

software for those particular issues. 

 

But I'm not particularly concerned that there was any one 

company getting a favoured hand.  Because when I look over 

the list I notice that there's such a long and a wide range of 

suppliers.  And that's what makes me buy your argument that 

they go shopping with specialized equipment to specialized 

people and they've come up with a whole range of suppliers.  

And there's no inflection on my part that there was anything 

untoward happening here.  But I just wanted to hear what you 

had to say on that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now before I take my seat, the member from Morse has a 

couple of windy questions for you, and you will see what I'm 

talking about in a little while. 

 

But I want to take this opportunity if I don't get the opportunity 

again to thank you, Mr. Minister, and thank you to the officials 

for the responses to my questions. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, the 

SaskPower I think, or someone in the government recently 

provided a contract to someone in relation to wind power for 

generating electricity.  And I was wondering whether the 

Saskatchewan 



1680 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

Research Council was involved in any of the bids. 

 

I know that they have been involved in some of the companies 

that want to set up some of these wind-powered generators, and 

I was just wondering whether your Research Council had been 

involved in any of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Yes, the Saskatchewan Research 

Council did bid on the project, and they were not successful.  I 

believe, and I would stand to be corrected because SaskPower 

would have these figures and not the Research Council, but I 

believe that the Research Council came in second. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I believe it was an Ontario firm that got the 

bid.  I know that there was an individual from my constituency 

that bid on it, and he's connected with an Alberta firm but lives 

in Swift Current, and I just was wondering.  So you don't know, 

but I'll ask SaskPower then when we have that discussion about 

the contract, and we'll see what transpired. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I remember the contract being awarded.  

The funding for the project came jointly from the provincial 

government and the federal government.  And if my my 

memory serves me correctly, it was in the area of 170 to 

$180,000 -- the contract that was awarded.  I think that most of 

the low bidders were evaluated so that we were comparing 

apples to apples, and a firm from Ontario was successful as the 

low bidder.  And the only consideration that was taken once we 

had them all evaluated was that the low bid would get the 

project, and that's the tendering policy at SaskPower. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is Sask Research Council still involved in 

businesses that want to generate electricity with wind?  Are 

they still involved with companies like that in the province?  

And if so, would you tell me if there's more than one or there's 

four or five of those people who are interested or a consortium 

or a group of people that are interested in that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I understand that there is no specific 

client right now, but there's a contract arrangement between the 

company and the Research Council. 

 

There is, in particular to wind, there is one expert at the 

Research Council that's a permanent employee at the Research 

Council that's available to do work for the private sector.  And 

the role of that person right now is exchange of information 

between entities to develop as much expertise as they can on 

the generation of electricity by wind. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 35 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I'd like to thank the hon. members for 

their questions.  And I'd like to thank the employees of the 

Research Council for travelling here today, and wish them 

well, and thank them for the 

very expert work that they do for the province. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


