




















































Hansard: February 26, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7 

 February 26, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that 

I shall on Tuesday next ask the government the following 

questions: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Executive Council, (1) what 

was the total expense incurred from expanding the cabinet 

from 12 to 18 members; (2) how many additional ministerial 

assistants were hired; (3) how many other staff were hired; 

(4) what is the total expense of those hired; (5) what is the 

total value of additional salaries provided to the MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) promoted to cabinet; 

and (6) what is the total value of additional benefits and 

allowances provided to MLAs promoted to cabinet? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Through you and 

to you, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce some guests 

today.  In the west gallery, Mr. and Mrs. Cecil and Ina 

Ralchenko from rural North Battleford who are dear friends of 

mine and came down yesterday to partake in the throne speech 

activities and are today taking part in the activities in the 

House.  I hope the House would give them a warm welcome 

today.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

welcome to you and through you to the House today in the 

Speaker's gallery we have Cory Deimert of Shaunavon and I 

wish all members to welcome him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to introduce to you Miss Joyce Roth.  This is her first trip 

to the Assembly.  This is her first time in, and I would like to 

ask all members to help me welcome her to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

like to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly Mr. 

Orest Myzak who is a long-time ag rep from Canora, in the 

west gallery, and would like to welcome him to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Government Economic Policy 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question will be to the Premier this morning.  Mr. 

Premier, since November 1, 1991, the citizens of this province 

have witnessed the most dramatic betrayal of the truth ever 

forced on an electorate in this province.  They thought they 

were voting for less tax, and they have been gouged.  They 

thought they were voting for lower utility rates, and they've had 

their pockets turned inside out.  They thought they were voting 

for increases to health, education, and social services, and those 

have been ravaged. 

 

It's no wonder, Mr. Premier, that people by the thousands are 

not only abandoning your political party but this province as a 

whole. 

 

Mr. Premier, my question is, instead of the sleight of hand that 

you seem to be making an art form of in politics today, will 

you try your hand at telling the people of this province, the 

taxpayers, and this House if you intend on implementing some 

form of a tax reduction in the upcoming budget that will give 

people in this province some hope to stay here and build? 

 

Perhaps a fair and equal application of a harmonized tax 

system would be a start.  Or will you be very selective, as you 

have in the past, and keep gouging people?  What will it be, 

Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank the 

hon. member for the question.  Unlike the hon. member's 

question, I work from a different assumption. 

 

I believe the people of Saskatchewan voted for change.  They 

voted for change where the books of the province would be 

opened up; the true state of the fiscal situation would be 

revealed to them; that the sleight of hand that the Hon. Leader 

of the Opposition talks about, being practised for nine years by 

that former administration, be ended. 

 

It has been ended.  We have on our hands a fiscal crisis, not 

only domestically in the province of Saskatchewan, but almost 

nationally.  In the midst of all of this horror left behind by you, 

sir, when you sat on the treasury benches, and compounded by 

your allies in Ottawa, notwithstanding all of this horror, we are 

trying to renew Saskatchewan by providing, as the budget will 

reveal, compassion for those who are affected the most, and 

opportunities for small business, where possible, to try and 

have the economy grow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, you have once again lapsed into the 

only defence that you seem to know, and that's to blame 

anybody and everybody for your own incompetence, for your 

own deceit with Saskatchewan voters, and the unfair tax grab 

that your own ability to govern has shown people. 

 

Can you today, Mr. Premier, tell us what specific plans your 

government has other than paying off your friends and taxing 

the productive sector and the middle class 



8 Saskatchewan Hansard February 26, 1993 

right out of this province.  What real plans do you have to 

stimulate renewed confidence in our province's people?  They 

need leadership, Mr. Premier, and they are knocking at your 

door.  And I'm afraid so far no one has answered.  Mr. Premier, 

answer the door. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well I'm pleased to answer the door, 

but not only that, I'm pleased to walk right, straight through the 

door, thanks to the opening of the member's question.  Because 

what the member says in his question is the only defence that I 

have is blaming somebody else.  What the hon. member ought 

to realize is that the best defence is truth.  Truth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And the best defence is the $15 billion 

strait-jacket, sir, that you have put us and the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan on.  That is the truth. 

 

And also the truth is that we have proceeded in other areas.  I 

have here in front of me a new agriculture paper.  I have here in 

front of me a new health vision paper.  I have here in front of 

me a new economic jobs strategy paper -- something, sir, 

which in nine years your administration either had neither the 

vision nor the courage to advance. 

 

We are providing the people hope, but we're telling the people 

the truth.  The truth is through waste, through mismanagement, 

through horrific deals, we have a year or two ahead of us of 

toughness, but we have hope; we have daylight at the end of 

this tunnel that we are in now.  And that daylight is again to 

provide opportunity and security and compassion for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question once 

again is to the Premier.  Mr. Speaker, I'm glad that the Premier 

talked about truth this morning.  It's the point that we've been 

trying to make, Mr. Premier, is that Saskatchewan taxpayers 

feel that they have not been getting the truth about many 

things. 

 

Mr. Premier, why don't you do as you did in Prince Albert with 

the agricultural question where you did come clean with 

Saskatchewan farmers, where you did come clean and say that 

you shouldn't have changed, if you had it to do over again, the 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) program? 

 

While we're on truth, Mr. Premier, why don't you today admit 

that the government's lack of a plan and vision is what is wrong 

with this province?  It's the only thing that is holding 

Saskatchewan taxpayers back from pulling themselves up by 

the boot straps and making this province a better place to live.  

Why don't you admit that truth today, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I think that there are 

basically two answers in that question because there are two 

different directions that the question has.  First of all, if I may 

say to the hon. member opposite, the vision is clearly set out, 

set out in the Speech from the Throne, the vision which is the 

journey of renewal and the various position papers and 

subsequent follow-up legislation which you'll see in this 

session, and tax initiatives and budget initiatives to back up the 

specific plans which we have articulated. 

 

The hon. member talks about coming clean with respect to 

Prince Albert and GRIP.  I said in Prince Albert something I've 

been saying for months, and I repeat here again: the mistake 

that we made was to try to make a silk purse out of a sow's ear 

in changing GRIP.  GRIP '91 and GRIP '92 are flawed; they're 

fundamentally flawed. 

 

And if I may say so, today's Canadian Press story from 

Edmonton says that in Alberta there will be a $400 million 

deficit in Alberta on GRIP alone.  And in Manitoba the 

Minister of Agriculture, Glen Findlay, said the plan was 

designed only as an interim measure, and they too know that it 

is flawed.  Sir, if you fessed up, talking about the truth, to the 

truth of the programs, namely the programs which are 

fundamentally and basically flawed, you'd be on side in 

devising programs which really support family farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again my 

question is to the Premier.  Mr. Speaker, that's the fundamental 

problem that we seem to be having in this House today and that 

Saskatchewan taxpayers have, is that given an opportunity to 

come clean, the Premier once again slides back into his old 

ways.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, it's appropriate that I quote to 

the Premier exactly what he did say in Prince Albert on January 

13, 1993: 

 

 The changes we made to GRIP '91 and GRIP '92 were not the 

answer, that's for sure.  They added to the problem in some 

ways.  I think that if I had to do it all over again I wouldn't 

have touched it.  I wouldn't have touched it. 

 

Mr. Premier, the problem here is that you probably shouldn't 

have touched a lot of things and we wouldn't be where we are 

today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- My question to you was, Mr. Premier, will 

you now tell this Assembly what some of your vision is, not 

doom and gloom, but vision for the taxpayers of this province 

so that they aren't going to feel that the terrible medicine that 

you've brought upon them won't some day give them a cure.  

Can you tell us that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think 

about the only person left in Saskatchewan that doesn't 

understand what the vision and the plan is surely must be the 

Leader of the Opposition. 



February 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 9 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Because we have been saying this 

over and over again. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition would have us not touch 

anything.  The Leader of the Opposition would not have us 

touch the $15 billion deficit.  The Leader of the Opposition 

would want us to add $1 billion each and every year as you did 

for the nine years that you were in office, bankrupting not only 

our children and our grandchildren, but bankrupting this 

province.  That's what the Leader of the Opposition would not 

have us touch. 

 

Well I tell you, sir, we have got the guts and the courage and 

the duty to touch that.  We are going to tell the truth in the 

books as we have, and we're going to tell the people of 

Saskatchewan the truth -- that you saddled this province with 

the largest debt in the history of Canada, if not province of 

Saskatchewan.  And we're about to correct it.  We're not 

listening to your truths. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, in your throne speech 

delivered in this House yesterday, you asked to be judged on its 

own terms.  You asked that we allow you some latitude. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the throne speech the only 

concrete things we saw were community bonds and AECL 

(Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.), the initiatives of the former 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- And those were the truths, Mr. Speaker.  

Those were the truths.  The things like the Premier's 

commitment on accountability to never use special warrants 

again.  That is evidently not the truth. 

 

Mr. Premier, since your government is really the cause of the 

despair that Saskatchewan people are feeling, and because 

there are no concrete solutions in the throne speech, will you 

admit that the choices you've made so far are the wrong ones 

and be a part of participating in the solutions, not creating 

problems? 

 

Mr. Premier, give us some indications of what your 

government is going to do to simply get out of the way of 

Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan taxpayers, and let them 

get on with fulfilling the destiny that they all want to achieve.  

Tell us how you're going to get out of the way then. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, this question 

period, by way of the questions, has a very, very familiar ring 

from last session and I've given I think about 20 copies of our 

campaign slogan, called "The Saskatchewan Way," which is 

what we campaigned on: "First Things First -- Common Sense 

Financial Management."  That was what we got elected on.  

New 

direction, new . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  This is the first question 

period of a new session and I want to warn members that I will 

simply not accept the interference, either when the member 

asks a question or when the minister is answering.  In this 

particular case there was no interference when the Leader of 

the Opposition asked his question and I expect the same when 

the Premier is answering. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker.  All I wish to say in response is, if there is a cause of 

despair, it is the despair wrought by nine years of the most 

profligate, wasteful, incompetent government in the history of 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I tell you, sir, in my answer that if there is hope, it is the fact 

that we are going the exactly opposite direction in bringing 

fiscal sensibility and priorities and hope for those who need it 

in this province.  And the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  This is a question period I think 

for the opposition to seek answers from the government . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well you can't expect it if you're 

constantly interrupting.  If the member from Wilkie wishes to 

waste a question period by interfering when the Speaker is on 

his feet, that's fine with me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't think I have 

anything further to add to this question.  And judging by the 

heckling from the opposition, they are allergic . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- My final question today to the Premier, Mr. 

Speaker.  Mr. Premier, tell this Assembly then how huge tax 

hikes, utility rate hikes beyond the rate of inflation, continued 

out-migration, higher unemployment, erosion of farm safety 

nets -- how then does this square with your NDP (New 

Democratic Party) promises in the last election?  How does that 

square in a throne speech, the second throne speech of your 

government, that doesn't correct any of those problems? 

 

If that's the record that you campaigned on, Mr. Premier, then I 

would say that that NDP program that you always trot out in 

this legislature was a terrible falsehood that you perpetrated on 

the Saskatchewan voters.  Mr. Premier, square the NDP 

platform with those points that I've just raised this morning. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm running out of 

copies of the NDP campaign platform . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We'll print some more. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- We might have to print some more to 

mail them over to the Leader of the Opposition, but only if he 

promises to read it -- just once.  And if he reads it once he will 

see when we describe the Saskatchewan way, exactly what 

we're doing and why 



10 Saskatchewan Hansard February 26, 1993 

we're doing it.  And he'll find that what we're doing there is 

essentially in its essence the direction that the people of 

Saskatchewan want us to go. 

 

And I say to the Leader of the Opposition opposite there and to 

the small band of supporters which he has, the result of the 

election results, the election in '91, prove, prove exactly the fact 

that the people of Saskatchewan know, want, demand us to 

take an entirely different direction than yours, and we're going 

to do it.  Fiscal integrity and hope and opportunity -- that's our 

approach. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Job Creation 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Premier likes to 

talk glowingly about his campaign literature, Mr. Speaker.  

Common-sense management would not recognize the things 

that you've done so far, Mr. Premier.  Increased taxes and 

utility rates do not lead to economic activity.  Restoring faith in 

politicians does not entail breaking campaign promises.  

Bringing people together does not involve pitting community 

against community in health care services. 

 

Mr. Premier, my question is for you.  I notice in the throne 

speech you talk about creating 8,000 new jobs.  Would the 

NDP leader please report how many of the 700 companies and 

16,000 additional jobs promised in the last throne speech have 

become a reality. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Before the minister answers I just 

want to direct to the member from Kindersley, he does not 

direct a question to the Leader of the NDP.  The Premier and 

the ministers answer for the government, not for a political 

party. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to respond to 

the member's question on job creation because it's a very, very 

important issue.  To have the member know that there are a 

number of areas where there have been significant jobs created, 

I want to go through a few of them here today.  And I'm sure 

the member will be interested. 

 

Spar Group in Swift Current expansion, 60 to 80 jobs; Hitachi 

Industries in Saskatoon, the new increase in the expansion of 

25 jobs; Norquay Alfalfa Processors -- and I want to 

compliment the member from that constituency -- 45 jobs for 

his effort; Babcock & Wilcox in Melville, 35 jobs; Sears 

Canada, 900 jobs; Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting, keeping 

jobs and rebuilding that smelter, 375 jobs; Wanuskewin 

Heritage Park in Saskatoon, 40 jobs.  And the list goes on and 

on. 

 

And I want to say to you very clearly, very clearly -- if the 

members would care to listen -- is that job creation is very 

important.  We're working with companies like Flexi-Coil and 

Mr. Terry Summach, who has been involved in trade missions 

with us.  The employment level there has gone from 400 when 

you were the government to 800 now.  And I can say in many, 

many areas there have 

been significant changes that are very different than Promavia, 

Trinitel, Joytec, and those job-creation projects like GigaText 

that not only didn't create employment, but saw millions of 

dollars of taxpayers' money now having to be paid off by this 

administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  NDP talk about 

economic renewal and job creation but only mention in their 

throne speech, AECL and community bonds, both initiatives 

that were put forward by the previous administration, not 

yours, sir.  Not your administration, sir. 

 

The Premier . . . Mr. Speaker, my question is again to the 

Premier.  The Premier has been unable to give us examples of 

businesses that are coming to Saskatchewan.  I wonder if he 

could give us some examples of a business or businesses that 

will not come to Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that 

the members listen to the answers before they read the prepared 

questions, because I just listed for him, I just listed for him a 

large number of job projects.  But I will repeat some of them 

and add new projects to that list. 

 

I mentioned Wanuskewin Heritage Park, 40 jobs; the 

TCCCS/IRIS (Tactical Command and Control Communication 

System) National Defence contract that has come to 

Saskatchewan, 50 jobs; Mercury Graphics, 30 jobs; Sask-Can 

Fibre Inc., 4 jobs; Alcatel Canada in Weyburn, their new $10 

million expansion; Phillips Cables, their $1.7 million 

expansion. 

 

And I say to the members opposite, if you want to go through 

this list -- I say again, there are many, many more -- come to 

my office and I'll give you the long list of companies that are 

expanding and moving to Saskatchewan. 

 

And listen to what I say because there have been thousands of 

jobs created and that is why the business community is very, 

very interested . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, if the Premier and his cabinet would 

listen to their constituents, they would know the kind of harm 

and fiscal and economic steamroller that they're rolling over 

this province with. 

 

We know of, for example, Mr. Speaker, that a major hotel 

chain has put off  its decision to locate in Saskatchewan as a 

result of the doom and gloom that this Premier continually 

wants to present to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Can the Leader of the Government please provide 

Saskatchewan with some kind of hope and encouragement to 

bring this new economic development initiative to 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the 

member opposite that we have had great cooperation from the 

business community in developing the 



February 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 11 

economic renewal strategy for Saskatchewan.  Literally 

thousands of business people have been positively having input 

into our economic development plan. 
 

I consulted with that member before this document was 

released, gave him copies of it, consulted with him, and asked 

for his opinion and input.  I did the same to the Leader of the 

Liberal Party -- asked for input and comment.  To date I am 

still waiting for your input, positive input to this document.  

And I still wait. 
 

The Leader of the Liberal Party said that she would bring one 

project per week to the House or to the government.  I still wait 

after more than 52 weeks for the first example of economic 

development to come from that member. 
 

So I say it's great to criticize.  But the business community of 

this province have bought into economic development 

program.  If you haven't, I ask you sincerely to come, bring 

your projects, and we will work on them. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Is it any wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, that businesses will not relocate to Saskatchewan.  

Should we be surprised that there is no confidence in the 

business community when the Premier tells everyone that we're 

a basket case in this province. 
 

Should we be surprised when companies think twice about 

locating, when the things like The Melfort Journal . . . the 

member from Melfort stands up and says the province is near 

collapse -- a quote in The Melfort Journal -- that's what one 

of your members says. 

 

Is it any wonder, is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, that people and 

hotel chains don't want to relocate in this province.  It's no 

wonder to me and I'm sure it's no wonder to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Will the Leader of the NDP of this . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Will the member rephrase his question please. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Will the Premier of this one-term government 

please give this province one shred of hope, one peek at his 

vision.  Will he stop his doom and gloom rhetoric long enough 

to offer the people of Saskatchewan some shred of hope in this 

time that you continually . . . to pervade people with this doom 

and gloom scenario. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to respond to 

that question.  Because quite honestly the only gloom and 

doom that I hear around the province is when people talk about 

what the previous government did.  That's the only gloom and 

doom I hear. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, a 

story about the confidence that the federal government has in 

this province.  There was a proposed deal with AECL before 

the last election that we stopped and 

reviewed. 

 

Your federal minister, Mr. Jake Epp, not only had the 

confidence in the province, but cut the amount that the 

Saskatchewan government had to put in by 5 million and is 

moving that project here because not only do they have the 

confidence in the province, but they say they can do the deal 

cheaper and more rationally under this government than they 

could under yours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- So you see the federal government, 

even your Conservative cousins in Ottawa, believe and have 

more confidence in this province under an NDP administration. 

 

I say again, and I'm not going to go through the list, but new 

businesses are not uncommon.  In fact, in almost every 

constituency there are examples: the Norquay alfalfa plant, 

Sears Canada locating in here; against the proposal to go to 

Conservative Manitoba or Conservative Alberta, they chose 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So there are many examples of very positive business 

endeavours that are undertaken, and I wonder why the member 

has to be so negative in his approach to economic development. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1030) 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's the member's point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, during the question period you 

ruled that there was no Leader of the NDP and I have no 

quarrel with that.  The Minister of Economic Development at 

the same time, Mr. Speaker, referred to the Leader of the 

Liberal Party and there was no admonition for that.  I'm just 

wondering if you could review that ruling and put that in order. 

 

The Speaker: -- I do recall and think the member makes a very 

valid point.  At the time I should have interrupted, and I 

apologize for not doing so.  The member makes a very valid 

point. 

 

PRIVILEGE 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much for that ruling, Mr. 

Speaker.  Pursuant to rule 16(1), I have informed the Speaker 

of my intention to bring forth a question of privilege and I 

would do so at this time, Mr. Speaker, the question of privilege 

regarding the conduct of the chairman of the Crown 

Corporations Committee. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I believe that in ordinary circumstances a 

question of privilege occurring in a committee should be raised 

in that committee itself.  But because this committee was 

meeting intersessionally, I as House Leader was not available 

until three days ago when I heard about this.  And therefore I 

put this to you 



12 Saskatchewan Hansard February 26, 1993 

that this is the earliest opportunity I have to raise this particular 

question. 

 

But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, the question of privilege 

deals directly with the conduct of the chairman of the 

committee and calls into question his impartial function. 

 

Given the nature of the issue, it was not possible to raise the 

question in the committee since the chairman had abandoned 

his role as the independent arbiter of the rules.  For all those 

reasons, I suggest Mr. Speaker cannot rule the question of 

privilege invalid for lateness or failure to raise the point in the 

committee itself. 

 

On February 11, 1993, the chairman of the Crown Corporations 

Committee engaged in debate with the member for Morse 

regarding facts before the committee.  Without getting into the 

specific debate itself, I quote two simple statements that 

demonstrate without question that the chairman engaged in 

debate with the member and left the member without an 

opportunity to pursue his objectives as a member of this 

legislature.  I quote the verbatim for that meeting: 

 

 . . . as chair (I quote), as chair, I must correct you on the facts 

(he said). 

 

And he continues and I quote again: 

 

 But with respect to this issue, you are clearly not outlining 

the facts as they are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a serious breach of that member's 

privileges for several reasons.  Firstly, as the chairman controls 

the meeting, members have no assurance that they will have the 

ability to confront the particular interpretation of the so-called 

facts as the chairman declares them to be.  The chairman must 

make rulings and run meetings, but if he strays into taking 

issue with members about facts under debate, the distinction 

between a ruling and debate will be lost and members will not 

have the confidence that the chairman himself knows the 

difference. 

 

Moreover, members, Mr. Speaker, are prohibited . . . they're 

prohibited by the rules from engaging in debate with the chair.  

By definite corollary, the chair must then not engage in debate 

with members.  The chair was at liberty at this meeting to leave 

the chair and engage in the debate as a private member.  But 

for him to boldly contradict the member from the chair on the 

facts of an issue is utterly unacceptable, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

suggest that if the chair argues with members about the facts 

the committee is considering, the members are unable . . . 

they're unable, Mr. Speaker, to execute their duties. 

 

Now in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, either, Mr. Speaker, this 

breach of privilege must be acknowledged and corrected or 

members will find themselves with no choice but to assume 

that they must be prepared to engage in debate not only with 

members of the opposing caucus but with officers of the 

Assembly itself.  And clearly, Mr. Speaker, you recognize that 

this cannot be allowed and therefore correction of that 

chairman is necessary in the interests of the privileges of the 

members and the good conduct of the 

business of the Assembly. 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, that you rule that 

the chairman of the Crown Corporations Committee has in fact 

breached the privileges of the member from Morse and he has 

clearly interfered with that member's ability to do his duty.  

And no member can have confidence in the impartiality of that 

particular chairman until he is called to account for his 

inappropriate actions and this House is assured that there will 

be no repeat performance. 

 

I thank you for your indulgence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I just wish to speak 

very briefly to the point of privilege raised by the member from 

Rosthern.  In consulting with the member for Regina North 

West, the chairman of the Crown Corporations Committee, in 

asking whether or not this issue was raised in the Crown 

Corporation Committee meeting, to show the importance of the 

issue, it was not even raised as an issue at the committee 

meeting. 

 

Subsequent to that, I asked the chairman of the committee if 

there had been letters exchanged or any discussions held.  He 

indicates it has never been raised in any way, even though there 

is a long time period between when the incident alleged 

occurred and when it's being raised. 

 

I would expect it would have been raised immediately in the 

committee as a point of order.  It wasn't.  It could have been 

raised to the chairman in the intermediate period; wasn't raised.  

I think what we're seeing here, quite honestly, is a bit of 

grandstanding by that member; I know not for what reason.  

But I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that I would rule on that and 

give it the attention that it obviously deserves. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The Speaker's office received notice 

this morning regarding this question of privilege, pursuant to 

rule 6 of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan, for which I want to thank the 

member. 

 

The question of privilege on proceedings in the Standing 

Committee on Crown Corporations on February 11, 1993, I 

refer members to Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules & 

Forms, 6th Edition, which states the following, citation 107: 

 

 Breaches of privilege in committee may be dealt with only by 

the House itself on report from the committee. 

 

Citation 760(3): 

 

 The Speaker has ruled on many occasions that it is not 

competent for the Speaker to exercise procedural control over 

committees.  Committees are and must remain masters of 

their own procedure. 

 

The important principle here rests on the fact that proceedings 

in committees are guided by the committee 



February 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 13 

chair and not by the Speaker of the House.  A question of 

privilege arising in a committee must be dealt with first in the 

committee.  When the committee reports the matter of privilege 

to the House, then the Speaker becomes involved. 

 

There is a well-established practice in this Assembly on this 

very subject.  And I refer members to the rules of the Chair on 

May 28, 1991; December 13, 1982; March 25, 1981; April 11, 

1980; and April 19, 1976.  I therefore inform the House and the 

member that it is not competent for the Chair to consider the 

matter of privilege raised by the member, and suggest that the 

matter be raised in the proper forum. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Referral of the By-laws of the Professional Associations and 

Amendments to the Standing Committee on Regulations 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 

day, I have a few routine motions that I would like to introduce 

at this time.  The first moved, and seconded by the member for 

Regina Dewdney, by leave: 

 

 That the by-laws of the professional associations and 

amendments thereto be referred as tabled to the Special 

Committee on Regulations. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Report of the Provincial Auditor to the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member from Saskatoon River Heights, by leave of the 

Assembly: 

 

 That the Report of the Provincial Auditor for the fiscal year 

ending March 31, 1992 be referred as tabled this session to 

the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Public Accounts to the Standing Committee on 

Public Accounts 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would move, 

seconded by the member for Regina Hillsdale, by leave of the 

Assembly: 

 

 That the Public Accounts for the province of Saskatchewan 

for the fiscal year ended March 31 be referred as tabled this 

session to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

Referral of Annual Report to the Standing Committee on 

Communication 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member from Quill Lakes, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the report of the Saskatchewan Legislative Library be 

referred as tabled to the Standing Committee on 

Communication. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Annual Reports and Financial Statements to the 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Saskatoon Fairview, that by leave of the 

Assembly: 

 

 That the annual reports and financial statements of the 

various Crown corporations and related agencies be referred 

as tabled to the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Retention and Disposal Schedules to the 

Standing Committee on Communication 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member from Melfort, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the retention and disposal schedules approved under The 

Archives Act by the Public Documents Committee be 

referred as tabled to the Standing Committee on 

Communication. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1045) 

 

Attendance of Member to the Forty-second Parliamentary 

Seminar at Westminster 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member from Canora: 

 

 That leave of absence be granted to the hon. member for the 

constituency of Moose Jaw Palliser for Monday, March 1, 

1993 to Friday, March 12, 1993 inclusive, for the purpose of 

attending the forty-second parliamentary seminar at 

Westminster. 

 

I so move. 



14 Saskatchewan Hansard February 26, 1993 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of the Assembly to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to present to you and through 

you to the members of the Legislative Assembly, two guests 

from my constituency, Kinistino, Mr. Reinhold Kirsch and his 

son Scott.  They're sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Kirsch is a small-business person from the community of 

Middle Lake.  He's in Regina today on business.  And I'd like 

to ask all the members of the legislature to welcome Reiny and 

Scott to Regina, and I hope that they have a pleasant stay in 

Regina here today.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Yes, the member may proceed. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 42 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- I ask leave of this Assembly, pursuant to rule 

42, to introduce a motion.  This motion is dealing with the 

agricultural situation in Saskatchewan.  And I will just read the 

motion: 

 

 That this Assembly call upon the Government of Canada to 

end its policy of offloading federal responsibilities on the 

backs of farm families by: (a) reversing its decision to 

increase grain transportation costs to Saskatchewan farmers 

by $18 million; and (b) fulfilling its promise to provide at 

least $500 million in a third line of defence payment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move, seconded by the member for 

Shaunavon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again I will say, at 

the conclusion of my remarks, I will pass this motion calling 

upon the federal government to stop its offloading and by 

reversing its decision to put $80 million on the backs of 

Saskatchewan farmers through reducing transportation costs 

and to provide a third line of defence payment of at least $500 

million. 

Before I start, Mr. Speaker, I thought about what we were 

doing here in terms of today being condolence day.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I wasn't sure that I wanted to supersede condolence 

day, but I'm sure that Mr. Perkins, Mr. Broten, and Mr. 

Thurston, who have passed away since this Assembly last sat, 

would be very pleased to set this condolence day aside to 

address the important issue of agriculture in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have . . . I'm almost tired, Mr. Speaker, of 

standing up and talking about agriculture and asking the 

members opposite to cooperate with us to call upon Ottawa to 

make a decision to support agriculture in this province instead 

of putting it down. 

 

Different from a year ago, I think this is one small step.  A year 

ago in a similar situation with a similar motion, you will recall, 

Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite denied us the chance 

to debate this issue and to call upon Ottawa to support 

Saskatchewan farmers.  So I see a little glimmering.  I don't 

know if it's the leadership race or what, but there's something, 

there is a slight move here and I'm really pleased to see that.  

Because with cooperation I think that we can succeed in 

ensuring Saskatchewan farmers get what they deserve. 

 

The history, Mr. Speaker, of this Tory government in Ottawa 

has not been very beneficial to Saskatchewan farmers.  In the 

past number of years we have seen the offloading on 

transportation alone.  I'll just start with that topic. 

 

Transportation.  I can remember a number of years ago paying 

about less than one-third of cost to transportation.  It was in 

statute that the Crow benefit, the Crow rate would be paid by 

the federal government in perpetuity. 

 

We saw the beginning of the demise of that, Mr. Speaker, with 

the Liberal regime in Ottawa a number of years ago.  I can 

remember Mr. Jean-Luc Pepin beginning the demise of the 

transportation industry in this country.  Mr. Pepin and . . . 

what's his name from Humboldt? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Otto Lang. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Otto Lang.  My friend from Humboldt, Otto 

Lang, continued the tradition.  And I see no change today, Mr. 

Speaker.  I don't hear the Leader of the Liberal Party in Ottawa 

or the Leader of the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan jumping up 

and down and saying, let's stop the demise of the transportation 

industry for farmers in this country by continuing the offload; 

let's stop that.  So I would assume that Mr. Chretien is going to 

continue on in this fashion. 

 

Although again I say, if we have the cooperation of the official 

opposition I would assume and hope the independent member 

will now come onside and we can have a three-party united 

effort to call upon Ottawa to stop the offloading, to put a 

third-line defence payment into Saskatchewan so that we can 

survive for the years to come in agricultural industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, as I said, Mr. Pepin, Mr. 



February 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 15 

Lang, began the whole process, and the Tory government has 

continued it. 

 

Now I pay as a farmer much more than I paid.  I don't know the 

exact numbers.  I didn't have time to research the numbers, but 

it's something in the order of probably 30 per cent more than I 

paid 10 years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that cost to the farmer was a cost that he had a 

promise from government that he wouldn't have to worry 

about.  But we've seen over the years the offloading.  And now 

we're looking at $80 million in I believe it's the Bill C-61 in 

Ottawa, taking $80 million in the next two years out of the 

pockets of Saskatchewan farmers; 140 million out of the 

pockets of farmers in western Canada. 

 

You add on to that, Mr. Speaker, the millions and millions of 

dollars that have been taken out of the pockets by increasing 

the transportation rate over the last number of years and it is 

astronomical.  Mr. Speaker, I'm asking today that Ottawa open 

its ears to the plight of the farmers in this province, that Ottawa 

take a good, hard look. 

 

We've seen Saskatchewan being ignored in recent times again.  

Thirteen thousand people were at the farm rally in Saskatoon 

sponsored by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, but most farm 

groups participating, a united front of 13,000 people in one 

place in Saskatchewan.  And the Prime Minister of this country 

didn't have the decency to show up; didn't have the decency to 

show up because I think, Mr. Speaker, in the past he saw the 

opposition Tory Party in Saskatchewan not supporting the 

farmers and the government by calling upon Ottawa to do the 

job that they are supposed to be doing. 

 

Hopefully, Mr. Speaker, that with this small step and the 

cooperation from the opposition, the new leader of the Tory 

Party in Ottawa, whoever it may be, that the new leader will 

come forward, look at the situation, hear the calls from farmers, 

from farm groups, from municipalities, and from the 

Government of Saskatchewan, hear the call and respond to the 

plight.  I would hope that, Mr. Speaker, although Mr. Mulroney 

is still the leader. 

 

And if you look around the room in Ottawa to see who might 

be the new leader, Kim Campbell's name comes up time and 

again.  But in today's Globe and Mail, Mr. Speaker, today's 

Globe and Mail revealed that . . . You will recall the helicopter 

deal, the $4.4 billion helicopter deal that Ottawa announced 

while ignoring a half a billion dollars, $500 million that 

Saskatchewan farmers needed; they plunged forward by 

announcing a $4.4 billion helicopter deal.  Well in today's 

Globe and Mail, Mr. Speaker, it is revealed that that $4.4 

billion has all of a sudden jumped to $5.8 billion.  And who's 

the Defence minister?  Kim Campbell, the leadership hopeful. 

 

So again I hope that the opposition in this province stays onside 

with the government.  Because we are going forward, Mr. 

Speaker, relentlessly.  I've made this speech time and time 

again in opposition and nothing happened because the 

members over there, the offloading continued and continued. 

 

I will make this speech until the point in time, Mr. 

Speaker, where either I am not in this Assembly no longer or 

the federal government comes forward with a $500 million 

third line of defence payment and stops the offloading that is so 

desperately hurting Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say something about 

what I would assume, because of history, that the Leader of the 

Opposition and the opposition members might say today. 

 

I would hope that the opposition members don't use this 

opportunity, I hope they haven't accepted this motion, to use as 

an opportunity to stand up and grandstand and rail on about the 

GRIP program, which I think they might do.  But I would ask 

them, please don't let me down. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Don't let the farmers down. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Don't let the farmers down.  Don't use this 

opportunity, Mr. Members of the opposition, to grandstand 

about a program that was fundamentally flawed in the 

beginning, continues to be flawed, and will be flawed until it 

dies. 

 

I hope you don't do that, and you may not do that, because as 

referred to earlier today in the Canadian Press article, that 

Alberta, Mr. Isley is now saying: well GRIP ain't so great after 

all -- $400 million deficit in Alberta and it will grow.  So 

what's going to happen in Alberta?  The premiums are going to 

start escalating. 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. Findlay in Manitoba told a farm group last month, and I'm 

now quoting from the CP (Canadian Press) report, that the plan 

was designed as an interim measure that would not be 

necessary after 1995.  Well that is kind of a new twist to it 

because the Tory parties have been promoting the program 

from Saskatchewan . . . the Saskatchewan Tories, rather, have 

been promoting the program in Alberta and Manitoba, that it's 

going to be the greatest thing in the long-life program.  But all 

of a sudden we see Mr. Isley, the Minister of Agriculture in 

Alberta, and Mr. Findlay, the Minister of Agriculture in 

Manitoba, starting to back off. 

 

So again I would ask the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, make 

Saskatchewan work by cooperating with this government.  Do 

yourselves a favour.  The farmers of Saskatchewan, the 

taxpayers of this province, every person living in this province, 

relies on agriculture. 

 

We have seen the statistics over the last number of years.  

Before the GRIP program was introduced, there was a 

5,000-person job loss in Saskatchewan.  Why?  As reported, 

because it relates to the lack of support from the federal 

government.  And I would say it would be a combination of the 

lack of support for income because of not delivering on the 

third line of defence payment that they had promised and also 

lack of support because of the offloading, the billions and 

billions of dollars I would say in the past and in the future if 

this trend continues. 



16 Saskatchewan Hansard February 26, 1993 

Now we can talk about agriculture in terms of what Ottawa is 

trying to do.  And we know that the federal government is 

sending the message that we're getting out of agriculture 

lending, agriculture financing.  That's what the underlying 

message is from Ottawa.  And I guess we will see, Mr. 

Speaker, we will see if that is true.  I would certainly hope it's 

not. 

 

If the members of the opposition and the independent member 

from Greystone, the Leader of the Liberal Party, continue to 

support this motion, we may be able to make some headway.  

Because we have a federal election coming up and historically, 

sadly I say this, historically the federal government has waited 

for the most part for a federal election in order to deliver 

finances to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We're putting the farmers of this province in a position where 

they're begging.  And why?  We're putting them in a position 

that they're begging because there's a political agenda that the 

Tory government is trying to fulfil.  Mr. Speaker, that is wrong.  

But we will see if the tradition continues that a federal election 

will produce funds for Saskatchewan farmers and indeed the 

farmers of western Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there are no funds announced before this 

federal election, I would say that we're looking at a bleak 

history in agriculture in Saskatchewan in the short term.  I 

think Saskatchewan farmers have the resilience to work 

through this, as we've seen over the number of years that we've 

been in a depression in this province, despite the fact that some 

of the people in Ottawa, including the recently resigned Prime 

Minister, are saying that the recession is over.  Well I don't 

think the farmers in Saskatchewan think the recession is over. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't understand.  I don't understand why the 

federal government would stand on the podium in Ottawa and 

ignore the needs of a billion . . . or of a million people in this 

province.  As I said earlier, the statistics show that the lack of 

agricultural support has cost this province jobs.  About 40 per 

cent of the jobs in this province stem directly or indirectly from 

agriculture.  Mr. Speaker, why do we have to fight and talk and 

work so hard and long to achieve something that should be 

obvious? 

 

The member from Morse chirps from his seat, Mr. Speaker, 

about nothing in the throne speech about agriculture.  Well I 

hope that he doesn't use this opportunity to put forward his 

hypothetical problem, I guess I might say.  Because in 

Saskatchewan in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, we have laid 

out a plan for this province to take us through the future -- take 

us to the future.  Planning for the future. 

 

But I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the member from Morse, instead 

of saying there's nothing in the throne speech about agriculture, 

should be phoning his counterparts in Ottawa and saying, look 

people, we need dollars out here.  We have to stop the 

offloading.  And we have to do it now, right now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, as I say, I've made similar 

speeches many, many times.  But unless we continue, unless 

we as a government, with hopefully the support of the 

opposition and the independent member from Greystone, we 

will . . . we must continue to speak in this legislature, to put 

forward motions that are unanimous in this legislature to 

publicly call upon the federal government. 

 

The devastation that was left in this province over the last 

number of years, the members opposite would like everyone to 

forget.  And we saw that today in question period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, without support from the people that we received 

in the last election, without that support we wouldn't be able to 

be in the position that we are today to turn this province around 

and make it a place where the sun will shine in the future.  But 

the people gave us that support.  And I just think it's fair, I just 

think it's fair that with the support like that, that we continue. 

 

And this is the first opportunity since we've had the farm rally, 

the first opportunity since the introduction of the Bill in Ottawa 

to reduce transportation rates, the first opportunity we've had in 

this new session to stand in our places and call upon Ottawa to 

open its eyes to the needs of Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, we 

will continue to do that. 

 

The members opposite will do their politics.  They will say 

we're not supporting agriculture as they go around this 

province.  They will say there's nothing in the budget.  They 

will say there's nothing in the throne speech.  They'll continue 

to be negative.  But, Mr. Speaker, that won't accomplish 

anything.  What will accomplish something for the farmers and 

for the people of Saskatchewan is cooperation. 

 

In the 1990s, Mr. Speaker, we see a world economy that is in 

the doldrums.  There are some shining lights in countries 

around the world.  But in the western world, Mr. Speaker, I say 

to you that because everyone in Saskatchewan is important -- 

because the farmers are important and those working off the 

farm are important, everyone's important -- I say that 

Saskatchewan is the only place in the western world where 

we're actually confronting a problem and have the intestinal 

fortitude to stand before the people and say, it's going to hurt, 

folks, but it's going to be better in the end.  I say we're the only 

place. 

 

I see now in the United States, Mr. Clinton talking almost the 

same way as we're talking.  We hear other provinces talking 

about confronting the deficit, but I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan is the only province, the only government, I 

think, in the western world that is confronting a terrible deficit.  

And do you know what?  We will succeed.  We will succeed.  

We will succeed because in the 1990s the operative word is 

going to be cooperation. 

 

And that is why today, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to see the 

opposition coming into the 1990s just a small step by accepting 

this resolution.  And I would ask them to please support this 

motion.  And after you support the motion, 



February 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 17 

let's cooperate and send the message, a united message to 

Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farm income in Saskatchewan this year is touted 

to be about $241 million.  That is the lowest since 1971.  As I 

said before, we deserve better. 

 

And I'm not going to prolong this debate, Mr. Speaker, 

although I think the longer that we stand in our places and talk 

-- repetition, repetition, repetition -- perhaps Ottawa will hear.  

If it takes a federal election, so be it. 

 

But I ask as I finish my speech, Mr. Speaker, I ask the 

members opposite and the Leader of the Liberal Party to put 

aside the old politic, put aside the old politic, march with this 

government through the 1990s in cooperation . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well the member is still doing the old politic. 

He's sitting there in his seat and saying, one term. 

 

Well you know, Mr. Speaker, the people will decide.  The 

people will decide.  But you know what, Mr. Speaker?  The 

people are saying in Humboldt, my friend . . . I've been around 

to talk just recently, three weeks ago, four weeks ago, a full 

constituency tour, every town, and I didn't hear anybody say, 

you're doing the wrong thing.  I didn't hear anybody say, you're 

doing the wrong thing.  And they are representative of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I ask the members of the opposition to put aside the old 

politics.  If we're a one-term government, which I doubt, it 

won't matter.  Cooperation is going to be what it takes to turn 

this province around.  And you can sit in your seats and chirp 

and continue the old politic, or you can stand in your places 

and cooperate and help us lead the people of this province to a 

bright future by getting Ottawa to support us, and by 

supporting the implementations of the budget that we have in 

the past and will continue in the future in order to turn this 

province around.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker. I got so enthused in 

my speech that I forgot . . . Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, I move: 

 

 That this Assembly call upon the Government of Canada to 

end its policy of offloading federal responsibilities on the 

backs of farm families by (a) reversing its decision to 

increase grain transportation costs for Saskatchewan farmers 

by $80 million; and (b) fulfilling its promise to provide at 

least $500 million in a third line of defence payment. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member for Shaunavon. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate the 

chance to stand in my place today to second the motion put 

forward by the member from Humboldt and to speak on this 

motion. 

 

It's very similar to a motion that I put forward last year.  And as 

the member from Humboldt has eloquently stated, we have 

been bringing this same theme forward 

continuously, and I believe that in this upcoming session we'll 

continue to do that.  That being to act in cooperation, in 

cooperation with the opposition, in cooperation with the federal 

government, and all the stakeholders involved in the industry.  

And we're going to do that, Mr. Speaker, to help the farmers. 

 

What we're asking the opposition to do is to support us this 

session.  The Minister of Agriculture has brought forward a 

document and it's going to be taken out to the public in 

meetings with the farmers soon. This spring I believe we're 

being out there, and we're seeking positive dialogue with the 

farming community and those stakeholders.  And we encourage 

the opposition to take part in this, bring forward their positive 

solutions if they have any, and work with us to help these 

farmers. 
 

(1115) 
 

Now I know the member from Morse commented that there 

wasn't anything in the throne speech yesterday regarding 

agriculture.  But as I look at a copy of the throne speech now, 

Mr. Speaker, I see there's a couple of pages, in just a document 

of a few pages, on agriculture.  And it basically addresses what 

the motion does, that is the plight of the farmers, the situation 

they're faced with, and what we expect from the federal 

government -- that they fulfil their obligation, live up to their 

commitments they have made to the farming community, and 

stop their offloading onto the backs of these farmers. 
 

I note in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, provincial net farm 

income in 1993 is projected to sink to $241 million, the lowest 

level since 1970, Mr. Speaker.  And I think this really shows 

the situation that the farmers are in, that hopefully the 

opposition and the federal government of the day can perhaps 

set aside their leadership races and join in with helping turn this 

situation around. 
 

Our concern for bringing forward motions at this time, Mr. 

Speaker, are due to perhaps recent announcements by the 

Prime Minister that he will be resigning.  And of course this 

brings on a heated leadership race.  I noticed watching the 

television last night, it's really starting to pick up.  And brings 

to me the question that's raised is, who's in charge right now of 

agriculture in the federal government?  Is this being put on the 

back burner so that perhaps someone can win a leadership 

race? 
 

Is the intensity of this leadership race going to be focused on 

the more populated areas of the country?  Well I hope not.  In 

the West we don't have a large population but we have a way of 

life that I think that we have got to protect.  And I would ask 

that the opposition in Saskatchewan support, lobby their 

colleagues in Ottawa to perhaps ensure that farm life can 

continue. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the offloading that has occurred to date and the 

inaction of the federal government has had some serious 

impacts on this province, and I just want to touch on a few of 

them, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Due to the fact that the third line of defence payment which 

was promised, the initial being 500 million back in 1990, I 

believe . . . so we are a few years short already.  But when we 

take a look at the unemployment rate in 



18 Saskatchewan Hansard February 26, 1993 

Saskatchewan, and I note that Saskatchewan had the lowest or 

among the lowest unemployment rate for some 27 years, Mr. 

Speaker, and now we're at a high 10 per cent.  And it just 

shows the seriousness of the situation. 

 

And by and large, this has a lot to do with the consumer 

confidence in agriculture, the mood of the province which by 

and large is set in the agriculture community, and how we need 

to address this problem right away. 

 

We have had gains in areas of employment in this province, 

those being in transportation, community, communications, and 

other utilities of some thousand; finance, insurance, real estate 

of 3,000. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at the decline in the 

agriculture sector, because the farming community has really 

put a halt to their spending, what they're looking at now is just 

how they can exist.  There was a decline in 1992 of some 7,000 

persons in employment, and that loss is in agriculture.  So any 

of the gains that we enjoyed in other sectors have been offset or 

have actually gone unnoticed due to the large loss on the farm.  

And this is due in fact because the farmers don't have the 

ability, they don't have the financial ability, to be hiring.  And 

what they're relying on now is a lot of family labour, and this is 

putting a lot of stress on those families that of course many of 

the family members are already working at one or two jobs -- 

off-farm income to support the farming operation.  I know 

many families that are working into the wee hours of the 

morning to make this operation work.  Of course none of those 

job numbers are showing up in the document. 

 

The decline in agriculture employment I guess is due in large 

part because the rural residents, not just the farmers, but they've 

stopped their spending.  And what we're looking at is small 

manufacturing bases, those that are making the cultivators and 

the sprayers in rural Saskatchewan and the stone pickers.  They 

can't be hiring people either if they're not selling those 

products. 

 

The number of bankruptcies that are occurring in 

Saskatchewan and the situation that will be upon us in the next 

year or two or three in keeping farms viable, farm families 

viable, is going to be another serious situation, and it's one that 

we're going to require help.  The farmers are going to require a 

great deal of help from the federal government in dealing with 

some of the farm debt. 

 

Another thing that shows up a great deal is the amount of stress 

that is put on our farm families both financially and 

emotionally.  And it's really starting to show up in some of our 

communities.  I know the member from Morse had some 

comments there; he's preparing for his speech.  But I get calls 

from the riding of Morse, and many of these people are asking: 

is it possible that we can work in cooperation this time to 

achieve the goals that we all need? 

 

And of course that message was loud and clear from the 

Saskatchewan farm rally also, that the 13,000 farmers there 

want us working cooperatively in this legislature to help solve 

the problem.  They don't need to hear any more political 

rhetoric and comparison of programs.  It's far beyond that and 

the member from Morse knows that, or 

perhaps I should be forwarding some of the calls from his 

constituents on to him so that he can get a flavour of what's 

happening out there. 

 

We have another problem coming up in the near future, and of 

course that's why the urgency of the motion, that being the 

spring seeding around the corner.  And what we're looking at 

without this cash injection, immediate cash injection of monies 

that were promised in 1990, some three years ago, if we don't 

have that cash injection this spring, I ask the member from 

Morse how the farmers in his area are going to be putting their 

crops in. 

 

This is a question that they're raising continuously.  And I 

would feel quite comfortable in working with the member from 

Morse in coming up with some solutions and working 

cooperatively to achieve what's right for the farmers in this 

instance.  We have lots of time for politics I guess closer to the 

next election, but I think at this point we'd better make sure that 

we're going to have a rural Saskatchewan to go out and 

campaign in for the next election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, just to talk a little more about 

the offloading that has occurred and why there is such a 

financial strain in rural Saskatchewan, we just have to look at 

what the federal government has been doing over the last few 

years. 

 

It was only a few short years ago that crop insurance, 50 per 

cent of that bill was picked up by the federal government.  Now 

within the borders of this province, Mr. Speaker, we find that 

within the boundaries of Saskatchewan we are now paying 

some 75 per cent of that program.  And many times the 

Minister of Agriculture has referred as the blood transfusion 

from one arm into the other, and that's exactly what's 

happening. 

 

We also look at the two-price wheat system, that the federal 

government pulled some $250 million out of the two-price 

wheat system. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- How much? 
 

Mr. McPherson: -- Two hundred and fifty million.  And they 

promised that that money would be coming back to these rural 

areas.  Well I farm, Mr. Speaker, but I don't see where that 

money is coming out to help us as producers.  It didn't show up 

anywhere on my tax receipts. 
 

One other area, Mr. Speaker, is the western grain stabilization 

where the federal government not long ago paid I believe it was 

$3 for every $1 that the producers paid in.  That was pulled 

away from the agriculture producers, Mr. Speaker.  It was then 

replaced with a revenue program that once again within the 

borders of this province, like crop insurance, we're funding 

some 60 per cent of the program. 
 

We have a lot of programs but they seem to be now all within.  

And it's unaffordable to a province that is in the situation that 

we are, in the financial situation that we are, and I think the 

people know why we're in that situation.   I won't get into that.  

I notice that the members opposite all 



February 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 19 

lower their heads when I touch on it, so I want their attention 

so I'll get off of that subject. 

 

In 1982 I recall the chant, and it was a chant:  keep the Crow, 

let Blakeney go.  Do you remember saying that?  The member 

from Morse I think said that.  Now with the help of Tories all 

across the province, they've got a new chant:  let the Crow go, 

there's a leadership show. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Once again, I just ask that the members 

work cooperatively with us.  Put that leadership show on the 

back burner for some time.  You can get back to that soon 

enough.  But we have some problems -- spring seeding, 

bankruptcies.  We need cash, immediate cash.  So let's work 

together and get that.  And we ask that you lobby your 

counterparts to help us achieve that for the farmers -- not for 

either political party; for the farmers. 

 

I would have to wonder also, as it states in the motion, why 

we're back to grain transportation issues.  I know that last year 

the federal government had many people touring the province, 

holding meetings to find out what the input of the farming 

community is, and the stakeholders, mayors, reeves.  We were . 

. . everyone was involved in what should be done with the 

grain transportation issue. 

 

Well I think the farmers and all those stakeholders spoke loud 

and clear as to what should be done, but were they listened?  I 

have to ask, why were they consulted?  Because it was loud 

and clear, the message back was status quo:  don't change the 

Crow. 

 

But before this can evolve -- and I know the federal 

government is putting other proposals forward -- we see that 

they are already cutting back 10 per cent a year over two years, 

which is increasing the cost to these people that can't even find 

ways of putting their crop in.  It's going to increase their cost of 

operating their farms by some $80 million here in 

Saskatchewan alone.  That again is going to have a large 

impact on those unemployment figures that the member from 

Kindersley was so concerned about at question period. 

 

So once again we just want your support in ensuring that the 

federal government live up to its commitment and obligation 

that they've made many times, that they will not be reducing 

the monies to the Crow benefit and that the status quo or the 

method of payment will remain as is.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1130) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, today we've witnessed a bit of the 

new NDP administration's policy.  Their back bench was so 

disappointed in the Speech from the Throne that they had to 

initiate some relevant or thoughtful discussions on agriculture.  

And they even superseded the Speech from the Throne in 

coming and ask to have an emergency debate on agriculture 

because they feel so weak about agriculture, so ineffective and 

so poor where thousands and thousands of people have been 

complaining in public that they have to put up another sham or 

a faade of some sort of effort so that they have an emergency 

debate. 

 

And in the paper today, Mr. Speaker, everybody is saying, the 

editorials are saying and the public is saying, that the NDP 

policy in agriculture, the NDP policy in financing, the NDP 

excuse that it's only the federal government, is hollow; it's not 

valid.  It's not accurate, and the public knows it. You're fooling 

no one but yourselves. 

 

And to have a would-be minister of Agriculture, who wanted 

the job, be able to stand up in the House and give him a chance 

to speak along with his colleague from Shaunavon, to make 

them feel good that they're really doing something in 

agriculture is such a fake, is so flat.  It is so empty that even the 

members opposite are sitting there saying, well I hope they 

finish; I hope they get it off their chest; at least it gives the 

back-benchers something to do. 

 

Because the policy is so hypocritical, Mr. Speaker.  And I'm 

going to amend the motion on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan -- amend the motion to say that the province of 

Saskatchewan should at least cooperate and pay its fair share 

like other jurisdictions are so that people can receive the help 

that they're receiving in Alberta, the help they're receiving in 

Manitoba, and the help they're receiving across the country, 

from Ontario to Quebec. 

 

But only in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, do we see 20,000 

farmers come up in rallies to beat on the provincial 

government, to boo the NDP Premier of Saskatchewan because 

he says, oh I can't do anything.  Even though I promised I'd 

give you cost of production and I promised I'd be there to really 

improve the agriculture situation, I have to do the opposite.  

And they boo.  Well of course they boo. 

 

And then he has his back-benchers, or maybe on their own 

volition, stand up here and say, well really it's the federal 

government's fault.  Well nobody's buying that.  I mean you 

can try to fool some of the people some of the time but you're 

not fooling anybody now except maybe some of your 

colleagues who sit in here and say, well gee that was pretty 

pathetic.  The Speech from the Throne was pretty flat. I guess 

we better do something for agriculture.  Make it look like we're 

doing something that's credible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion is about offloading.  And today in the 

paper, today in the paper the media has pegged the Premier 

right on.  And Murray Mandryk points out, for example, 

Romanow's complaints are full of inconsistencies. 

 

On the offloading -- the offloading going on in the province of 

Saskatchewan gets a triple A.  This is a triple A, double, triple, 

quadruple A-plus offloading on the backs of the taxpayers in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  Everybody pays. 

 

Offload, offload, offload.  And you promised not to.  And I 

hope you have the courage to publish your 1991 campaign 

brochure that says you were going to do all these nice things.  

If you can get Phoenix house or somebody else to print it and 

publish it, I'll distribute it in my riding or any place across 

Saskatchewan and then just 



20 Saskatchewan Hansard February 26, 1993 

write big joke across the whole thing. 

 

I mean if you bring it up one more time it'll convince us once 

more that if that's all you've got, is the member from Humboldt 

to stand up and try to make a faade and some sort of fancy 

speech about what Saskatchewan could do if the federal 

government would cooperate, I mean it is a disgrace. 

 

All the pain and all the suffering and all the people going broke 

and all the children and all the families that are under stress, 

and they just pick one or two bills out of their hat every month 

and say, it's like a lottery. Well this one was lucky; I guess I 

can pay it.  Because of the NDP.  Because of the NDP. 

 

You promised to make it better.  You said a little bit of 

management and a little bit of renewed spirit and everything 

would be fine, and it's pain. 

 

And the media is saying you're full of inconsistencies today.  

They go on and say that the province of Saskatchewan is 

lacking in any clear direction in terms of the Speech from the 

Throne.  Mr. Speaker, look at this.  We talk about offloading.  

The Speech from the Throne, and it's in today's paper, says 

there's no clear direction except offloading.  That's what it is.  

Offload onto your own people.  And that's what it says. 

 

That's what the public is saying about you.  Offload on your 

own and hurt your own.  And then stand up and say and have 

the member from Humboldt, who would like to be in cabinet 

and missed, you give him a chance to speak and say, well 

really it's the federal government's fault. 

 

And in today's paper ironically again it says: "Mulroney didn't 

abandon Western farmers." He put billions into the 

Saskatchewan coffers, billions into the coffers.  And the NDP 

in its hypocrisy stands up and say, well but we need more from 

the federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can you believe the gall of the members opposite 

in the pain and suffering that's gone on in the province of 

Saskatchewan and with their almighty campaign promises to 

fix it, will stand up in here and at the very same time they bring 

this emergency debate forward, the local media is kicking the 

tar out of them for being inconsistent, unfair, full of offloading, 

and beating on Saskatchewan people at the very time when 

they need help the most. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I find it . . . if this is the new wave of 

government politics and government administration in the 

province of Saskatchewan, if this is how the NDP do it in 

Ontario or in B.C. (British Columbia) or now in Saskatchewan, 

it isn't on; it's not fair.  It's even . . . it isn't honest.  It's nowhere 

near . . . The Premier this morning talked about he wanted to 

tell them the truth.  Well for heaven sakes he's been in 

government now for almost two years, a year and a half, and 

it's the same thing, blame somebody else, not telling them 

what's really happening. 

 

He's going to say, well I'm going to just put more offloading 

onto the backs of Saskatchewan people.  I'm going to list some 

of these. I'm going to list some of these because he's admitted 

he's been wrong before and I 

appreciate that and the media even appreciated it when he 

stood in his place in Prince Albert and said, I admit that I made 

a major mistake.  And he forced us through it and you too, Mr. 

Speaker, all of us. This Legislative Assembly went through just 

some of the biggest pain you can imagine . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- I wish to ask leave, Mr. Speaker, to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce today through you and to you, Mr. Speaker, on behalf 

of the MLA from Rosetown-Elrose, Mr. Wiens, guests from 

the Elrose Composite School.  We have . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member knows he's not to 

refer to people, to members, by their name but by their 

constituency. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to 

introduce to you today the grade 5 class, 25 students from 

Elrose Composite School, who are taking a tour of the 

Legislative Assembly today.  Accompanying them today is 

their teacher Donna Benjamin; chaperones Mrs. Ellis, Mr. 

Reed, Mr. Parson, Mrs. Quinney, and Mr. Bone. 

 

And I will have the opportunity to have lunch with them later 

on this afternoon and an opportunity to take photos with them.  

So with that, I look forward to their questions and I hope that 

the Legislative Assembly would welcome these people today.  

Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 42 

(continued) 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I recognize the member from Estevan, 

I would like to remind members that we're not on the throne 

speech debate, we're on a specific motion.  It should be 

wide-ranging but I think it must pertain to agriculture and what 

the motion is before us. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was about to go 

through some of the detail of offloading that the new NDP 

administration has imposed on the people of Saskatchewan, 

because this motion is about offloading and they're asking the 

federal government to stop offloading and to come on to 

provide more money when in fact the NDP have done two 

things. 

 

They admitted they were wrong.  The NDP leader in Prince 

Albert admitted that he was wrong on GRIP and he's been 

booed by thousands -- literally over 10,000 people booed him 

when he said that -- and approximately 20,000 people have 

rallied across the province in saying the NDP administration is 

wrong on agriculture; they did not tell us the truth. 



February 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 21 

The second thing I'm going to do is list how they have 

offloaded on their own people in the province of Saskatchewan 

when they promised they wouldn't do that, and the hypocrisy of 

asking Ottawa for more when in fact you keep offloading onto 

the people of Saskatchewan.  So even if you got more money, 

the people have no confidence at all that you would help them 

whatsoever. 

 

You've expanded your cabinet; you've bloated it up.  People are 

talking about cabinet ministers flying around the world with no 

deals and nothing happening, and then at the very same time 

you tax people. 

 

Now let's just look at how they've offloaded, Mr. Speaker.  

They've increased all of the utility rates on Saskatchewan 

people, and not just once but twice and now three times.  And 

the utilities were fat and sassy with excess profits and retained 

earnings two years ago.  And they've increased rates and 

increased rates and increased rates.  Increased phone rates.  

They've increased installation rates much larger than inflation, 

and installation fees.  They've increased power rates. 

 

Now if you're a farmer in tough condition on a farm and you've 

had your power rates increased and your telephone rates 

increased and your insurance rates increased, what do you do?  

Did you have any alternative?  No.  The new administration, 

the NDP, says well that's a government monopoly and we're 

here to take your money; and if you don't like it we'll cut you 

off.  We'll cut you off.  We just offload on you on a public 

utility. 

 

A natural monopoly is there to be protected so that people in 

government can say I'll regulate the rates to protect you from 

gouging.  And what do you do?  A natural monopoly is used to 

hose the people.  And you've raised rates up and up and up at 

the very time the member from Humboldt says, but they're 

hurting and they're suffering.  Well what hypocrisy.  He can't 

look at himself in the mirror.  And the members opposite 

couldn't.  You've raised telephone rates and power rates and 

insurance rates. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as you know, every place in the world 

natural monopolies are put in the public sector to regulate so 

they're not gouged.  This is a public utility, not an NDP cash 

cow.  That's the problem you face because you offload on 

people because you don't really care. 

 

You don't care about agriculture.  You don't care about 

families.  You don't care about rural municipalities.  You don't 

care about seniors.  You don't care about native and aboriginal 

people.  You just want your share of big bucks out of a 

monopoly.  And on top of that you use them for patronage so 

that at least your friends can get a job. 

 

Despite what the Attorney General says, you have lots of 

patronage.  And you pack it in the only utilities or only Crown 

corporations that are left, thank goodness.  Thank goodness one 

of the major reasons of putting them into the private sector is 

so that you can remove the patronage.  At least you can't do it 

to Saskoil and to Sask Potash and PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 

Company) any more.  I mean that's all you want. 

 

The rate increases on natural gas, on SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance) vehicle insurance, 15 per cent increase 

in taxes in the PST (provincial sales tax).  You promised you 

would reduce the PST.  No more.  It's increased.  And we're not 

even into the budget. 

 

But the offloading on Saskatchewan people when you 

promised no more taxes.  No more taxes.  Read the NDP 

leader's lips.  He said he would not offload on the taxpayer.  

What has he done?  Nothing but tax increases since he's been in 

power.  And we can expect even more to come in the budget.  

And they're complaining about offloading. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is unbelievable when they would now go 

back to the very people that got them elected and they're going 

to go to them.  I hope the member from Humboldt can walk 

around Humboldt or Watrous or other places and say: how do 

you like the tax increases so far?  How is it?  Isn't it really nice?  

You've got a new surtax on personal income of 10 per cent, 

increase on fuel tax, an increase in tobacco tax, a 1 per cent 

increase on the corporate income tax, increase of 1 per cent on 

the corporation capital tax surcharge rate, an increase of 25 per 

cent on the corporation capital tax, imposed user fees for 

chiropractic service, imposed user fees for optometric services, 

and we're looking at drug fees that went up from a hundred 

bucks to over $375 per family and individuals.  And they're 

worried about offloading. 

 

Well the motion before the House is just a sham, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  It is just a faade.  They're trying to duck and hide 

from the truth.  They didn't have the courage to even debate the 

Speech from the Throne today.  They had to come with an 

emergency debate to show everybody how they cared about 

agriculture.  Well we'll love to talk about agriculture. 

 

I'm amazed that they let you away with it, Mr. Member from 

Humboldt.  They put you up there and said, well gosh, I guess 

we'll go with you and maybe we can kind of divert this, show 

how much we care; maybe we can fool the people of 

Saskatchewan one more time, fool them one more time.  Well I 

don't believe it when the list of offloading is here.  And all 

because you campaigned on one thing and decided that you 

would do exactly the opposite. 

 

You could have had balanced budgets.  You could have had 

economic activity.  You could have had some excitement.  But 

oh no, you had to do it your way.  And now we're really seeing 

that without a plan it's just get hit in the head, all pain, no 

relief; it hurts.  And the Saskatchewan public from Moose Jaw 

to Melfort to Prince Albert to Estevan, Swift Current, are 

saying: did we ever make a serious, serious mistake listening to 

the NDP. 

 

(1145) 

 

And now you're going to come in with more.  The NDP leader 

yesterday said, whoop, you're going to get a lot more; it's going 

to be more and more and more pain.  And then he's got his 

cabinet ministers running around the province and says, the 

province is about to collapse; therefore we've got to offload on 

the province, offload on the people, because if it's about to 

collapse, we've got to offload on the public that elected us.  

Because they 



22 Saskatchewan Hansard February 26, 1993 

wanted power. 

 

Power to do what?  Power to do what?  Power to create 

economic activity?  Power to cooperate with other 

jurisdictions?  Not on your life.  Power to cooperate with the 

business community?  The business community says, for 

heaven sakes, if you're going to broaden the tax base and 

offload on the public, at least harmonize so we can have some 

economic incentive to do some real economic development.  

No.  Can't do that. 

 

So they don't cooperate there.  They don't cooperate with 

labour.  They don't cooperate with pensioners.  They don't 

cooperate with seniors.  They don't cooperate with farmers.  

They don't cooperate with the chamber of commerce. They just 

offload -- tax and hit and tax and hit and tax and tax and tax.  

Democrats worldwide do the same.  They talk about the new 

world and all it is is offload onto their public. 

 

Plans to reduce the number of MLAs in rural Saskatchewan.  

Offload, Mr. Speaker -- wow!  Look at the political agenda.  

Squeeze them real hard, tax the farmers, cut out their programs, 

make it really miserable for them.  And then I guess what we 

can do, after the population goes down we can cut the number 

of seats and we'll do it under the guise: well but, by gosh, we 

have to balance the budget; we've got to do our fair share here. 

 

And what are they going to . . . do you think you're fooling 

people?  What kind of malarkey.  You can bet your cowboy 

boots that everybody in Saskatchewan knows exactly what 

you're up to.  In the next election you're saying, well maybe we 

can just squeeze enough seats out of the major urban markets; 

to heck with the people in rural Saskatchewan.  We will offload 

like you can't believe and squeeze them and squeeze them and 

squeeze them just so we can win another election. 

 

Because the population will go down in those rural ridings that 

support free enterprisers or generally any place else, and you 

say most of the democrats are coming from the radical left 

wing of the major city centres and we can maybe survive one 

more election there.  And won't you be proud of that? 

 

That's the big offload.  Well I'll tell you, your plan is out in the 

open.  Everybody knows your plan.  Everybody talks about it; 

they see through it.  And, Mr. Speaker, you know that they 

rammed through legislation here even after . . . Well it was 

interesting.  The NDP leader admits he made a mistake.  We 

didn't have to go through this faade we went through in the 

House last session where you changed the rules, unilaterally 

did things that we'd never seen in parliamentary democracy, 

voted without the opposition -- all because of a mistake the 

NDP leader says. He admits now, should have never touched it 

-- should have never, never touched it. 

 

This place was in a shambles; it closed down for three weeks, 

all because the NDP leader made a mistake.  And said, you 

know, if I'd have just gone with the flow with the rest of 

Canadians, we could have had a lot of money into 

Saskatchewan farmers' plans.  We could have worked for 

'93-94, changed GRIP the way people might like to. 

But no, he had to unilaterally, retroactively change it and then 

impose this pain which was part of his plan all along because 

he wants to reduce rural seats under the guise that it's going to 

be economically more efficient, so that maybe the NDP can last 

more than one term.  That kind of offloading, Mr. Speaker, is 

pathetic.  It's politically dishonest. 

 

In the Speech from the Throne we're asked to judge this 

government on how it's doing in economics, how it's doing in 

taxes, how it's doing in openness, how it's doing in providing a 

vision.  And they can't even get into the Speech from the 

Throne, Mr. Speaker.  They got to go on an emergency debate 

on agriculture and try to redirect with some sort of lightning 

rod on another topic.  They are so ashamed of their record 

already. 

 

Reduce the number of MLAs.  Imagine!  That's part of their 

plan that was talked about yesterday. 

 

They released the wellness model.  And if you want to see 

offloading, just look at the new wellness model.  I've met with 

my hospital board and people in health care in Estevan this last 

week, and I'll tell you, they look at the wellness model as the 

biggest offloading joke you can imagine.  It's an excuse. 

 

Do you know the problem with the NDP?  They say, the NDP 

runs around and says, I want to have your advice.  I want to 

listen to you.  But do you know what?  People can talk but the 

NDP don't listen.  They don't listen.  And everybody knows 

that, whether you're looking at health boards in Beechy or 

schools in Outlook or Elbow, or hospitals or administrations 

any place.  The NDP say, oh I'm here; I'm here from the 

government and I'm here to help you.  But they don't listen. 

 

They've already made up their mind they're going to reduce the 

number of rural seats, they're going to offload on 

municipalities, they're going to close hospitals, they're going to 

close nursing homes.  And they're going to do this under some 

sort of guise that they've got some big plan. 

 

So it's not only taxes where they've offloaded, and utilities, but 

now it's in health care, health care models, administrations, and 

smaller and smaller communities.  And indeed I eventually 

think it will be even larger communities where you're going to 

see the largest attack, under the guise of Tommy Douglas on 

health care, that you've seen in your life. 

 

And there's some more hypocrisy -- well Tommy said we could 

do this.  Imagine!  And you're supposed to be consistent with 

the beliefs of the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation), that said I am there to help you in health care and 

help you in farming and help you with your children and 

reduce the taxes and to make sure that you have services. 

 

Under that man's vision, you do all this taxing and cutting and 

hurting and eliminating representation, change the rules of the 

House.  Then you can kind of flippantly go along, well I made 

a mistake.  It was only a 4 or $5 million mistake.  

Saskatchewan people will never get over it, I suppose.  

Whoops! I made a mistake. 



February 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 23 

And I think the Star-Phoenix or somebody else said, well the 

Premier's a pretty nice guy; he admits he made some mistakes.  

Well he's right if he's right and he's right if he's wrong.  Right? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Wrong. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I think that's wrong.  He made a mistake in this 

legislature.  He cost hundreds of millions of dollars for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I talked to a machinery dealer yesterday right here in Regina.  

And the machinery dealers are telling us that they're having a 

very good year and for one particular reason.  I said, well how 

could that be, because Saskatchewan farmers are hurt so bad.  

What is it?  And he said, you know what?  Flexi-Coil is going 

to be out of air seeders pretty quickly.  We're going to be out of 

this and out of that. 

 

I said, what's happening?  He said, you know what?  Alberta 

farmers and Manitoba farmers have good, have very good 

programs, Mr. Speaker.  And if you will talk to them -- and I'll 

gladly give them your names -- they're coming in here and 

saying, holy smokes.  The Progressive Conservative 

government in Saskatchewan designed a heck of a farm 

program for the rest of the country.  In Saskatchewan, you've 

kicked it out.  And they've got money in Alberta and they've 

got money in Manitoba.  They're coming to Saskatchewan to 

buy farm machinery because they're out of it over there. 

 

And they're saying, I don't know what you guys did but I'll tell 

you we've got a fine program from where we are.  We're not 

going to rallies, not 15,000 people coming to a rally in 

Winnipeg beating on the Premier.  No.  Not in Alberta; only in 

Saskatchewan.  There aren't rallies any place else.  The 

offloading in Saskatchewan, the tearing up of agreements, the 

admission of major mistakes, the collapse of credit ratings, the 

fear, and then . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Despair. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- And the despair.  That's right.  Even the cabinet 

ministers are preaching despair. 

 

Look at this.  Mr. Speaker, look at this.  This is what the new 

NDP Premier is telling his cabinet ministers to say around the 

province.  And he's talking about his worry about offloading.  

He's saying . . .  This is the Nipawin Journal and this is the 

cabinet minister representing the Melfort riding.  And the 

headline says: province is near collapse -- Carson. 

 

Now is that what you want them to say?  Do you want them to 

run around and say yes, we're near collapse; that's it.  Just 

gloom and doom.  And then on top of that, they'll make it even 

more of a collapse because they're going to tax people and tax 

them and tax them and tax them and tax them.  Tax everything, 

tax the utilities, tax their farm, tax the gas, tax the rural 

municipalities; offload, offload, and offload, and then run 

around and say, well you're near collapse. 

 

No wonder, Mr. Speaker, that they're not on their feet 

defending the Speech from the Throne with optimism and 

glowing terms of what Saskatchewan's going to be.  They had 

no idea, Mr. Speaker, what to do if they formed government, 

none at all.  They had no plan.  They say, well we're here.  

We've just got to wade into this and it'll all be fine.  And they 

have got ruin in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

They have no economic plan.  There's no economic 

development.  And if they do have anything going, it's because 

of community development bonds, Saskatchewan savings 

bonds, industrial development that was started by people who 

could work with economic activity and the private sector.  And 

all because they didn't give it any thought at all; they just 

wanted power, just power.  And what have you got?  New 

highways?  No.  New highways?  No . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . The member from -- where are you from? -- 

Quills, the member from the Quills says, well they got rid of 

me.  Imagine.  That was their objective. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Yes, look at this.  See, what did I tell you, Mr. 

Speaker?  That was their whole . . . Their whole objective is 

just playing politics, not for the people, not for the farmers, not 

for the farmers. 

 

See the true politics, the true political objective of the people in 

here on the opposition, on the opposition, in the benches 

opposite, is just to be there.  No help for people.  They said, oh 

well, we'll promise the public anything, just anything at all, just 

to win.  And then what have you got?  You've got offloading; 

you've got the closure of rural health care facilities.  They 

eliminated the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, so they offloaded 

on pensioners.  And seniors all across the province thought it 

was a good plan; in fact CCFers and NDPers thought it was a 

good plan. 

 

But no, they offload the problems that the NDP have on 

pensioners; they've frozen or eliminated health facility capital 

grants in rural areas; they cancelled the rural gas program -- 

offloaded on rural people again.  They reduced municipal 

revenue sharing, and I'm sure when you look at this budget 

you're going to see more offloading on municipalities.  User 

fees for cancer patients outside Regina and Saskatoon -- 

offload on the sick, offload on the sick.  And the member from 

Quills doesn't like to hear this but that's exactly what it is.  He 

offloads on the sick. 

 

Reduce the number of rural municipalities, eliminate the 

Crown lease surface rights, so . . . well they don't like to hear 

this, Mr. Speaker.  They tax and tax and tax and tax and then 

charge the sick.  And this is supposed to be in the great legacy 

of Tommy Douglas.   They tax and tax and tax and then tax the 

sick. 

 

The agriculture programs they've cut and tax on top of that; 

cancelled Fair Share, and they said they'd never do it.  The 

member from Humboldt says: we won't cancel Fair Share.  He 

won't admit it but we got him on quotes.  The member from 

Humboldt said: we will never cancel Fair Share.  What did they 

do?  They cancelled Fair Share.  And the member from 

Humboldt can eat those words.  He can eat them because he 

didn't tell the truth like the rest of you, all the rest of you.  You 

said, oh you'd never do that, 



24 Saskatchewan Hansard February 26, 1993 

 never raise taxes.  There you go, you eat them.  Because you're 

raising taxes.  And you know what?  There's more to come. 

 

Offload on Saskatchewan taxpayers because you had no idea 

what you were going to do when you won.  Cancel the feed 

grain adjustment program?  Well temporarily, he said, we'll 

keep it there because of the heat we're getting from the 

livestock industry.  Increased fees; cancelled the cash advance; 

capped the fuel rebate program; forced farmers to accept the 

GRIP program that is universally unpopular; going back to 

gravel roads. 

 

When we look at the offloading, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can 

see that the NDP administration has no reason at all to do 

anything but try to put up a faade when they're going back to 

the federal government today. 

 

They are so ashamed of their Speech from the Throne, so 

lacking in support from their members opposite in the back 

benches, that they've got to prop him up and say, do something 

-- do something to kind of show that we're fighting with the 

feds.  Okay, that would be really good.  So they've put up this 

fake debate, this fake debate. 

 

Now let me mention, last night, Mr. Speaker, last night in 

Hazlet, Saskatchewan, Mr. McKnight was there speaking at a 

PC (Progressive Conservative) function.  And he reported 

again and he said very clearly, the federal government is there 

with its $43 million if only the province of Saskatchewan 

would pony up and help farmers.  One more time he said, we're 

there.  We've been there in Alberta, he said.  We've been there 

in Manitoba.  Farmers there like their programs.  But only in 

Saskatchewan have they cut and offloaded -- only in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Wheat Pool members know it, United Grain Growers members 

know it, stock growers know it, people all over the country 

know it -- that only in Saskatchewan under the NDP have the 

programs come to a complete stop.  Because the NDP can't 

think above politics.  They will not cooperate with the 

Conservative government in Ottawa. 

 

(1200) 

 

They will not cooperate so they suffer the pain and they offload 

and they hurt and they tell stories and they flip-flop.  And then 

finally when they're really hurt, the NDP leader says, whoops! I 

made a mistake.  It was only 4 or $500 million.  Saskatchewan 

is out . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And that's right, he won't 

fix it. 

 

Why don't you make a recommendation that he do something 

about it?  Why don't you help?  Where's the hope, any hope at 

all or any help from the NDP administration?  What is it?  Did 

you give us any examples of what you would do to help? 

 

Do you know what you're doing?  You said, I'll tell you what 

we're going to do; we're going to have a little trip around 

Saskatchewan.  Isn't that what the Minister of Agriculture said?  

We're going to talk about rural offloading and they're going to 

have meetings around Saskatchewan.  Do you know how many 

places and communities you're going to south of No. 1 

Highway?  Do 

you know? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Nobody knows. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Nobody knows.  They don't care.  A cabinet 

committee . . . The Agriculture minister is going to go around 

Saskatchewan.  Do you know how many communities you're 

going to even talk to south of the No. 1 Highway?  Not one.  

Talk about politics, partisan politics.  As if there is no pain in 

Weyburn, as if there's no pain in Shaunavon, as if there's no 

pain in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg or Estevan -- not one meeting 

south of No. 1 Highway because you say, well we've written 

those off and we're going to reduce the number of seats there to 

one or two anyway.  Isn't that your plan? 

 

You are going now out around rural Saskatchewan, and do you 

know where you're meeting people?  You're going to go north 

of Saskatoon where you think, well I might have some support 

left up there, north of Saskatoon.  You're going to go to Melfort 

March 15; Wadena, March 15.  And look at this: Spiritwood, 

March 15; Biggar, March 15; Swift Current, March 16; and 

Grenfell, March 18.  And this is all going to be done in the next 

10 days or 15 days. 

 

Number one, you're not giving them enough time, and number 

two, you don't even go to parts of the province that you've 

already written off, as if there's no pain there. 

 

What politics, crass, crass politics.  And you expect farmers to 

come up and . . . What are they going to tell you?  What are 

they going to tell you?  They're going to say, well why don't 

you do something? You're in government.  What's your plan?  

Well we don't have a plan; we're here to consult.  And then 

people will tell you stuff, and you don't listen anyway. 

 

You've been booed all over the province.  You're going to be 

booed and booed and booed and booed.  You'll get out a few 

handful of supporters.  How pathetic.  How pathetic. 

 

What's wrong with the rest of the province, NDP?  What's 

wrong with the rest of the province?  Why do you limit . . . I'll 

tell you, this is going to the rest of the province.  And when we 

. . . we'll know.  You're looking at places where you're in 

trouble.  You've written off the South because you say that is 

going to be PC, no question about it.  Now you're in trouble in 

some of your northern ridings, so you're going to go in there 

and say, well we need to shore up the member from Melfort 

because she's written off the entire province; it's all gone to 

heck in a hand basket.  The province is near collapse, Carson 

says.  So what do you do?  We better have a meeting in 

Melfort, better shore her up.  This whole thing is about partisan 

politics.  There's nothing else.  Well, Mr. Speaker, we have 

seen the musical chairs operate over there. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Definitely should have Rosetown. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- And today, today . . . yes, well they wrote off 

Rosetown; it's all over.  Yes.  The former minister of 

Agriculture made such a mess of it that they canned him.  And 

I mean they're not even going back into Rosetown.  It's done; 

it's dust; it's over, boys.  So maybe you can amalgamate that 

with Biggar and you'll only have one 



February 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 25 

seat.  Is that your plan?  Yes.  There you go.  See?  That's their 

plan.  So they've got all this all figured out. 

 

And on the offloading, look at it.  In the Leader-Post today the 

editorials that are normally kind to you are starting just to kick 

your pants.  And it says: throne speech dull with lack of clear 

direction.  All they see is partisan politics with you guys.  

That's it.  There's no direction. 

 

It's a little bit of, oh we'll consult here and a little bit we'll 

consult there and at the same time just hit them in the head -- 

close their schools; close their hospitals; offload on the public; 

raise their taxes; raise their fees; mean speeder; tear up their 

highways; and if our cabinet ministers get in trouble we'll just 

shuffle the deck a little bit, put them in another portfolio, pass 

them on. 

 

Now wonder you've got problems.  Holy smokes.  

Unbelievable.  And then, for the first time in I think 

Saskatchewan's history, before we could even get to the Speech 

from the Throne, you've got to have an emergency debate on 

offloading and blame somebody else. 

 

How weak, how weak, how weak, how nobody would even 

have . . . I didn't think they'd let them get away with it.  I 

honestly didn't think, Mr. House Leader, that you'd say: well 

this would be a good plan.  This will really divert the energies 

of the Assembly.  You know, this will really work. 

 

The public's going to say, well at least they could defend their 

Speech from the Throne.  This doesn't even account as a day 

we're talking about the Speech from the Throne.  This is the 

NDP plan?  And what are they saying?  The media says: no 

direction.  Whoops.  Dull and no direction. 

 

And the next editorial says: Romanow's complaints are full of 

inconsistencies.  So you're inconsistent, you're dull, and you 

don't have any direction.  How are you doing so far? 

 

And now you've diverted the entire debate of the House into 

some faade speech about offloading, where you're the king of 

offloaders.  And you expect us to endorse this, to join with you 

in your plan? 

 

The only good thing you had in the Speech from the Throne 

which is acknowledged in the media is that you had some 

bonds and some investments in some privatizations, and AECL 

and Farm Credit are moving here. 

 

That all that you've got.  I mean it's unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. 

How we could even be into such a debate when you're 

supposed to be there to help people.  If the federal government 

even gave you money, what you'd do is you put in your coffers 

for some darn fool program that you'll dream up to look after 

yourself politically.  Because people have no confidence you 

care, no confidence that you care at all. 

 

Well I'm sure there's going to be lots of debates in this 

Assembly and it'll probably be a long session, Mr. Speaker, 

because of the incompetence of the members opposite. 

They could have balanced the budget and they could have 

economic development and they can't eat their mistakes during 

the last campaign.  They can't admit that it was there.  And the 

Minister of Finance knows it and the former minister of 

Finance knows it.  I mean it's all there.  Our legacy is there, he 

says.  Our legacy is there and he campaigned on it as if he had 

it all fixed up, had it all fixed up.  And he has no idea how to 

fix it up, none whatsoever.  He has no idea how to fix it except 

to offload on the public and hit them in utilities. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to let my colleagues get in on this 

so-called emergency debate.  There is real emergency and 

people want real help and they want the NDP to smell the 

coffee and get out of their political bunker and come out and 

talk to real people and help them.  You have offloaded and you 

have hurt them.  People are just shaking their heads and saying, 

how dishonest. 

 

I'm going to amend this motion and I'm certainly not going to 

vote for yours. I'll tell you that.  Nor would the Saskatchewan 

public.  And if you took it to the Saskatchewan public today, 

you wouldn't get a rural seat in Saskatchewan and you know it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm going to amend the motion and it's going to 

be as follows. Moved by me, seconded by the member from 

Morse: 

 

 That the motion be amended by deleting the word "Canada" 

and substituting therefor the word "Saskatchewan"; 

 

 deleting the phrase "offloading federal" and substituting 

therefor the phrase "refusing to accept its fair share of"; 

 

 deleting all of the words after the word "responsibilities" and 

substituting therefor the following: 

 

 for agriculture support and live up to its commitments by: (a) 

retroactively correcting the Premier's admitted damage to 

farm families in its destructive changes to farm policy; and 

(b) negotiating in good faith with the federal government to 

obtain a joint solution to the crisis, starting with a willingness 

to accept the federal offer of 43 million from the Canadian 

taxpayers in return for only a $9 million contribution from 

the provincial government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I amend the motion today and my colleagues will 

be prepared to speak to that amendment because, Mr. Speaker, 

we fully believe that if the NDP have any conscience at all left 

that they will openly enter into discussions with the federal 

government, cooperate as they always talk about, and actually 

help farmers and rural communities and all people in the 

province of Saskatchewan now that the NDP Premier has 

admitted that he made a very, very large error.  And we 

seriously and honestly and genuinely ask them to cooperate 

with the federal government. 



26 Saskatchewan Hansard February 26, 1993 

The amendment that I have put forward asks you to do that.  

You have a responsibility to share in this.  You have a 

responsibility to pony up with the people who can help as they 

do in Alberta and as they do in Manitoba.  What this asks you 

to do is just act like they do in other jurisdictions.  They 

cooperate in Ontario, for heaven's sake, under Bob Rae.  They 

cooperate in Alberta.  They cooperate in Manitoba. 

 

Nobody's going to believe that this is a federal government 

problem in the province of Saskatchewan.  It is an 

NDP-designed difficulty and crisis because you won't do 

anything but harm rural people. 

 

So if you have any decency left, I ask you to sincerely support 

the amendment to this motion which says Saskatchewan has to 

do its fair share in cooperating with other jurisdictions -- 

Manitoba, Alberta, and the federal government - 

_ to really help farmers who are in a crisis.  And I think if you 

have any decency at all, that you will support the amendment. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I believe the amendment is in order but I'm 

going to have to go through it.  It's fairly complicated.  But in 

the mean time . . . we have done that.  In the mean time I will 

allow the member from Morse to continue the debate. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a privilege again 

for me to enter into the debate on an issue that is very near and 

dear to me.  Mr. Speaker, the discussion that was . . . the 

motion that was presented by the member from Humboldt, in 

my view represents only a partial solution to the real problem.  

And the amendment by the member from Estevan has 

identified what the real problem is. 

 

The real problem, and it has continued to be the problem since 

the election in October of '91, has continued to be the lack of 

initiative by this government in dealing with the farm problem, 

in dealing with the farm crisis, in dealing with the very fact that 

there is no vision.  There is no vision for the future in the 

province of Saskatchewan for rural Saskatchewan and there is 

no vision for what that rural component of this province . . . 

which is the history of this province. 

 

And I noticed, Mr. Speaker, that in the context of the Speech 

from the Throne yesterday, that Her Honour read that they're 

going to reinvent the component that makes Saskatchewan 

grow -- reinvent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people want to say to this government, get out 

of the way; we can do it ourselves.  That's what they have said 

over and over again.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's what they're 

saying -- move out of our way.  If you do nothing it helps, but 

the way you've been working, you've destroyed every focus 

and every function of rural Saskatchewan that you can possibly 

take a hold of -- every one of them.  And I could list you every 

one of the farm policies that this Premier and the former 

minister of Agriculture and the present Minister of Agriculture 

have 

cut to the quick.  They have cut every one of those programs, 

and on top of that, Mr. Speaker, they have raised the rates to 

every one of those rural people by such significance that they're 

having difficulty making their payments. 

 

My neighbour phoned me on Monday and said to me, he said 

what are we going to have in this throne speech that's going to 

make any difference at all?  And I said, well I'm not sure what 

they're going to do, but from what I hear, there's going to be tax 

increases and cuts.  That's what it's going to be -- utility rate 

increases and tax increases across the board. 

 

But what are they going to do for me?  He said to me, I put my 

bills in a hat.  We run a lottery every month, and he said, the 

lucky one that I draw gets paid that month.  And that's what's 

going on all across the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the rate increases the other day in SGI just 

topped the list.  You go out and talk to the people in the 

country when they get their surcharge on their vans, when they 

get the surcharge on their three-ton trucks for delivering grain.  

The farm policy in this government stinks. 

 

It is extremely important, Mr. Speaker, that the member from 

Humboldt and the comments he made about 40 per cent of the 

people of this province have a direct and indirect relationship 

to growth in the economy because of agriculture.  And he said 

that.  Why doesn't he say it in his caucus?  Why doesn't he say 

it there?  He says it in here, and because he says it in here . . . 

Before the Speech from the Throne has even had a mover and a 

seconder, he comes in here and says, my Speech from the 

Throne is inadequate.  He says it's inadequate, and he says it 

because it's the truth. 

 

(1215) 

 

There is nothing but platitudes in that throne speech for 

agriculture.  And the reason is that the Premier is not, number 

one, only prepared to admit his mistake, but he's not prepared 

to restore back to the farmers the things that he took away from 

them that were legally theirs and morally theirs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he took that away because he made that decision 

that he was not going to become involved in dealing with 

agriculture in a positive way.  That was his decision.  That's the 

only conclusion that we can come to because of what he says. 

 

The member from Humboldt has also indicated that we should 

tell him what should be done.  Well they've got a few rural 

members on that side of the House; why don't they tell their 

cabinet what to do?  Or have they been shunted off to the side 

and said no, we're not going to listen to you.  We're going to 

say it like the member for Melfort says it.  Everything is in 

collapse, total disaster.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is what we have 

here as a presentation by this government in a throne speech. 

 

They didn't have the enthusiasm and the direction to provide 

for this Assembly a mandate for vision for the future in rural 

Saskatchewan.  They didn't have it for 



February 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 27 

urban Saskatchewan; they didn't have it for health care.  Why?  

Because the vision is gone.  The vision is gone for what 

Saskatchewan really is. 

 

They said, we've got to reinvent it -- reinvent it, Mr. Speaker.  

And they said that right in the first page of the throne speech -- 

reinvent it.  "My government has asked the people to join in 

reinventing Saskatchewan's future." 

 

My goodness sakes!  We had a good Saskatchewan up till 

1991.  And, Mr. Speaker, that is a fact.  You go and ask rural 

Saskatchewan.  When you go around and have your meetings, 

when you go around in rural Saskatchewan having your 

meetings -- in Spiritwood and Grenfell and in Swift Current -- 

you're going to find out from the rural people exactly what they 

think of you. 

 

And then why are you in court now on the basis of GRIP '91?  

Why are you in court on the basis of not dealing with the 

farmers of Saskatchewan in a fair and a legitimate way?  Why 

are you in court about that?  Because, Mr. Speaker, you were 

wrong when you put it in; you were wrong when you took it 

away.  And, Mr. Speaker, I think we need to identify that as 

one of the major reasons why this government has a problem 

out in rural Saskatchewan.  They have a problem, a serious 

problem. 

 

And I even had interesting phone calls from families of 

individuals from individuals sitting on the government side of 

the House.  And one of the gentlemen phoned me, he said, my 

nephew is the member from such and such a seat -- and I won't 

embarrass him by saying the constituency he was from -- but 

he said, I will never . . . he's my nephew but I'll never vote for 

him again.  That's what he told me. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the feeling of rural Saskatchewan.  

The rural members are letting their voters down time after time 

after time.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we raise 

this as an amendment.  Because the Premier of the province has 

changed farm policies in such a drastic way that all of us, all of 

us are going to suffer.  Of the 80,000 jobs in the city of Regina 

alone, 50 per cent of them have to do with agriculture.  Who's 

going to suffer, Mr. Speaker, in this whole deal?  Who's going 

to suffer?  Mr. Speaker, it's the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan who are going to suffer, and seriously, seriously 

suffer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what about dealing with negotiating in good faith 

with the federal government -- negotiating in good faith with 

the federal government?  The member from Estevan said in his 

remarks earlier that the farm machinery dealers in 

Saskatchewan were having some success in marketing to 

people from Alberta, people from Manitoba.  And I'll tell you 

why, Mr. Speaker.  He talked about offloading.  Well the 

federal government made available to the people of Canada a 

tax credit in agriculture -- a 10 per cent tax credit on purchases 

of farm machinery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's the reason why there's farm machinery 

going out of the dealerships in the province of Saskatchewan.  

That's the reason.  And that's the reason, Mr. Speaker, that the 

people in the province . . . That's the only reason the people in 

the province of Saskatchewan 

have to have any benefit from the bad things that this Premier 

has done in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Where is the vision?  Where is the vision for all of the 

programs that should be happening in the province of 

Saskatchewan in relation to agriculture?  I would say, Mr. 

Speaker, I would make this observation, that the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan know and understand agriculture.  

Forty per cent of the economic activity is driven by agriculture 

in this province.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact. 

 

We need to consider this from a number of areas.  We, prior to 

1991, asked the federal government to set up a third line of 

defence.  We asked them to set it up.  And has this Premier 

along with his ministers done anything in relation to setting up 

a third line of defence with the federal government?  Have they 

negotiated?  Have they negotiated an opportunity in good faith 

with the federal government?  Have they negotiated an 

opportunity for a solution to the crisis?  No, Mr. Speaker, they 

haven't. 

 

Have they even begun to consider the offer that the former 

minister of Agriculture made to the people yesterday, and as 

late as yesterday in Hazlet: that the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, if they did what they should, they would take 

the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to deal with an opportunity for 

expansion of the GRIP program.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

what they offered as late as yesterday.  And that, Mr. Speaker, 

is still on the table. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need a strategy on the part of this government 

for dealing with agriculture on a long term, not just from day to 

day but from year to year over a five-year period, at least a 

five-year period.  Is there anyone on the other side who has a 

vision for what rural Saskatchewan should really be?  Is there 

anyone there that has a view to making the economy in the 

province of Saskatchewan roll? 

 

And I watched the Premier yesterday as he spoke on a news 

conference, and he became irritated at the fact that the federal 

government was asking for some money back.  But he became 

really, really irritated by the fact that the federal government 

was asking for that money back. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it brought to mind some of the reasons why 

we are in that position.  One of the reasons for that is because 

we're losing people.  We're losing people, Mr. Speaker, on a 

daily basis.  People are leaving for jobs.  In rural Saskatchewan 

people are just leaving because there's no job opportunities.  

Why?  Because they don't want to stay on the farm because 

there's no way that people can earn a living on the farm based 

on the economics that there are today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has cut and they're going to 

probably axe the feed grain assistance program -- it's got a new 

name now but that program's likely going to be axed in the 

budget.  They're probably going to axe the livestock cash 

advance program.  They scrambled all over the place in the 

province talking to the people of Saskatchewan, saying the 

federal government should reinstate the grain cash advance at 

no interest.  They did that; they do that on an annual basis.  But 

what do these 



28 Saskatchewan Hansard February 26, 1993 

people do?  No, we'll take that $12 million or roughly that 

amount of money that is spent for the livestock cash advance 

and we'll scrap that program. 

 

What do they do with counselling and assistance for farmers?  

We'll scrap that program too.  We'll shuffle it off into ACS 

(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) and we'll 

throw it down the pipe and we'll say: we don't want to deal 

with counselling and assistance for farmers today. 

 

They scrapped GRIP '91.  I had a gentleman from Balcarres, 

from the Indian reserve, come to me and speak to me about 

how GRIP '91 had been an asset to the Indian reserve on the 

basis of being able to go to the bank and borrow money against 

that volume of dollars that they were going to get for a return 

on their investment in farming that land.  They had a secure, 

legitimate document that would deal with giving security for 

them.  And the reason it's important for them is because they 

cannot use their land as security.  They have no security so they 

had to have some.  GRIP '91 provided that. 

 

This Premier has to come to the point at some time in this 

mandate that he has and acknowledge that agriculture must 

start to receive some attention from this government.  It was 

platitudes all the way through -- the Crow, the Western Grain 

Transportation Act, the barley.  All of those things were just 

platitudes that this government floated out because they have 

no . . . They have absolutely no vision for what the future of 

Saskatchewan should be. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what this province is into.  The 

whole of their assessment is that agriculture is gone; it isn't 

worth saving.  And that's their attitude. 

 

Mr. Speaker, talked a little bit about a new land trust.  Well 

let's call it no trust.  The people of the province of 

Saskatchewan don't have any trust in you.  And if you call it a 

land trust, Mr. Speaker, the people of the province have no 

trust.  They will treat that probably the very same way they 

treated land bank.  They didn't have any trust in you then and 

they don't have any trust now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the original motion talks about offloading, talks 

about offloading in a very specific way to do with 

transportation.  And I want to point out to the people in this 

Assembly, in an article in The Western Producer today.  

"Mulroney didn't abandon Western Farmers" -- that's the 

headline.  And Mr. Knisley goes on to say: 

 

 During the 1988 election campaign Brian Mulroney spent 

little time in Saskatchewan. 

 

Very little time.  But what did he do?  He went to Outlook, 

Rosthern, and Wolseley talking to crowds of farmers. 

 

 And while that campaign was a great free trade fight 

elsewhere, in those communities free trade took a back seat 

to cash. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farmers in the province of Saskatchewan, in rural 

Saskatchewan are strapped for cash.  Seniors are strapped for 

cash.  Everyone is strapped for cash and yet their utility rates 

go up in power, in natural gas, in 

telephones, in SGI.  All of the essential services that are 

provided to these people to maintain their homes, the rates are 

going up. 

 

It has to do with an annual 4 per cent increase.  But where does 

that 4 per cent average increase come?  It comes to those . . . 

the greatest volume of people that has the highest cost load in 

relation to this tax increase.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is what this 

government has a problem. 

 

I'm going to go on to quote again: 

 

 "When Western Canada called Brian Mulroney as prime 

minister and said agriculture is hurting and we need help, the 

government of Canada responded." 

 

That's a fact, Mr. Speaker.  And I could go through a whole list 

of items that they said we will, we will ensure that the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan, the province of Manitoba, 

and the provinces of Alberta and across Canada, that 

agriculture will benefit.  And they did come to the aid of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

In dealing with the component of the article: 

 

 In the 1988 campaign Mulroney said whenever he and 

Devine met the former premier always said: "Thanks a 

billion." 

 

And it wasn't a hundred million here and a hundred million 

there; it was a billion here and a billion there.  And that's a fact, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would hazard a guess that the Minister of Finance would 

have a whole lot less problems with the credit unions in the 

province of Saskatchewan if the people in this government 

would have rationalized their decision making and understood 

what the impact of cutting out agriculture was really going to 

do. 

 

(1230) 

 

Cutting out agriculture, Mr. Speaker, is going to absolutely 

devastate the credit unions in the province of Saskatchewan.  

Those farm policies are going to hurt every credit union in rural 

Saskatchewan.  And I know that for a fact because it's 

happening in my own city.  It's happening in Swift Current.  

We have an amalgamation process going on of probably the 

two largest rural credit unions in the province of Saskatchewan.  

And they're amalgamating.  Why, Mr. Speaker?  Because the 

income from agriculture is not sufficient to generate the income 

for those credit unions. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, it isn't large enough.  The income isn't 

large enough in rural Saskatchewan and in urban Saskatchewan 

to make the businesses profitable in relation to that 

development.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact. 

 

We had amalgamation of the Ponteix credit union with the 

western savings in Swift Current.  Now they're having a 

meeting in March now to decide whether the two credit unions 

will go together.  And, Mr. Speaker, it isn't going to take long 

and that's all going to be put together.  Why? 



February 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 29 

 Because this government hasn't taken seriously their 

responsibility of dealing with the rationalization of the credit to 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan in rural 

Saskatchewan.  They haven't done that.  And it's affected a 

large cross-section of people in this province. 

 

When Mr. Mulroney rolled into office in 1984 it is unlikely he 

expected to spend much of any time on farm issues.  Well what 

happened in '84 and '85?  1984 was the highest income ever 

recorded in Saskatchewan's history in agriculture, Mr. Speaker.  

Ever recorded. 

 

But it had one of the lowest net incomes up to that point in 

time.  The highest recorded income with one of the highest 

recorded costs in relation to that income.  And one of the major 

reasons, Mr. Speaker, was the high level of interest . . . the high 

interest rates in that period of time.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

one of the reasons why the costs were so high. 

 

1985 was the first U.S. (United States) farm Bill and it drove 

the cost of . . . or the price of grain down immediately.  

Immediately the reaction in the international market was that 

the grain prices went down a buck.  And from that point on, 

Mr. Speaker, there had to be a response by the Government of 

Canada, and there was.  There was a response by the province 

of Saskatchewan, and there was.  For the rural people in the 

province of Saskatchewan there was a response and it saved the 

credit unions.  It saved the people in small business in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact.  And it's a fact that is 

represented by the erosion of at least 2,000 people out of the 

farm sector employment side.  In 1991 and 1992, 2,000 people 

left employment in rural Saskatchewan in agriculture alone in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  And I saw statistics today that 

there are 10,000 less jobs available today than there were a 

year ago.  And since 1991, there are 34 less . . . 34,000 less 

jobs in the province of Saskatchewan today than there were in 

1991. 

 

And what has happened, it's because of the policy set down by 

the Premier of this province and, Mr. Speaker, because it 

hinges on at least 40 per cent of the gross benefit to the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan, this gross benefit has caused 

the decline in employment opportunities.  Go out into the 

market, the employment market today, and you're going to see 

that there is very, very little opportunity. 

 

My son is graduating from commerce this year at the 

University of Saskatchewan, and 29 out of the graduates got a 

call from accounting firms -- 29 out of the whole graduating 

class.  That, Mr. Speaker, is the opportunity that young people 

have in the province of Saskatchewan.  There is none. 

 

There is none, Mr. Speaker, and why?  The reason is we have 

not dealt fiscally equitably across the province in dealing with 

the people in rural Saskatchewan.  That, Mr. Speaker, is the 

reason why we are amending this motion that was presented 

here today and saying that we need this Premier to negotiate in 

good faith with the federal government. 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier in a radio show in Prince Albert said 

this: that changes we made to GRIP '91 and GRIP '92 were not 

the answer, that's for sure.  They added to the problem in some 

ways.  I think that if I had to do it all over again, I wouldn't 

have touched it.  And then in italics: I think our mistake here 

was trying to make a silk purse out of a sow's ear. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, 1992 GRIP definitely was the sow's ear.  It 

was the other one, if '91 was the first one.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, I never ever said in this province, and I spoke to 20 to 

30,000 farmers myself in the spring of 1991, and I said this 

isn't perfect but we've got to start some place.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is exactly what the Premier should have done in 

dealing with GRIP '91 versus GRIP '92.  He should have gone 

across the province and asked the people, what do you really 

want to have? 
 

He campaigned on the basis of a cost of production formula.  

And, Mr. Speaker, if the Premier today would go across the 

province and talk about the cost of production formula in 

relation to GRIP '92, he'd be laughed out of the place,  which is 

just about what happened in the Pool meeting that they had in 

Sask Place in Saskatoon. 
 

When he went to give his closing remarks, they all raised up 

their yellow sheets and said, that's enough; we want an end to 

this.  That's what happened in Saskatoon and that's what the 

farmers are going to tell you when you go travel around with 

your road show to places across this province.  That's what 

they're going to tell you. 
 

An Hon. Member: -- You never showed up in Rosetown. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from just north of 

the city here, I forget the name of seat, he says I didn't show up 

in Rosetown.  Well I sure did.  He wasn't there; I was.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, I've been at Melfort and I've been at North 

Battleford and I was in Saskatoon and I've been a whole lot of 

other places, talking to farmers.  I went out and stuck my neck 

out on GRIP '91 and the farmers said, go with it but let's 

improve it. 
 

And what did you do?  You absolutely, totally destroyed it.  

Absolutely destroyed it. 

 

The member from Last Mountain-Touchwood is the member 

that didn't go to Rosetown, and that, Mr. Speaker . . . these are 

the reasons why this province is in trouble. 

 

You can tax all you want, but some day people are going to say 

to you, enough is enough.  That's what you said.  In 1991 I 

clearly remember the then leader of the opposition standing in 

the seat just beside me and saying, I can govern this province 

on what -- what? -- four and a half billion dollars.  Now it's up 

to 5.1 and he just increased the deficit by another 500 million 

and more, and growing. 
 

He said he would never put in special warrants; it was a thing 

of the past.  And what did we have last month, Mr. Speaker?  

We had some warrants.  And what are they for, Mr. Speaker?  

Those warrants are for the kinds of things that this Premier is 

doing in relation to farm policy.  He needs to correct them.  He 

needs to deliver a kind of a policy that isn't going to destroy 

rural Saskatchewan. 



30 Saskatchewan Hansard February 26, 1993 

Whether it's in health care, whether it's in social services, 

whether it's in agriculture, whether it's in Sask Power 

Corporation, whether it's in SaskTel, or whether it's SGI, all of 

them, all of them, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of the province is 

using to twist the energy out of agriculture, turn the screws 

down on agriculture.  Because why?  Because once upon a time 

in 1982 they threw them out of government.  That's why.  It all 

comes back to that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, he's not here to serve the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan.  He's here to serve his own needs 

and his own ends.  That's what he's here for and that's what he's 

trying to do. 

 

From all of the views of the people that I receive on a daily 

basis, having been around my constituency in the past six 

months, I hear that over and over again.  People are saying 

they're tired of this Premier.  They're tired of his agriculture 

policies.  They're tired of him sticking his nose into their 

business.  Just give us an opportunity.  Leave things as they are 

for a while. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier of this province has to begin to 

instruct his ministers, his Minister of Agriculture to negotiate 

in good faith.  I don't believe it was the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose that negotiated in good faith.  I don't even 

think it's the new Minister of Agriculture who's operating in 

good faith with the federal government. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, a constituent of mine asked 

for some information on the Crop Insurance Corporation and I 

gave it to him.  And he wanted to know what the administrative 

costs in Crop Insurance had been for the last 10 years, so I dug 

the information up.  And there were some interesting things I 

discovered, Mr. Speaker, some very interesting things. And I'm 

going to raise them in Crown Corporations.  Some very 

interesting innovative bookkeeping, you might say. 

 

And a question came to my mind is, why was $36 million of 

interest put in administrative costs in Crop Insurance?  Why?  

Because, Mr. Speaker, the Premier in his farm policies is 

jerking around the federal government.  He's doing the same 

thing with the farming public of Saskatchewan. 

 

There is a formula, Mr. Speaker, that deals with crop insurance 

and a certain amount of the money that is paid by the federal 

government and the provincial government in relation to the 

interest costs on the debt in crop insurance.  And then the 

federal government pays an additional 50 per cent of the 

administration costs. 

 

So not only did they, Mr. Speaker, not only did they recover 

from the side of the interest costs from the federal government, 

they turn and put their share into the administrative costs and 

get a double consideration from the federal government and 

pay half of the $36 million yet besides. 

 

Now you want to talk about negotiating in good faith when you 

do that with the federal government?  You do that in good faith 

when you negotiate with anyone, is you rig the books?  That's 

what you're doing. 

 

The 1991 statement of crop insurance was four times as 

high for administration costs as the previous year.  Why, Mr. 

Speaker?  Why, Mr. Speaker? -- because these people had 

some innovative bookkeeping.  That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason 

why these people have a problem.  That's why they have a 

problem. 

 

And as we go about rural Saskatchewan talking about health 

care, these rural policies, people are getting very, very 

discouraged, very disappointed.  And when they come to speak 

to me in various locations they say, I can't believe what they're 

doing.  They are going to totally destroy. 

 

I stopped in an A & W and was having supper, and I heard 

behind me an older gentleman and a lady.  The gentleman said, 

would you take the tray to get rid of the dishes and the garbage, 

because I want to go talk to Harold.  And he came over and he 

talked to me.  And I didn't know what his name was; I don't 

know what business he's in.  But he said to me, this 

government is absolutely crazy in what they're doing.  They're 

absolutely foolish in their approach to how they're managing 

the economy.  They're absolutely not to be trusted in how 

they're managing the economy. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is happening over and over and over 

again in this province.  And, Mr. Speaker, I am absolutely 

certain that it's going to continue to happen until there's an 

awakening on the other side about what the real vision for the 

people of Saskatchewan should be. 

 

There is a distinct belief, Mr. Speaker, that the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan have no faith in what you can do for 

rural Saskatchewan.  They have absolutely none. 

 

(1245) 

 

Other people who have come to me and said, I made $6,000 on 

my farm to feed my family, to do all of the things that I have to 

do as a family; $6,000 is what that family makes.  And I would 

hazard a guess, Mr. Speaker, that that family is one of the 

well-off ones in that community.  Because I know that there 

were many people who did not receive any benefit from crop 

insurance or from GRIP '92 in relieving the kinds of conditions 

that existed because of the way the program was worked.  That 

is how serious a problem it is. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that's their record.  It was their record, Mr. 

Speaker, in the '70s, and it's going to be their record in the '90s. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the very fundamental reasons why I 

am not involved in the NDP Party is because of the 1970s and 

how they treated rural Saskatchewan.  And there is going to be 

a decision made in 1993, '94, and '95 about what your role in 

rural Saskatchewan is going to be and how people are going to 

treat you. 

 

And I don't understand, Mr. Speaker, in light of politics, the 

economy, good management of the economy, all of those 

reasons why these people would be doing what they're doing.  I 

don't understand it.  There's something about these people, they 

must have an inside feeling of wanting to make the people in 

this province suffer.  And I 



February 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 31 

don't know what it is, but across the province these members 

should have some sense that the people in rural Saskatchewan 

are suffering. 

 

Why don't they do something about it?  That's my question, 

Mr. Speaker.  Why don't they do something about it?  Why 

doesn't the Premier correct some of the things that he knows 

are wrong?  He knows they're wrong.  He said they're wrong.  

He said, if I had to do it over again I wouldn't have touched it. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, and if an apology to the people of the 

province is necessary, I believe that restitution is also 

necessary.  There is in my view a necessity for this Premier to 

acknowledge not only his mistake in dealing with rural 

Saskatchewan but also correcting it, restoring it back to what it 

was. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the same constituent that called me 

regarding pulling the bill out of the hat for a lottery -- who's 

going to be the lucky guy today -- he told me that it had been 

between 25 and $30,000 that he had lost in this '92 GRIP.  

That's what he had lost.  And that's what he's destroying the 

farm families with, the Premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  He's destroying them. 

 

And then the member from Humboldt read that $400 million 

had gone out of the Crop Insurance Corporation of Alberta.  

Well this is supposed to be actuarially sound, Mr. Speaker, 

over a 20-year period.  Some days you're going to pay in; some 

days you're going to pay out.  Some day rural Saskatchewan's 

going to pay in, and sometimes they're going to get a benefit. 

 

And that's the same as is going to happen with SGI.  They 

made a decision over on the other side, because of injuries to 

people, that they were going to raise the rates in SGI.  I have 

yet to see the proof of that, but that's the reason.  But that, Mr. 

Speaker, is the reason that SGI raised their rates, because 

there's injuries in car accidents and people are suing for it.  

Fine, if that's the reason, raise the rates. 

 

If there's a deficit in the Crop Insurance Corporation, raise the 

rates if it's necessary.  Farmers understand that and they're not 

against it.  But give us a time line to do this.  And what the 

program was suggested to do in the first place was that it was 

supposed to be available for these farmers over a 20-year 

period to break even.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is what the 

corporation's responsibility was.  But did they do it?  The 

Premier said, I wouldn't have touched it if I'd have known what 

it would do.  Well that is what the problem is.  And we're 

asking the people in this Assembly to acknowledge that.  We're 

asking the people of this Assembly to say that along with the 

Premier, that he made a mistake. 

 

And not only that, Mr. Speaker, I wish we could have debated a 

throne speech that would have provided an opportunity for a 

benefit to rural Saskatchewan, but there is none, there is none. 

 

There is an opportunity in rural Saskatchewan to deal with a 

little booklet that's got a few, 20 pages, that's going to tell us 

how to deal with agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan -- 

"Forging Partnerships in Agriculture." 

And there's six meetings to talk about it, Mr. Speaker, six 

meetings in the province of Saskatchewan to talk about it.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is almost disgusting. 

 

We're talking about a problem that is massive, Mr. Speaker.  

We're talking about a solution that needs some very 

fundamental assessment by rural Saskatchewan, but what are 

we getting?  We're getting a Minister of Agriculture who is not 

even likely going to attend the meetings.  In fact there are I 

think three on one single day in that agenda that he has.  That, 

Mr. Speaker, is how he's going to consult.  He's going to send 

these people around and say, oh yes, I'm going to consult but 

I'm not going to be there.  I'm going to send these other people 

out to talk to them. 

 

Why?  Because he hasn't the courage to do it himself.  He 

hasn't the courage to go out there and market his new "Forging 

Partnerships in Agriculture."  He hasn't got the courage to 

market it.  He hasn't the courage to go and step out in front of a 

group of people, and say this is what I believe the future of 

Saskatchewan should be because he knows that he's going to be 

cut down on every one of the things that he's got mentioned in 

here.  He knows that.  So what does he do? 

 

And now he will use as an excuse that he has to stay in the 

House.  Well from the throne speech agenda, he isn't going to 

be doing much in the House because he isn't going to be very 

active, not on the budget nor in the budget-making process nor 

in the legislative process.  He's going to be sitting to the side 

because he hasn't the power to generate enough action in the 

cabinet to make his points of view known, nor the arguments to 

express the feelings of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Why?  Because he hasn't gone out to ask them, 

Mr. Speaker, and when he has he hasn't listened.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, is the reason why he's got a problem. 

 

The member from Humboldt said . . . In a letter that we got 

earlier he said: it is my intention later today to present a motion 

to the Assembly under rule 42 seeking emergency debate on 

aid for Saskatchewan farmers.  Well, Mr. Speaker, we're 

talking about that.  It's a red herring as far as this throne speech 

is concerned.  It's a way to deflect from the real opportunity the 

kinds of things that we need to debate in this House to have a 

vision for the future of the province of Saskatchewan.  The 

people have a vision.  The people have a vision for 

diversification.  But does this government?  No. 

 

In question period early today the member from Elphinstone 

said that Spar Group had hired all these new people.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, they laid off a hundred less than a month ago.  They 

laid them off.  Why, Mr. Speaker?  Because the economy is 

down.  They laid them off.  They may hire them back in six 

months.  That's the kind of optimism and vision that these 

people across the way have. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you talk about "Forging Partnerships 

in Agriculture", it's time that the Minister of Agriculture was 

prepared, along with the Premier, to go out into the country and 

take some heat. 

 

Forging is generating the heat to make things happen, Mr. 



32 Saskatchewan Hansard February 26, 1993 

Speaker.  Forging in partnerships in agriculture, forging in the 

context of the word meant that you were going to heat it up and 

put it together and make it stick, and do it together and make it 

go. 
 

But what are you doing?  You're ripping agriculture apart from 

one end of this province to the other.  You're ripping apart rural 

Saskatchewan from one end of this province to the other.  

You're pitting small communities against small communities in 

health care.  You're pitting small communities against each 

other in trying to look for opportunities for economic 

diversification.  And there is none, Mr. Speaker.  There is none, 

Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it talks here about a number of issues dealing with 

farm debt.  We should talk about farm debt.  Why wasn't it 

addressed in the throne speech?  Why wasn't it addressed in the 

throne speech? 
 

We want to talk about provincial debt.  Sure let's talk about it 

in the context of the throne speech.  I don't have a problem with 

that.  But let's deal with it. 
 

Let's talk about the process of the national evolution in 

agriculture, dealing with the Crow or dealing with the 

Canadian Wheat Board.  Let's talk about it.  I have no problem 

doing that. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I stand on the side of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan and rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I'd just like to ask the member from Quill Lakes 

where he stands on these issues.  Because he should be going 

out to rural Saskatchewan along with the Minister of 

Agriculture and dealing with the problems in rural 

Saskatchewan.  Then he would start to understand it . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I will, Mr. Speaker.  I will get very 

specific later on in my discussion, not on this issue, but on the 

throne speech. 
 

Mr. Speaker, he's talking about farm size in this.  And he's 

going to have six meetings in four days and that, Mr. Speaker, 

is exactly what he's going to have.  He's going to have it all in 

the North.  He's going to have it all where he thinks he's going 

to be comfortable.  He's probably going to make it in buildings 

too small to get any people into. 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, that's the reason why we raise this as an 

issue, that we will demand from this government an assessment 

of rural Saskatchewan every way you turn it -- in health care, 

social services, in farm debt, farm size, GRIP, whatever.  We 

will deal with it in the livestock sector, and, Mr. Speaker, the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan want us to do that.  

They want us to come forward in a way that is going to be right 

for the people of Saskatchewan.  That's the reason why we are 

standing up and we are asking that the Premier correct his 

mistake.  He admitted it. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, along with admitting it comes the 

responsibility of re-establishing what he wants to do.  And he 

said it in the throne speech -- nothing.  He said absolutely 

nothing.  He talked about things that he did the last time.  He 

talked about things that he may change as far as restricting 

ownership as it relates to perhaps foreign ownership.  But did 

he talk about the real issues of cash out in rural Saskatchewan?  

No, he did not. 

He did not talk about it in any way, shape, or form.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, your motion talks about $80 million being taken out 

of the WGTA (Western Grain Transportation Act).  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that government opposite has taken way more than 

$80 million out of the pockets of farmers.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

purple gas in the province of Saskatchewan and its relation to 

agriculture, probably took more than $20 million out; the cash 

advance for livestock, another $12 million; the feed grain 

assistance program, another 7 or $8 million.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

diversification in many shapes and forms has been cut to the 

quick in rural Saskatchewan.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is more 

than the $80 million that you are complaining about in the 

WGTA. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if they would have gotten off and started 

negotiating in good faith with the federal government on the 

WGTA, they would have come to some conclusion.  And that's 

why we raise it in this fashion, Mr. Speaker, negotiating in 

good faith with the federal government, regardless of their 

stripe.  We did it in '82 to '84 with a Liberal government.  And 

every time you folks turn around, all you do is kick them.  Do 

you think they're going to smile at you? 

 

And the people of the province of Saskatchewan are beginning 

to believe, they're beginning to believe, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Provincial Secretary should maybe give up his post as a cabinet 

minister while he's recovering.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a part 

of what he should be doing in light of saving the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan some money. 

 

The Speaker: -- It now being 1 o'clock, this House stands 

adjourned until 2 p.m. on Monday. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 

 


