


















































Hansard: May 17, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1731 

 May 17, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 

introduce to you and to members of the Assembly a group from 

China who are seated in your gallery.  I just wonder, as I 

introduce our guests, if they would stand up and be recognized. 

 

First I'd like to introduce Madam Si.  Madam Si represents an 

agency in China that is responsible for all of the purchase of 

cattle, grass seeds, and I believe poultry that enter into China.  

So I want to welcome you here today, Madam Si. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Along with Madam Si, 

accompanying, Ms. Qiu -- if you would stand and be 

recognized -- Mr. Liu and Mr. Xue.  Now Mr. Xue is the 

representative from Inner Mongolia.  And really that is the 

purpose of the trip, is to look at cattle from western Canada, 

particularly from Saskatchewan, which would be suitable for 

that area of China.  As I understand, the weather very much 

parallels what we have in Saskatchewan, and for that reason 

they have a special interest in Saskatchewan. 

 

That point is brought home with the introduction of Sid Palmer 

who is one of our main cattle breeders and dealers in 

Saskatchewan.  And along with Mr. Sid Palmer, my friend 

Darren Rose who is also showing some of our hog facilities.  

Darren is with WECAN up in the Humboldt area.  And they do 

a lot of exporting of technology on hog production. 

 

Also with the group, Tim Marshall, one of our staff from over 

in the department.  And I want you to welcome them all here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too want to extend 

on behalf of the official opposition a welcome to the guests that 

are here today from China, also for Mr. Palmer.  And I've been 

up there selling Hereford cattle, and I appreciate very much the 

responsibility the people take in realizing the value of livestock 

industry in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I also want to indicate to Mr. Xue that my nephew teaches 

English at Hohut in I think it's Inner Mongolia.  And he teaches 

English and range management and he's a doctor of veterinary 

medicine, and he is teaching school there at the university.  

And so if Mr. Palmer needs somebody over in Inner Mongolia 

to be a translator there or a person to become involved, I'll be 

glad to provide you the name of that individual and you can 

maybe start negotiating some deals there. 

 

I'd like to have the Assembly welcome these people 

here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Sask Water Contract 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Labour.  Mr. Minister, is it the 

policy of your government to restrict non-union companies 

from being able to bid on certain government contracts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, has your 

government ever acted to limit competition in government 

tendering by inserting a non-union-only contract in project 

agreements? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If the member is leading up to the 

contract by the Saskatchewan Water Corporation for the 

pipeline development, which I take it to be what you're leading 

up to, let me assist you in getting to the point of your question . 

. . welcome.  I may say that the matter is under consideration as 

is the whole question of what role unions ought to play in 

union contracting. So the matter is still under consideration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

that's exactly what we're getting at: your union-only contracting 

program in your government.  Six weeks ago Sask Water put 

out a tender for construction of a pipeline between Codette and 

Melfort.  After the low bid came in from a non-union company, 

your government cancelled the first tender, drafted a project 

agreement with a union-only clause, and held a second tender.  

As a result, the contract was awarded to a company whose bid 

was $1 million higher than the original winning bid. 

 

Mr. Minister, how do you justify taking this contract away 

from a non-union company who had won it fairly and then 

turning around and giving it to a union company at an 

additional cost of $1 million to the Saskatchewan taxpayers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Again, Mr. Speaker, I want to be 

circumspect here; this matter is still under consideration.  No 

tenders have been awarded.  The matter is under consideration.  

I'm not sure we'd assist the officials of Sask Water in 

discharging their duties here by pronouncing ourselves in 

favour of one contract or the other.  Suffice it to say the matter 

is still under consideration, and when the matter has been 

resolved, government policy will be announced. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1732 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, what we 

have here is the NDP's (New Democratic Party) version of 

Indecent Proposal -- the minister paying $1 million to get in 

bed with the unions. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, this really is indecent because it's not the 

minister's money that he's actually playing with here; it's the 

taxpayers' money -- money that could be used to keep hospitals 

open or schools open.  But to think about it, Mr. Minister -- 

you're wasting taxpayers' money on this project if you're going 

to go ahead with this union-only clause. 

 

Mr. Minister, this is indefensible.  We can't afford this type of 

government favouritism.  Mr. Minister, will you end this unfair 

tendering practice and save the taxpayers some money by 

promising to award contracts to the lowest qualified bidder, 

union or non-union?  Will you make that commitment to the 

legislature today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I will simply make the commitment 

that . . . I say in the beginning to the member that no contract 

has been awarded.  The preface to the member's question, 

which you were reading from a pre-prepared question, suggests 

that the contract had been awarded.  Just in case you're troubled 

by the facts and want to base a question on the facts, no 

contract has been awarded. 

 

At a time when government policy has been settled and 

contracts are awarded, government policy will be announced. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Minister, the vice-president of Sask Water, Mary Anne 

Davidson, admitted that the second tender call came at the 

request of the unions.  Isn't that interesting, Mr. Minister? 

 

We have business groups in this province who are calling for 

nothing other than a meeting with the Premier to discuss job 

opportunities in this province and you won't even give them the 

time of day.  We have people all over this province calling for 

you to slow down your hospital closures; in fact a thousand of 

them were out on the steps of the legislature recently and you 

totally ignored them.  We have farmers who want, in this 

province, you to honour contracts with them and your ignore 

them as well. 

 

We have all these people who you totally ignore but yet one 

call to Sask Water from union bosses and you take away a 

contract from a non-union company and inject a union-only 

contract rule, and cost the Saskatchewan taxpayer . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  I want the member to put his question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I ask you once again, will you end 

your union-only contract-tendering process 

and open tenders up to the lowest bidder, qualified bidder? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I know the members opposite 

enjoy and think it good politics to set one segment of society 

against another and to play to the regrettable anti-union 

sentiment which exists in part of our society.  Let me just say 

though again, in case the member wishes to trifle himself with 

the facts, Sask Water did not do anything at the behest of the 

unions.  Sask Water's policy is decided by management in 

conjunction with the board. 

 

Again I say to . . . The vice-president of Sask Water said no 

such thing and very well the members opposite know that.  

Sask Water's policy will be announced in due course when it is 

settled. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, the Sask Water 

president did indeed say that it was at the request of the unions 

that that second tender call be made. 

 

Mr. Minister, once again we have seen your government's 

misplaced spending priorities.  On Friday the Minister of 

Justice acted to take away democratic representation from rural 

residents by eliminating eight rural constituencies.  And the 

minister said it would save $1 million -- about $1 million is 

what he said -- the same amount you just wasted on this 

tendering call, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, why do you feel it's appropriate to take $1 

million away from a non-union company in this province and 

then not allow them to proceed with that contract in this 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't know what one does with a 

series of questions which are based upon a set of false facts.  

I've told the member several times, no contract has been 

awarded.  The member's question is based on the assumption 

that it was.  I say to the member opposite . . . all I can say to the 

member opposite is, no contract has been awarded.  The matter 

is still under consideration, and at such time as contracts are 

awarded, we'll be pleased to answer any questions the members 

opposite may have. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, could you tell the Assembly what 

the reason then was for the second tender call?  What was the 

reason? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I say to the member opposite that the 

facts upon which you're proceeding are erroneous.  I do not 

think it's particularly useful to get into a detailed discussion of 

the tenders and the 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1733 

awarding process until such time as it's finished.  When it is 

finished we will be happy to answer your questions.  Until 

then, there's a limited amount which we can and should say. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the 

vice-president of Sask Water says, and I quote from the Star-

Phoenix: 

 

 Davidson admitted the second call came at the request of the 

unions, but said it "was premature" to say the difference in 

bids was because of contractors using union salaries. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you confirm for the legislature here today 

that the difference in the cost between the non-union and union 

contracts was in the neighbourhood of $1 million? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Again the member seems oblivious to 

the facts.  The facts are there has been no contract awarded.  It 

is not unusual for tenders to come in at a higher figure than 

what is anticipated.  When that happens, in this case as in 

previous cases, the matter is reviewed to determine what steps 

should be taken.  That's what's happening now. 

 

At a time when a decision is made, we'll be happy to answer 

your questions.  We cannot answer questions on an assumed 

basis of fact. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the fact 

is the second tender call did go out which clearly means in 

everybody's minds in this province that you are establishing a 

union-only contracting process in this province which flies in 

the face of the promise the Premier made at the SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) convention 

earlier this year. 

 

When questioned at that convention, the mayor of Arborfield 

asked him if he had that type of policy within his government, 

and the Premier said, and I quote: I say to you that our position 

is as follows.  We do not have a union-only proposition.  And 

the Justice minister backed him up by saying, that is correct, 

Premier; there is no union contracting policy in existence. 

 

Mr. Premier, and Mr. Minister, you and your minister have not 

told the truth here today.  Why did you mislead the mayor of 

Arborfield and all delegates at the SUMA convention into 

thinking you had a fair and non-discriminatory tendering 

practice when you know full well your government restricts 

certain contracts to union-only participants. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- About three or four days ago 

my estimates were before this Assembly.  We had what I 

thought was a useful discussion on the question of union or 

non-union contracting.  I felt it was a useful discussion.  And 

the government's policy was given to members of the 

Assembly.  I doubt very much that Mr. Speaker is going to give 

me sufficient time to rehash that conversation.  Suffice it to say 

what I said at the time is the matter is under consideration.  We 

are still reviewing the matter and we will be happy to discuss 

the matter with you when some decisions are made.  We cannot 

however answer a question on the basis of assumed facts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, could you confirm for the 

legislature what the cost of that second tender call was? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I suppose we can continue this.  I can 

only say to the member opposite, no contracts have been let, to 

my knowledge, with respect to this matter. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question for the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, we've already seen how your 

government policies have cost Saskatchewan thousands of jobs 

since you took office.  Now we have the unbelievable situation 

where out-of-province union workers will get preferential 

treatment over Saskatchewan non-union workers, due directly 

to your government's tendering process. 

 

Mr. Premier, in your democratic reform document you said: if 

quality, service, and price are equal, preference must be given 

to products and services available in Saskatchewan.  In spite of 

that commitment, Mr. Premier, we now see the incredible 

situation where preferential treatment is being extended to 

out-of-province workers even though they cost more. 

 

Mr. Premier, your government's taxation policies have already 

created enough jobs in Alberta.  Will you end this unfair 

tendering practice and start creating jobs for Saskatchewan 

people for a change? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It would be more useful, Mr. 

Speaker, if the member opposite would either take more care in 

writing your questions before the Assembly resumes its 

afternoon sitting, or if you were able to show some flexibility 

in the questions you asked. 

 

I have said to the members opposite that the tenders were 

received; none have been accepted.  The matter is under 

consideration and we cannot discuss the details of individual 

tenders or where the negotiations are at.  That's not appropriate 

and the member knows that full well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 



1734 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

there has been two tender calls.  One came in a million dollars 

lower than the other one.  Which one are you going to take?  

The people of Saskatchewan are wondering that.  Do you have 

a union-only contracting program in this province or do you 

not have that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- As was discussed in my estimates a 

few days ago at some length, the matter is under consideration.  

I stated at that time what the goals of the government are with 

respect to contracting, and I answered fully all the questions 

which the member from Maple Creek had.  I do not believe . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We didn't know about this then. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I can't help it -- what the 

member from Kindersley may know.  The matter was fully 

discussed in the estimates.  If the member is unaware of what 

was said in estimates, I cannot help that.  But the government's 

contracting policy with respect to unions or non-unions was 

fully discussed in estimates. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

tomorrow another Sask Water tender will opened for the 

second time.  This one is for a pipeline from Melfort to 

Weldon.  Again the second bid was called for because your 

government contract went to a non-union shop and your 

government didn't like that.  And again this will mean an 

additional cost to taxpayers of this province. 

 

It seems that there's only one fair thing to do in both of these 

instances, Mr. Minister.  Will you cancel the second tender call 

in both of these instances and will you order your minister . . . 

or will you extend the opportunity for your department, Mr. 

Minister, to award the contracts to the lowest bidders, thereby 

restoring the integrity of the process and saving the taxpayer 

over $1 million.  Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I say to members opposite again for 

the umpteenth time:  no contract has been awarded.  When a 

tender is accepted, then the questions which you have will be 

fully answered.  At such time as they are considering the 

tenders, it is not appropriate to get into a detailed discussion of 

what the individual tenders may have contained. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Firing and Re-hiring of Government Official 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

for the Premier.  Mr. Premier, we had the unusual circumstance 

last week of the minister for liquor and gambling answering for 

employees in your office.  While he tried hard, Mr. Premier, he 

was not able to answer the questions that you refused. 

This House was then insulted once again to find that while you 

the Premier were unwilling to answer, here was your press 

secretary, John Millar, providing answers to the media.  If John 

Miller wants to answer the questions, perhaps he should be 

sitting in your chair. 

 

I would now ask you to inform the Assembly of the salary that 

you are paying to Mr. Ian Laidlaw working out of the Premier's 

office. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

answer to the question I took notice of on behalf of the Premier 

last week.  I want . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does it pertain to the same 

question that is now being asked? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes. 

 

The Speaker: -- All right, pertaining to the same question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer to the 

member's question is simply this, that Mr. Laidlaw is not 

employed by the Premier's office.  He's employed as executive 

director of Information Technology Management, which is a 

newly created position.  And he was appointed to this position 

after a successful . . . being successful in an open competition.  

I say, Mr. Speaker, he is not employed by Executive Council.  

As I have indicated before, it is the Department of Finance that 

pays Mr. Laidlaw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

when was Ian Laidlaw appointed to this position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, he was with, as we 

indicated prior, with Property Management Corporation.  And 

with the reorganization and the restructuring at SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation), he was 

terminated.  He was, as I understand, unemployed for a period 

of 15 months at which time he applied in this open 

competition.  He was the successful applicant, and as such, he 

was hired. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

thought I asked a fairly simple question.  When was he hired? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I am not sure of the 

date that he was hired but I can suggest to you that it was some 

15 months after the reorganization within SPMC.  So I would 

assume that would make it end of April, sometime in that area. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It seems very 

strange that the minister would have all the answers as to the 

person's work history and yet not 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1735 

know when he was hired.  Perhaps he would know how much 

money Mr. Laidlaw is being paid at his present position. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, he is being employed 

at a salary of $6,436 a month. 

 

Boundaries Legislation 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, on Friday your Minister of Justice 

tabled a new boundary Act for the province of Saskatchewan 

and says that by this Act you are going to save the taxpayers 

approximately a million dollars.  Well we've seen this morning, 

Mr. Premier, this afternoon, that that million dollars got spent 

pretty fast on some of your friends on the water pipeline to 

Melfort. 

 

My question is though, sir, how you can justify maintaining 

two seats in a part of Saskatchewan where your Minister of 

Justice says that we're going back to the philosophy of one 

person, one vote, when obviously large rural areas of this 

province are going to be amalgamated into several large seats.  

I wonder, Mr. Premier, how you can justify this fact, given the 

pronouncements made by your Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

respond to the hon. member's question by indicating when it 

comes to northern Saskatchewan obviously previous 

governments, including their own, recognized the difficulty of 

representing those areas of the province.  And it's very clear 

that this is not new status for northern Saskatchewan but 

something that has been established over the years. 

 

When it comes to the new boundaries Bill that has been 

introduced, obviously when asking government in general to 

downsize and the public demanding government to downsize, 

clearly the elected members have to do their part.  That's what 

this is all about -- attempting to do our part to save in the 

administration of government. 

 

And quite clearly, when I go out and talk to chambers of 

commerce around the province and when people are out talking 

to working people, one of the comments and ideas that comes 

up over and over again is the question of whether or not it takes 

66 members to represent the province of Saskatchewan with 

around a million people, and clearly we think the number that 

we have put in the legislation is about what the public would 

like it to be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, most taxpayers in the province of 

Saskatchewan say that we need less government; there's no 

argument from anyone on that fact. 

 

The fact is though that your Minister of Justice said that not the 

commission but the government Bill stipulates that there will 

be two seats in northern Saskatchewan 

even though he is moving the variance, a variance that has been 

larger than 5 per cent all through our history because it was 

there to recognize communities of interest, natural boundaries, 

trading areas. 

 

He is saying that no longer is applicable any more, I'm bringing 

in a Bill that moves the variance down to 5 per cent, that all of 

those reasons in our history that we had variations anywhere 

from 10 to 25 per cent no longer are applicable, but there will 

be two seats in northern Saskatchewan even though the rest of 

the taxpayers in the province, particularly the rural areas, will 

have less access to elected representation. 

 

Can you tell me, Mr. Premier, why the commission then didn't 

have the opportunity to set the number of ridings and the 

variation?  Would you tell me that, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it seems strange in 

passing that the members would take this kind of an approach 

to an area of the province where a good number of the 

communities don't have any road links.  I mean they 

communicate and move back and forth either by air, in some 

cases by water.  It seems very strange that they would take this 

kind of an approach when in fact, under their own Boundaries 

Commission, this was clearly recognized.  And I find it hard to 

believe on which day they changed their mind as it would 

relate to northern Saskatchewan. 

 

As it comes to the number of people in the southern 

constituencies, a variance of 5 per cent on 10,000 per 

constituency, allows for about a thousand vote variance, a 

thousand voters variance -- 500 more, 500 less; that's a 

thousand people. 

 

I'm sure that allowing for a thousand vote variance gives the 

designers of the boundaries, the independent boundary 

commission, plenty of leeway in allowing for natural 

boundaries and those kinds of things that should be taken into 

consideration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier again.  Mr. Premier, the problem is, it's the reasons 

given by the Minister of Justice for bringing in this particular 

piece of legislation and taking out of the hands of this 

independent commission that supposedly is going to be in 

place, how to design an electoral map of Saskatchewan when 

there are still special considerations. 

 

The Minister of Justice says that we don't need that any more, 

that we are doing this exercise because we need to save money.  

What we've seen today where the saving of a million dollars 

doesn't matter anything to your government, so that argument's 

out the window, because you can spend a million bucks on 

your friends with the snap of a finger. 

 

Now the question is, Mr. Premier, the Minister of Justice says 

we're getting back to one person, one vote, in this province, and 

that's why we're down to 5 per cent variation.  If that is the 

principle, Mr. Premier, 



1736 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

why then are you saying that certain areas of the province 

deserve electoral representation based on things other than a 

larger variance? 

 

Mr. Premier, why not put in the hands of the commission the 

ability to set those boundaries all over the province of 

Saskatchewan and do it in a fair manner?  Mr. Premier, why 

won't you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 

to the Assembly and to the hon. member opposite that the kind 

of argument that he's making now flies in the face of what they 

were doing in their boundary commission and in their 

legislation that they brought in before the last election, where 

they clearly allowed for variances in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

But I think what is being condemned about the previous 

government in their arrangement was not the discrepancy in 

northern Saskatchewan and not even the discrepancy between 

urban and rural, but the discrepancy between rural and rural 

seats -- for example, the Morse constituency at 7,000 and the 

Humboldt constituency at 11,000.  Those kind of variances 

should not be allowed.  Or the variance in Regina between 

Elphinstone at 11,000 and Regina South at 8,000.  These kind 

of variances are not acceptable. 

 

And for you to stand here today and be critical about a 5 per 

cent variance in Saskatchewan except for the two northern 

seats, I tell you, is hypocrisy at its height. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 82 -- An Act to amend The Change of Name Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that an Act to 

amend The Change of Name Act be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 83 -- An Act respecting Registered Psychiatric 

Nurses 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 

respecting Registered Psychiatric Nurses be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 84 -- An Act to amend The Litter Control Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend The Litter Control Act be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I wish to address a 

point of order raised on Friday.  On Friday, the member for 

Moosomin raised a point of order before orders of the day, 

relating to responses by the Minister of Health during question 

period. 

 

The minister was asked two questions at once, and when time 

ran short during the first answer, the minister attempted to 

answer the second question the next time she was recognized. 

 

First of all, when answering questions, ministers ought to 

gauge the length of their answers to ensure they can answer all 

parts of the question they wish to answer in the acceptable time 

frame allowed for answers. 

 

Secondly, it is not appropriate for a minister, when recognized 

on a later question, to finish an answer to a previous question.  

Members asking questions must also keep in mind a couple of 

points relating to this point of order. 

 

One is that members should not ask more than one question at 

a time.  If they do, then they should be prepared to receive 

longer answers.  Two, members should not include long 

preambles unless they are prepared to receive long answers in 

which their main question may be evaded. 

 

I ask members to observe these points to improve the operation 

of question period. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Municipal Government -- why is 

she on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- By leave to make an important 

announcement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Norwegian Independence Day 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to 

bring attention on the members of the Legislative Assembly, 

and the people of Saskatchewan, that May 17 is an important 

event in the lives of many of our citizens. 

 

Every May 17 Norwegians and Norwegian descendants 

celebrate the signing of the Norwegian Constitution of 1814.  

In the turmoil at the close of the Napoleonic Wars, this small 

land of farmers declared their independence from the 

domination of Denmark and set up a new country. 

 

It was interesting to note that the Norwegian population in 

1814 was about 900,000, of which only 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1737 

10 per cent lived in towns.  The largest town was Bergen, with 

18,000 people, whereas Christiania, now Oslo, has only 10,000 

people. 

 

The majority of people in Norway were farmers.  Most of them 

owned land.  Many of the early settlers of Saskatchewan were 

Norwegian descendants who had lived for a number of decades 

in Minnesota, Wisconsin, Iowa, North Dakota, and South 

Dakota, before bringing their pioneering skills to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Many of these Saskatchewan residents of Norway ancestry 

have retained their strong, independent, democratic ideals of 

their Norwegian ancestors who signed their Norwegian 

Constitution at Eldsvoll, just north of Oslo, on May 17, 1814. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a descendant of a Norwegian immigrant and as 

Minister of Culture, I wish to congratulate all Norwegians who 

celebrate Norwegian Independence Day today, especially those 

people in my communities at Naicam and Birch Hills.  This is 

to them a very important and special day. 

 

Saskatchewan's cultural diversity has contributed to the unique 

and colourful fabric of our society, and Norwegians have 

enriched Saskatchewan lives in many ways.  They are an 

industrious, gregarious, and creative people who have helped 

build all of our communities.  Also, in our history they have 

had two major influences in world affairs.  About 900 years 

ago, Leif Eriksson set sail and landed somewhere on the North 

American continent.  This of course has produced one of the 

greatest industrial powers in the world known as North 

America. 

 

But more recently, Mr. Speaker, in 1983 the UN (United 

Nations) Secretary General appointed Gro Harlem Brundtland 

as chair of the Commission on Environment and Development.  

In 1987 the commission reported Our Common Future.  This 

led to the strategy of a sustainable development and provided 

the basis on which the real summit in 1991 was organized. 

 

I would like the Assembly today to recognize from the 

Saskatchewan Norwegian Council, Mr. John Nilson, who is in 

the west gallery facing us.  And I would like the members of 

the Assembly to welcome him and to wish all Norwegians in 

Saskatchewan the very best of days. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 80 -- An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act and to 

make certain Consequential Amendments resulting from 

the enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to 

move second reading of a Bill, An Act to amend The Tobacco 

Tax Act.  And this Bill provides legislative authority for the 

federal government to collect the tobacco tax at international 

border crossings in Saskatchewan. 

 

This agreement will be entered into between the Government 

of Saskatchewan, the Government of Canada, which will 

provide the details of the collection mechanism.  It is 

anticipated that the federal government will begin collecting 

the tax on July 1, 1993. 

 

Essentially, Mr. Speaker, Revenue Canada customs officers 

will collect the provincial tax for Saskatchewan on tobacco 

products that are brought into the province by residents 

returning from the United States.  This will make the price of 

cigarettes imported from the U.S. (United States) about the 

same as if they had been purchased here in Saskatchewan.  In 

this way, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan retailers of tobacco 

products will no longer be at a competitive disadvantage with 

retailers in the U.S. where the tax on tobacco is much lower. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rules to determine when the provincial tax on 

tobacco imports is payable at the border will be the same as it 

is with GST (goods and services tax) rules.  This means that if 

a person is required to pay the GST on tobacco imports, then he 

or she must also pay the provincial tobacco tax which is 

currently about $16 on a carton of 200 cigarettes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a consumer will still be able to bring back one 

carton of 200 cigarettes, 50 cigars, and 40 grams of . . . or 400 

grams of cut tobacco, tax free for personal consumption.  

However the person must be outside of Canada for at least 48 

hours in order to qualify for his or her personal exemption. 

 

A consequential amendment is also being made to The 

Revenue and Financial Services Act to ensure that an importing 

consumer of tobacco products is subject to the same 

enforcement provisions as individuals who purchase tobacco in 

Saskatchewan.  For example, if a person brings tobacco into 

the province from the United States without declaring 

importation, Revenue Canada may seize the tobacco and hold it 

until both the federal and provincial taxes are paid. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to tobacco, Saskatchewan will also be 

entering into an agreement for the collection of provincial 

alcohol levies at the international border.  It is anticipated that 

this too will begin on July 1, 1993.  The Government of 

Saskatchewan will be required to reimburse the federal 

government for the start-up and ongoing costs of collecting our 

tobacco tax and alcohol levies.  This is consistent with the 

arrangement the federal government has with other provinces 

that have entered into similar agreements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by requiring the Saskatchewan tax to be paid at 

the border, we will be ensuring that those Saskatchewan 

businesses that sell tobacco products, particularly those 

businesses located close to the 



1738 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

international border, will not be at a competitive disadvantage 

with their United States counterparts because of the tax 

difference. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to 

amend The Tobacco Tax Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I've 

listened carefully to the comments by the minister regarding 

the reasoning for the implementation of this piece of 

legislation.  And one has to wonder how many more promises 

that the government is going to break before this term is out. 

 

We all remember the comments made by the Premier -- and I'm 

certain most of the NDP candidates, if not all the members that 

are presently sitting here -- who suggested that there would 

never be an expanded, harmonized sales tax.  In fact they were 

going to eliminate the sales tax and indeed the harmonized 

portion.  And that as we see today the government is now 

quietly and very subtly moving in to further harmonization of 

the sales tax with the goods and services tax, something that 

the former government had spoken about and indeed had gone 

to the electorate with back in 1991.  And the member from 

Regina North West knows it very well.  And, Mr. Speaker, I 

find it interesting that the member from Regina North West 

would be disputing it when he's using this legislature as a 

means to lobby his constituents for a federal run in the 

upcoming federal election. 

 

But while the Minister of Economic Development talks about 

here about harmonizing the tax, when he spoke about not 

increasing taxes upon the people of Saskatchewan, it's 

interesting to sense that the Minister of Economic 

Development is standing here now and suggesting well we'll do 

a tobacco tax and then we're going to include it on alcohol 

products in the near future. 

 

Don't get me wrong, Mr. Speaker, whether it's tobacco or 

whether it's alcohol -- two products that I don't partake of -- it 

really is not a problem with me, but at the same time, Mr. 

Speaker, I think to say one thing and then to turn around and do 

the other, one has to wonder how far before we have a totally 

harmonized tax.  When in the end, Mr. Speaker, the fact is the 

harmonized tax in the province of Saskatchewan would be 

more economical, it would be easier to administer, it would be 

a lot simpler for the consumer. 

 

I mean instead of having an increase from 7 to 9 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker, we could have stayed with the 7, maybe even had 6 

and still had a greater resource moving into the province of 

Saskatchewan as far as revenue that was coming into the hands 

of the Minister of Finance.  And the minister knows that very 

well. 

 

So even though we don't have a lot of problems with the Bill 

and the harmonization, we just have to bring 

forward the fact that it's interesting to see a government today, 

when at one time talking of no more harmonization, just adding 

a little bit at a time to the point that before the end of the day, 

we're going to see a totally harmonized tax in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I think there are a few other areas we 

must take a little bit of time to address and look at and 

therefore I move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1445) 

 

Bill No. 81 -- An Act to amend The Alcohol Control Act and 

to make certain consequential amendments to certain Acts 

as a result of the enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm 

pleased to rise today to move second reading of The Alcohol 

Control Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

This Act will merge the operations of the Saskatchewan Liquor 

Board, Saskatchewan Liquor Licensing Commission, and the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Commission.  It will streamline 

procedures for interest groups who may be involved in both 

gaming and liquor enterprises, as well as streamlining 

government operations and saving the taxpayers of the 

province a considerable sum of money. 

 

The amalgamation of these entities was announced by the 

Premier in March as part of a government reorganization.  It is 

part of a package of proposals which is expected to save $5 

million annually. 

 

Reorganization of government is not taken lightly.  This 

reorganization was based on the importance of providing 

important core services and programs to the people of 

Saskatchewan while also recognizing the fiscal and budget 

restraints which face this province. 

 

Reorganization and streamlining is part of the process of 

rebuilding Saskatchewan which began in November of 1991.  

We have made significant gains already, with overall 

government spending cut by more than 3 per cent, salaries for 

cabinet ministers cut by 5 per cent, salaries for MLAs (Member 

of the Legislative Assembly) being frozen, and discretionary 

spending cut back. 

 

In our budget this year, we were able to streamline even 

further, and our four-year plan for reaching a balanced budget 

will ensure that we will continue on the right track. 

 

This Bill allows the sensible move of streamlining the 

procedures and regulations for gaming and liquor enterprises in 

the province.  Through its measures we will be able to make it 

easier for a reputable business to operate both liquor and 

gaming operations in the province such as the type of 

operations proposed in our VLT (video lottery terminal) 

program. 

 

Regulations of gaming and liquor enterprises will also 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1739 

be made easier through the new Liquor and Gaming Authority.  

There will be one board which will have a wider view of the 

issues and be able to better meet the needs of businesses in this 

province and the people of this province.  The structures of the 

operation of liquor and gaming are very similar, and 

streamlining them can occur with little difficulty. 

 

In addition to these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I believe 

amalgamation of the Gaming Commission and the Liquor 

Board and the Liquor Licensing Commission will make sense 

in decision making. 

 

The Liquor Board is one of the oldest established boards in the 

province with a long history in meeting the needs of the public.  

By adding this experience to the new challenge facing the less 

mature Gaming Commission, I believe we will have a stronger, 

more consistent and stable process for licensing and regulation 

of liquor and gaming in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hereby move second reading of An Act to 

amend The Alcohol Control Act and to make certain 

consequential amendments to certain Acts as a result of the 

enactment of this Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as I was 

listening to the member's comments . . . minister's comments, I 

certainly don't have a problem, I don't think my colleagues 

would have a problem with the fact that the minister is talking 

of forming one board to address a number of issues that are 

being brought before this Bill. 

 

But I find it interesting that the government of today is talking 

about it expanding gambling in this province of Saskatchewan 

when their counterparts in Manitoba are asking the Manitoba 

government to cease and to put a hold on and slow down the 

process, in fact if not discontinue it.  So it's interesting to have 

the government on one hand saying let's expand while the same 

party that represents them happens to be in opposition in 

another part of this country is saying, whoa let's hold onto the 

process.  And I think there are a number of hurdles and 

problems that we need to take a look at. 

 

I also find it interesting that when the government talks about 

the openness and being more accountable, and yet today in 

question period when we were trying to get some answers from 

the minister responsible for Labour we couldn't seem to get a 

straight answer regarding contracts and letting of contracts. 

 

And the minister talked about having to be more accountable 

and that's why they retendered the contract with Sask Water, 

and yet the retendering, the paper indicates there is a significant 

increase in the costs that the taxpayers are going to face.  And 

the minister in his Bill is just telling us there is going to be a 

saving.  So no wonder we need to . . . all the ministers on the 

other parts . . . benches here in Saskatchewan are looking at 

trying to find a few savings here because certain other 

ministers are eating it up.  And I can have 

some sympathy for the minister responsible here. 

 

But I think there are a few areas, Mr. Speaker, that we should 

take a little broader look at the Bill, and therefore I move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 72 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 72 -- An Act 

to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 

Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, the questions we really have to raise 

regarding The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 

Amendment Act, we feel we can raise these in committee; 

therefore we're prepared to let this move to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 73 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 73 -- An 

Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, as well as with the previous Bill, 

this Bill, The Crop Insurance Amendment Act, Bill No. 73, the 

number of questions that we have can certainly be dealt with 

expeditiously in committee.  And so we are prepared to move it 

to committee as well. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 75 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Anguish that Bill No. 75 -- An Act to 

amend The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act be 

now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this 

Bill was also a Bill that we feel needs a little bit of discussion 

on, but we feel that we could handle it in Committee of the 

Whole.  So on that, Mr. Speaker, we are prepared to allow it to 

go to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 76 



1740 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Anguish that Bill No. 76 -- An Act to 

amend The Oil and Gas Conservation Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this 

Bill also is a Bill that we'll, I think, handle quite easily in 

Committee of the Whole.  So at this time, Mr. Speaker, we're 

prepared to let this go to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 39 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mrs. Teichrob that Bill No. 39 -- An Act to 

amend The Education Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to discuss 

the implications of this Bill for a few minutes for the 

government's consideration before they decide to use the heavy 

hand of their majority to bring upon Saskatchewan taxpayers 

the results of this particular Bill. 

 

What we see here, Mr. Speaker, is an Act that attempts to bring 

fairness to a dominion problem, the problem of the nation, to 

try to make our nation into a truly bilingual and friendly place 

for all people within the two major languages that have been 

declared by our federal government. 

 

Unfortunately the reality of life is that no matter how many of 

these kinds of Bills Saskatchewan passes and no matter how 

many millions of dollars we waste, we will never accomplish 

the end result of the desire that was in place when these ideas 

were first formulated because in fact the reality is that there are 

very few French-speaking people in Saskatchewan.  We have 

less than 3 per cent, I'm told, of our population that has any 

connection to French in any significant way.  And of that 3 per 

cent, I suggest that probably less than half of them can even 

speak the language. 

 

The reality is, Mr. Speaker, that to spend millions of dollars to 

change our Education Act and to spend millions of dollars to 

support another school board system is an absolute and total, 

complete waste of money in the province of Saskatchewan.  

And we will hear the argument of course that the federal 

government is going to put up the funding initially.  Always 

remember the word "initially". 

 

Within a year or two's time, as soon as this Act is put into place 

and everything is established, I absolutely guarantee it -- you 

watch and read these words later -- they will download on us.  

The federal government will not fund French education boards 

in Saskatchewan for very long.  They will do it for a year or 

two until it's established, and then they'll dump the whole thing 

on our laps, and they'll say: here, you guys got it, you fund it.  

And the taxpayer of 

Saskatchewan will be stuck with the bill totally and 

completely. 

 

Not to say that we're going to get away scot-free right now.  

The reality is that you're going to have a situation . . . and I'll 

relate to you a story about Lafleche, Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, to make my point.  In Lafleche, Saskatchewan, they 

had the Catholic school board and the separate school board 

already under the old Act in years gone by.  A few years back 

-- not so many -- they came in that community to the 

realization that they could no longer finance two school boards. 

 

And so the people in the community themselves, mostly driven 

I understand by the people in the Catholic school board system, 

realizing that they couldn't afford to have the two systems any 

more, they asked for a meeting of the community, of both 

boards and all community-concerned citizens.  At that meeting 

they discussed the possibility of an amalgamation in order to 

save costs.  They in fact went ahead and did that. 

 

They amalgamated and they now run one school board at a 

fraction of the cost of what they used to run two, because they 

came to the realization that, in a rural part of the country where 

the depression and the recession of this province had hit earlier 

than it has hit Regina and Saskatoon, they could no longer 

afford the extra costs of running two school boards.  The 

people themselves had to come together and decide that this 

was just too much money and they couldn't afford it.  And so 

they did that on their own. 

 

And what are we doing here in Regina today?  We're talking 

about setting up yet another system of school boards at 

additional costs when people out in the country are recognizing 

the fact that we have to consolidate these school boards and not 

be buying these frivolous things like Cadillac school systems 

when we can only afford Chevy prices.  And that's what it's 

really all about. 

 

We've got a government that's on a champagne budget for 

school boards and they've really got a taxation base that can 

only afford beer.  And that's the reality of it.  We're trying to 

buy what we can't afford.  And we're trying to do it perhaps for 

lofty, high, idealistic ideas and reasons, but we can't afford to 

do that; we don't have that kind of money in this province to be 

throwing away. 

 

It would be nice if we could cater to every language group; it 

would be nice if we could cater to every religious group, every 

ethnic group, everybody there is.  But the truth of the matter is 

that in Saskatchewan we have such a diversity of languages 

and backgrounds that there's no possible way that our society 

could even collectively afford to do these kind of things.  We 

could not afford to cater to everyone individually. 

 

And reality is that if you were going to give a third school 

board to the French-speaking people of Saskatchewan, in all 

fairness we should be doing it for 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1741 

Ukrainian-speaking people in Saskatchewan; we should be 

doing it for our Native people in Saskatchewan; we should be 

doing it for German-ancestry people in Saskatchewan.  All of 

those I understand outnumber the French people that are in our 

province. 

 

(1500) 

 

So what is fair about setting up a very expensive third school 

board system for an ethnic group that has less than 3 per cent of 

the population when we totally ignore all of the other groups in 

our society?  That's not fair and it's not being bigoted to say 

that we can't afford it, because it's a fact of life; we just can't 

afford this kind of catering as much as we would possibly like 

to. 

 

Now we've got a very strong lobby group that has pressed the 

past administration as they have pressed this administration.  

I've done some checking into this and the best information I 

can find out is that this is nothing but a very small but very 

noisy lobby group who, we understand, and I haven't been able 

to prove this so don't take me to court to swear on it, but we are 

led to understand that most of this group actually came from 

Quebec and came to Saskatchewan for the purpose of lobbying 

our governments. 

 

They were actually not even Saskatchewan citizens originally.  

They came to this province exclusively to drive home this 

lobby group, and this becomes the American style of politics 

that so many of our residents has been telling me that they do 

not like.  They abhor the whole situation of the way the 

American lobby groups set-up has developed down there, and 

we see it now happening in Saskatchewan. 

 

And we ought to be very much aware of the fact that we are 

catering here to a very small but noisy lobby group who have 

very few supporters in our province, I say.  And I challenge the 

members of the government to check this out. 

 

We understand that a survey in the Gravelbourg area, which is 

the centre of most French-driven things in our understanding 

within the province, we understand that a survey in that area 

has revealed that the people in that area are not in favour of a 

third school board system and a French school board system 

that would cost more money, and they don't want it and they 

don't support it.  They see no need for it. 

 

They have said straight out, as I'll say here today, that under 

our present school board system we can provide French 

classes, we can provide French education, we can even provide 

whole French schools.  It would not be impossible to do under 

our present structure.  Why do we need a whole, new, separate 

set of administrators, a whole new set of school board officials 

to run what we can already run with what we've got in place? 

 

It just doesn't make any sense to cater to a small lobby group of 

noisy people at millions of dollars of expense when we can 

handle the whole situation with the 

structure we have in place.  Well it just doesn't make any sense 

to me to do it this way at all. 

 

In all fairness, the governments of the past federally have said 

we want to have this bilingual country.  In order for it to be 

totally bilingual, everybody has to do the same thing 

throughout society from coast to coast to coast, as it were. 

 

And yet Quebec has an only-French sign law for many years 

now.  When I was in Quebec I could find signs with no English 

whatsoever.  In fact I couldn't find signs with English; they 

were all French.  They had to be, under the law.  Were they 

being bilingual?  Were they allowing English?  Of course not.  

They were being very one-minded in their approach to 

language. 

 

And yet in Saskatchewan we're supposed to be fair-minded and 

waste millions of dollars catering to a bilingual concept of a 

federal government's when the main French province of our 

country would not cooperate themselves. 

 

Why would we want to spend millions of dollars trying to be 

fair to the province of Quebec when they likely don't even 

know where we are.  And the only way anybody ever finds out 

where Saskatchewan is, is if we have a school exchange 

program like the one they had in our town just a few days back.  

It's a good thing that we do that, or I'm quite sure that nobody 

from Quebec would ever even find out where Saskatchewan 

was. 

 

There is no doubt in my mind, Mr. Speaker, that we don't need 

this law.  We don't need this school board in our province.  We 

can do without it.  We can provide all the services that are 

needed to be fair to this group of people.  We can do it with the 

system we have. 

 

I am absolutely convinced that the federal government, no 

matter what political stripe they happen to be after the next 

federal election, I care not who they are, they will all do the 

same thing.  They will download this cost on us.  They will 

forsake us and leave us.  They'll suck us into this third set of 

school boards.  And as soon as the thing is all set up, they'll 

unload the bills on us and we'll end up paying for it. 

 

And I think we ought to take a second look at this thing.  I 

strongly advise the government to pull this Bill off of the order 

paper, to ignore the noises of a handful of loud lobby people.  

They'll grab the headlines for two or three days, maybe a week 

at the most, and that's the last you'll hear of them, because 

they're going to go back to Quebec when they see they're 

defeated.  If they find out you won't cater to their needs, lobby 

groups being what they are, will go home and find a new cause 

to lobby for.  They'll leave you alone. 

 

So take the heat for a little while, pull this thing off the order 

paper, put it in the garbage can where it belongs, and forget it.  

We can't afford it.  We're in a depression in this country.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



1742 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

only going to make a very few short comments on this Bill. 

 

But I agree with my colleague from Maple Creek that we as a 

society in Saskatchewan dealing with educational issues need 

to seriously think about how the very, very few dollars that are 

going to be available are to be handled. 

 

The fondest wish that I have for my children is that they be 

functionally and literately bilingual in the country of Canada.  

We as a nation have had an official bilingual policy in our land 

for a couple of decades now.  And I think it's a policy that if 

treated properly will encourage Canadians to respect people of 

other linguistic groups better than we have in our past. 

 

But I always think, Mr. Speaker, that it still has to be a matter 

of choice in this issue.  That when we talk about spending 5 or 

10 or 15 or $20 million, that we direct that in such a way as 

that individual Canadians will make individual choices. 

 

One of the ways that we can do that, Mr. Speaker, is through 

our school board system through our educational facilities.  It is 

a good system because we elect our trustees the same way that 

we elect, for instance, our provincial politicians.  They have 

accountability, Mr. Speaker, and they have to be accountable to 

the rate base in their particular area. 

 

My fear with this particular initiative -- and it was there with 

my government as it is with this government -- is that once into 

this system that the federal largesse, which I believe is there 

from an era that is rapidly going by, that that federal largesse 

will not be there in perpetuity down the road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen the federal government moving out 

of areas that they have traditionally funded in many different 

forms.  We have seen it in agriculture, we've seen it health, 

we've seen it in energy, we've seen it in mining -- all sorts of 

areas that traditionally had more federal funding are now being 

redefined . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .  And we have the 

member from the New Democrats over there yelling from his 

seat about Tories cutting back. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I say that this government has set a record 

for offloading onto the tax base of this province like we've 

never seen before in our history. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what I'm trying to reflect is what I get from 

the people that own property in my particular constituency.  

My constituency is a large, land-based riding, Mr. Speaker, that 

has a couple of French communities in it -- hard-working, 

industrious people who came to this province a hundred years 

ago, or more in some cases, and like everyone else, carved out 

a livelihood.  They homesteaded, they went through all the 

trials and tribulations, and have been able to maintain their 

cultural identity very well, Mr. Speaker. 

The separate school system was amalgamated into the public 

school system.  The Thunder Creek unit has both, where we 

have children from all faiths attending what at one time were 

separate schools in my riding, schools that were founded by 

French-Canadians a hundred years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to perpetuate that cultural heritage I say takes 

more than a yearly grant from the federal government to set up 

a third school board in the province of Saskatchewan.  For the 

people in my constituency to maintain their linguistic and 

cultural identity, I believe, Mr. Speaker, means that it will 

come from within.  It will come from within the home.  It will 

come from within the cultural organizations that they choose 

voluntarily to belong to.  It will be maintained because people 

in Saskatchewan respect cultural diversity.  They respect the 

linguistic groupings that make up this province, and they are 

many. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are all sorts of places in this province where 

you can still go to homes and hear German spoke.  You can go 

to homes and hear Ukrainian spoke.  You can go to homes and 

hear Chinese spoken.  There isn't an area of our province that 

hasn't been enriched because there is linguistic and cultural 

identities that are still as strong today as when the people came 

here and homesteaded decades ago. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I really wonder at this attempt by the federal 

government and by, as my colleague said, a very small 

minority in our province to have a third system of educational 

governance brought into the province of Saskatchewan at a 

time when there isn't a property owner in this province that 

doesn't understand rising mill rates, that doesn't understand the 

pressure that will be upon them to maintain our scholastic and 

educational system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are seeing, in the case of Saskatchewan, a 

government that has brought in policy change after policy 

change, vis-a-vis rural Saskatchewan.  It's taking away medical 

services.  It's taking away agricultural services.  It's taking 

away educational services from that large area that's out there 

that we call rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order to maintain a quality educational system, 

the tax base, the property tax base as it exists in our province, is 

going to have to pony up even more.  I hear rumours of 2 to 

300 teachers being laid off come fall.  I hear school boards 

talking about mill rate increases of 3, 4, 5, as much as 10 mills 

because of the changes that are coming down to the system.  It 

means that classroom sizes are going to have to be larger, that 

programs are going to have to be cut back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you cannot bus a child in this province and have 

them excel in any way like we are looking at in the future.  

We've got children now in my school unit getting on the school 

bus at a quarter after seven in the morning. 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1743 

Mr. Speaker, a five-year-old who is having the accessibility to 

kindergarten, getting on the bus at a quarter after seven in the 

morning and getting off of that bus at five o'clock at night, I 

say to you is going to be one tired child.  That is a child that is 

going to have a great deal of difficulty liking school and 

excelling at the curriculum that is available to them.  That is the 

kind of pressure that we are under in this province on our 

educational side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are going to be decisions made in rural 

Saskatchewan in the next few years that are going to be very, 

very difficult to handle.  The concept of the one-room school 

may be all that's left to people in rural Saskatchewan once 

again in order to see that their children have the fundamentals 

of an educational background. 

 

Now we have the offer -- and it's been on the table for many, 

many years in this province -- of millions of dollars to set up 

this third school board.  I say to you, Mr. Speaker, if the will of 

Fransaskois people in the province of Saskatchewan to 

maintain cultural and linguistic ideals is there, then maybe, Mr. 

Speaker, we should look for ways within our existing system, 

existing system, to maintain that integrity. 

 

(1515) 

 

Because certainly the buildings are there, the school buses are 

there, the parents that serve on school boards and serve in 

voluntary organizations are there and, Mr. Speaker, we don't 

have a history in this province of bigotry that would drive 

people from the French-language group away from their 

neighbours.  And it could be, Mr. Speaker, if we have these 

millions of dollars available that we look at some new and 

innovative ways to, number one, meet the criteria as laid down 

by the Supreme Court of Canada without having to go to 

another separate school board.  Because once that institution is 

in place, Mr. Speaker, it is going to be very, very difficult for 

some future government under extreme financial duress or 

cultural duress or socio-economic duress to take it away. 

 

And we can hear all of the assurances that we want from the 

minister that there is no down side to this.  But I can tell you, 

Mr. Speaker, if people, particularly in the rural areas of our 

province, are faced with putting their children on a school bus, 

their six-year-old kids for a two-hour ride in the morning and a 

two-hour ride at night, and they see in place another school 

board costing several million dollars a year to operate, they are 

going to ask themselves, are we making the proper choices?  

Because maybe those millions of dollars combined with my tax 

dollars would make us a better system where all of our children 

will have the opportunity for linguistic duality or if they 

choose, even a third language. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no question in the world of trade, in the 

world of shrinking boundaries because of technology, that the 

children of the future in this province may have to learn, as we 

saw from our friends in the gallery today, the ability to 

communicate with people in Inner Mongolia.  They may have 

to have the ability to speak a language that fits in with the 

cultural identity of the Pacific Rim where so much of 

Saskatchewan's trade is done. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the demand on the tax base, on the property, 

on the farm land and the home owner to provide enough money 

for that capability, I would say to you, sir, is going to get 

tougher to meet rather than easier. 

 

And those are the choices that are before us, Mr. Speaker, in 

the area of education.  And I think it is very, very narrow of 

this government and this minister to simply say, well the 

money is there; the federal government says the money's there, 

and we've got a court decision that says we have to do this 

without thinking of other ways. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that these arguments went 

around the cabinet table when we were in government, and I 

hope they've gone around the table with this New Democratic 

Party government.  Because we're talking about a lot of money 

here, Mr. Speaker, and we're talking about whole sections of 

our province who are going to face some very difficult 

educational choices not very far down the road. 

 

And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, I don't think my farm, given 

the international prices, given what I'm going to receive from 

my commodities in the next few years, I don't think my farm 

can bear a whole lot more educational tax on it than what's on it 

right now.  And I would tell you, Mr. Speaker, that you can 

drive from home to home and farm to farm and town to town in 

the riding of Thunder Creek and you will get that opinion 

echoed over and over and over again. 

 

And I would say to the members of the government here, the 

silent back benches, that if you went out and drove from home 

to home and farm to farm and town to town, you would get the 

same reaction in their constituencies also, because those same 

stark choices are in front of them.  And I would challenge any 

member of the government here today, a property owner, a 

ratepayer, to stand up and tell me that their farm or their 

business or their home can stand a whole lot more educational 

tax upon it and keep themselves and their family viable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those choices are coming down and we cannot 

avoid them.  And yet the government says no, we'll commit to 

a third level of governance, a third level of jurisdiction and 

everything that possibly can go with it, and we'll take this 20 

million or whatever it is from the federal government right now 

and we won't worry about the future. 

 

Well I can say to you, Mr. Speaker, try putting your 

seven-year-old on a school bus or your six-year-old for an hour 

and a half to two-hour ride in the morning and the same at 

night, and see what quality of life there is at the end of the day.  

Mr. Speaker, people in downtown Regina and Saskatoon 

wouldn't stand for that, and they won't 



1744 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

do it in Moose Jaw and they won't do it in Prince Albert. 

 

And I think it's time that this government started to think about 

that and start thinking about maybe some ways that that money 

could be put to use to satisfy and encourage people of a French 

background or French linguistic background on ways that we 

can maintain that linguistic heritage without putting our entire 

system at risk.  And if someone over there can tell me that 

that's simply not possible, then I say they haven't thought long 

and hard enough about this particular subject. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

thank the members who spoke before me for bringing forward 

some of the concerns that we have, particularly those economic 

concerns.  The sole purpose for Bill 39 is to allow for the 

establishment of a francophone school system within this 

province. 

 

But I guess the first question should be why, why create a third 

school system when taxpayers are already struggling to 

maintain the two systems that we have -- the public system and 

the separate system.  The members opposite have introduced 

this legislation at the very same time as they are cutting back 

funding to education and to other areas of programing within 

this province.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government's 

fiscal plan calls for cut-backs in all major spending areas 

including education for at least the next three years. 

 

I've been receiving letters from a good number of the school 

boards across the province, Mr. Speaker, both the public 

system and the separate system.  And in all of those letters 

there is cut-backs to the funding they have received.  In almost 

all of the letters, Mr. Speaker, they are talking of mill rate 

increases, they are talking of cuts to professional staff and to 

their other employees.  They're even talking of cuts to 

programs and the closures of schools, Mr. Speaker.  And not 

just rural schools.  We've seen in Regina the closure of three 

schools and the potential for more.  So, Mr. Speaker, the cuts to 

education go across this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the establishment of a third 

school board, does it make any sense?  We have to stop and 

think about that for a moment, Mr. Speaker.  A third school 

system adds yet another layer of government in Saskatchewan.  

There are already 115 school divisions, 300 RMs (rural 

municipality), 540 municipalities, and we will soon have 

another level with the super health boards. 

 

And as the member from Riversdale said, enough is enough.  

There's only one taxpayer who supports all of these 

government levels.  The Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, 

are being taxed to death and we should look at ways of 

reducing the size and cost of government, not increasing it.  

Mr. Speaker, the people are finding ways to reduce this tax 

burden by leaving. 

 

The Minister of Education says it won't cost the province any 

more money.  Well it's difficult to believe that establishing a 

completely new third 

school system, the buying or building of the required facilities, 

the purchasing of all the required materials, hiring of teachers 

and administration staff, providing bussing services for 

students, will not add up to the total cost of education in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And it's just not the cost that would be associated immediately 

with this new third school board, it's those costs that would be 

imposed on the existing boards as students would leave a 

particular school to attend the third school board; you're going 

to see reductions there.  You're going to see reductions in 

student population which will result in either staff cuts or a 

higher expense to maintain that facility because there's going to 

be less pupils using it.  If you close that school, then your 

bussing costs go up to transport those remaining children to 

another location. 

 

Since any additional expenditures by the federal or provincial 

government results in an increase in the size of the 

government's deficit and debt service costs, how can the 

government and the NDP justify establishing a third school 

system at the present time? 

 

Currently, Mr. Speaker, our province offers type B programs in 

areas where parents want their children educated in French.  

These type B programs deliver 80 per cent of their programs in 

French.  The only English part is the English language arts 

which we're obviously taught, Mr. Speaker, in English. 

 

In my own constituency we have a totally French school at 

Bellegarde.  They're part of the Arcola School Division, part of 

the existing system.  They operate with their own local school 

board, Mr. Speaker.  And there will be very little change for the 

education at this school if the third school system comes into 

place -- very little change. 

 

And the same is taking place currently at Gravelbourg.  The 

Gravelbourg School Division in fact, Mr. Speaker, is opposed 

to this legislation.  They do not feel it will serve their 

community well at all. 

 

I understand the argument put forward by the proponents for 

the francophone system, and that argument has been that 

parents want not only French-based language curriculum, but 

they also want the teaching of French . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Beg leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: -- I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And I thank my friend 

from Souris-Cannington for allowing this interruption of his 

speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I notice seated in the west gallery, two friends of 

mine, former constituents in my former constituency.  Now 

they are members of Regina 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1745 

Churchill Downs.  Rita and Francis Medernach.  I've had the 

pleasure of sharing a meal with Rita and Francis, certainly 

always enjoyed every chance I had to stop by their place.  I ask 

all members to join me in welcoming them to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 39 

(continued) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I was 

saying, the proponents for the francophone system want not 

only their children educated in the French language, they also 

want that educational component to include French culture.  

But under the economic circumstances and considering that 

French is already offered through the type B programs in our 

province, I don't believe that now is the time to be 

implementing such a third school system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Gallant report was commissioned by the 

minister of Education in 1989 to look into the establishment of 

the francophone system in this province.  That report was 

accepted and endorsed by the PC (Progressive Conservative) 

cabinet in 1990, and then it was shelved because of the cost 

implementation was too great, too high, given the economic 

circumstances of the province. 

 

That cabinet recognized the constitutional statutes, or status of 

francophone schools and their school boards. However, it also 

recognized it was going to cost too much money.  The 

members opposite are now always claiming that the previous 

administration went out and spent money willy-nilly without 

any considerations.  Well, Mr. Speaker, this is an example of 

them recognizing those costs. 

 

And yet now the members opposite, while in government and 

likewise while they were in opposition, are demanding that 

more money be spent.  The members opposite keep talking 

about this province being on the verge of bankruptcy.  If that's 

true, Mr. Speaker, and again I ask: how can the NDP 

government justify additional expenditures on a third school 

system that most of the province's population do not support? 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's not just the non-francophones of this province 

who do not support this project at this time, many people of 

French ancestry also feel that a third school system cannot be 

justified.  It is becoming pretty clear that the members opposite 

don't seem to listen to the vast majority of Saskatchewan's 

people, and it seems especially true that rural people's opinions 

just don't count with the NDP.  In fact they are doing their best 

to see that rural people have no voice at all. 

Not only is the government doing whatever possible to 

undermine agriculture producers, they are closing health 

facilities, schools will close, and now they're taking away rural 

representation in this legislature.  Mr. Speaker, all of these 

things, the NDP say they are doing to save money.  All of this 

hurt, they claim, is to save money.  And it's not true, Mr. 

Speaker, and the members opposite know it.  Saving money 

doesn't matter when the members opposite think that their 

political agenda can be fulfilled, as we saw today with the 

contracts being let.  A non-union contractor received the 

tender.  The NDP's political friends, the unions, complained 

about it, so the tenders were reopened.  And the additional cost 

will be a million dollars, Mr. Speaker, a million dollars. 

 

Another good example was the giving of $800,000 to the 

provincial secretariat's office, or should I say, the NDP's get 

elected office.  I guess using saving money as an excuse only 

works when the NDP government needs another excuse to pull 

the rug out from further rural communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's clear that this is not the proper time to be 

spending money on a third school system.  This government is 

slashing the budgets of the two systems already in place.  

They're cutting teaching jobs, cutting funding to vital programs 

like core curriculum, cutting capital expenditures and closing 

schools.  And then they say, let's spend money on another 

system.  It doesn't make sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They claim that federal money is on the table, that they must 

use it or lose it.  Mr. Speaker, what of all the money left on the 

table with the changes to the GRIP program?  They didn't seem 

to have any real problem with leaving that money on the table 

because it affected rural residents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that the vast majority of Saskatchewan people agree 

that this is not the time to implement this legislation.  And I 

guess we'll just have to see if this government thinks it's time to 

start listening to people.  But I'm sorry to say, Mr. Speaker, I 

don't think that will be the case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have many questions to ask concerning this 

Bill.  We have a number of amendments we wish to propose.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 59 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mrs. Teichrob that Bill No. 59 -- An Act to 

amend The Education Act (No. 2) be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Across this 

province there are a number of people who utilize the idea of 

home-based schooling; they would prefer to have their 

schooling provided by themselves rather 



1746 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

 than going through the two school systems that we have in 

place -- the public and the separate system. 

 

But there needs to be some control, Mr. Speaker, and we agree 

to that, that there needs to be some form of implementation so 

that the children of those people who provide their own 

educational services receive a proper education; that they can 

read and write and all the other things that we wish to have all 

our children do when they complete their school grading. 

 

A number of people got together.  The minister appointed a 

panel.  Chris Gerrard was the chairman of it, I believe, or at 

least was instrumental in preparing the report.  And they toured 

the province, Mr. Speaker, and met with a number of different 

groups, including the home-based schooling association, to put 

together a recommendation to the government as to how this 

sort of a program should be put through.  And I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that this report formed the basis for the legislation that 

the minister is bringing forward. 

 

One of the things that needs to be carefully considered here 

though, Mr. Speaker, is that the government does not impose a 

heavy hand on this process, that it allows parents some latitude 

to be able to choose the educational curriculum and format that 

they feel best suits their children and their own circumstances. 

 

There is talk in this Bill of allowing local school 

superintendents or directors of education to be part of the 

process of monitoring the children who are taking advantage of 

the home-based schooling, and that may very well be 

appropriate, Mr. Speaker.  But those directors of education are 

going to have to be sensitive to the needs and wishes of the 

parents and the children involved.  I think that will be a very 

important component of this whole system once it goes into 

place.  We need to be careful, Mr. Speaker, that indeed the 

children are receiving the education that is needed, but it must 

be based on some very broad concepts of what we feel is the 

educational needs of children within this province. 

 

One of the components that could be handled under 

home-based schooling would be access to second or third or 

fourth language opportunities, and it may be very difficult for 

the Department of Education to outline curriculum for that kind 

of an educational system.  So they need to be able to broaden 

the scope of what they are going to contemplate when this 

takes place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We do have some questions and concerns to deal with this 

legislation, and we feel that can be handled, Mr. Speaker, in 

Committee of the Whole.  Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Municipal Government 

Vote 24 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister at this time to introduce 

the officials who have joined us here today. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, the officials here today 

are the same as were here on Friday. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

the colleagues of mine that were discussing your portfolio on 

Friday had suggested to me that they haven't gone into the 

areas that used to be covered by Rural Development as a 

ministry which are now under your jurisdiction we understand. 

 

Now in order for the public to understand which parts of Rural 

Development have fallen into your hands, as the Minister of 

Highways has indicated that the road system is now under his 

jurisdiction, could you briefly explain to us which parts of the 

previous Department of Rural Development you are now in 

control of? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, thank you for the 

question, to the member opposite. 

 

When the two departments were amalgamated from Rural 

Development, we have municipal finance and advisory 

services, community planning, some administration, and the 

revenue-sharing pool. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I take it that the revenue-sharing pool then 

would include the grants that are affected in the change from 

the cash basis to the accrual basis in the change-over that 

occurred this year in the accounting procedures of the 

government.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, that's right. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I'll just take a minute to read to you a letter 

from a municipality that I received, dated May 11.  I know that 

my colleague has some other resolutions and letters from other 

RMs that he will discuss with you, and this may double up 

somewhat, but I think it's important that I read this one to you 

because it comes from my constituency, the rural municipality 

of Clinworth No. 230. 

 

It's addressed to yourself, and you probably have a copy but 

with all the mail you get you may not have noted it.  

"Cost-sharing road construction" it says. 

 

We would like to express our concerns with the recent 

announcement from your government regarding the limited 

monies allocated for road construction through the 

conditional grant.  There may be many revenue and 

expenditure items that will change with your new accrual 

accounting, but we do not believe that our road system 

should be placed in jeopardy because of this change. 

 

Now we are well aware of the difficult financial situation 

that Saskatchewan is facing and we are not requesting any 

extra funding.  What we 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1747 

request is that municipalities be allowed to establish their 

own construction priorities.  Construction of any significance 

would rapidly deplete two years of allocation; thus a 

municipality could be responsible for the balance of any 

construction that needed to be finished at 100 per cent of the 

construction cost.  If municipalities are forced to do this, the 

road standards may not be followed and could ultimately 

result in the demise of the existing road system. 

 

Road systems are not used solely by the local ratepayers 

and they should not be totally responsible for the costs of 

building the main road system.  There will be many 

municipalities that have a higher percentage of traffic, thus 

causing more construction requirements. 

 

The government has done an excellent job of building a 

good road system for the residents of Saskatchewan 

through the conditional grants and we urge you to 

reconsider your decision regarding these grants so the 

system can be maintained to these standards. 

 

Now the following resolution was passed at our regular 

council meeting on May 6, 1993. 

 

It goes on, Minister: 

 

Whereas effective April 1, 1993, the province of 

Saskatchewan converted from the modified basis of 

accounting to the accrual method of accounting; and 

 

whereas the department has been instructed by the 

Minister of Municipal Government only to consider those 

RMs which have futures in an amount not greater than two 

times the RM's current construction allocation; and 

 

whereas as a result of this policy it is estimated that a high 

percentage of RMs will not even be considered; and 

 

whereas the Minister of Municipal Government has stated 

that if an RM does not receive construction approval and 

they wish to do some work on the designated road system 

in 1993, this work must be undertaken on a 100 per cent 

municipal cost basis, resulting in a substandard road 

network; and 

 

whereas this policy could very well spell the demise of the 

existing road network and the construction industry which 

includes road contractors, consulting engineers, culvert 

companies, and surveyors; 

 

Therefore be it resolved that we request the Minister of 

Municipal Government to reconsider the decision of 

allowing only those RMs with futures less than two times 

the current construction allocation by having the province 

slow the process and reducing the accounts 

payable. 

 

(1545) 

 

Now that was addressed to you and comes from Naida 

Dillman, the administrator of the RM of Clinworth.  And I 

guess I should just let you answer in general what your reply to 

this and to many other municipalities will be. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, there has been a lot of 

misunderstanding I believe about the change in the futures 

program and the change to accrual accounting. 

 

First of all, I would like to place on the record that this year the 

allocation for conditional grants for RMs is $23.16 million.  

Last year it was $23.16 million.  There has been no decrease in 

conditional funding for the grant system for RMs. 

 

In regards to a couple of other points, it is true that we have 

frozen the futures program in order not to any further go into 

debt on that program.  It was capped at $15 million this year, so 

there was a need to pay it down from 19.6 million down to 15 

million.  That $4.6 million is part of the grant structure and it 

will be distributed to all the RMs as their allocation as well. 

 

In regard to the remarks made about roads being substandard, 

all roads within the grid system that is cost shared with the 

province of Saskatchewan will continue to be under engineered 

specifications.  And if an RM wishes to build within that 

system they can do so but it will have to be funded 100 per cent 

by their own money if they are more than two and a half years 

of their allocation into the futures.  But it will be under 

engineered specifications from the Department of Highways. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Are you saying that even if a municipality 

pays 100 per cent of the cost of the building of a road, that you 

are going to force them to maintain a certain standard by 

engineering? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That is true because it's part of the 

designated system and it has to be kept up to a certain standard.  

And if they want to build within that system it has to be to 

engineered specs by the Department of Highways. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Is it possible for an RM to have a road taken 

out of the designated system? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes they can have a road taken out of the 

system. 

 

In regard to the last answer, I will qualify that too, that if they 

do not build it to standards, engineered standards, then they 

won't be eligible for maintenance grants. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- With all due respect I don't think they care 

one iota about maintenance grants if they haven't gotten a 

construction grant.  They'll take care of that themselves. 



1748 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

Is it not true that a municipality doesn't have to have any roads 

in a designated system if they choose to opt out? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, that's true. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Then is it not true, Minister, that the RMs' 

point is well taken that if they're going to pay 100 per cent of 

the costs, they are not going to accept you dictating to them 

what kind of standards they have to have.  They'll simply opt 

out, and they'll allow their roads to be built at half standards or 

quarter standards or whatever it takes in order to be able to 

finance whatever kind of trails they put in. 

 

And in reality you don't have a road system in Saskatchewan 

any more that has any standards at all because all the 

municipalities will opt out if they have to pay all the costs, and 

they'll build whatever comes to mind that they can afford, 

wherever they choose to.  And there won't be interlinking road 

networks any more.  They'll simply build for themselves, their 

own private needs, and they won't take into consideration the 

through traffic from one part of the province to the other.  

They'll simply . . . each municipality will take care of their own 

problems, and they'll build at the standards they can afford.  

And the whole system goes down the drain.  Is that not a fact? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- With due respect I think you paint by far 

the worst-case scenario about what is happening.  First of all, 

there are only 90 RMs who have grant allocations more than 

two and a half times into their futures.  So there's only 90 RMs 

who will not be able to participate in the program this year. 

 

In regard to the issue about substandard roads, again we'll make 

the point that if they want to have gravel and maintenance 

grants applied to their RMs, their road construction will have to 

be up to certain specs. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Is it not true, Minister, that most 

municipalities already have their road systems built up so that 

they can collect the maximum for maintenance and gravel 

grants that are available?  And that if they constructed new 

roads, would it in fact not be a fact that they couldn't collect 

any more because they've already reached their maximums? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- In answer to that question, there are about 

8,000 klicks, or about 16 per cent of the system that was never 

constructed to standards, and 40 per cent of the system which 

represents 22,000 kilometres, need new construction. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I'm tempted to say, so what?  It's got nothing 

to do with the question I asked you. 

 

What I said was, you're threatening to take away grant money 

for gravel and maintenance if they don't build road to your 

standards.  What I'm saying to you is that most municipalities 

are already receiving the maximum amount of gravel and 

maintenance monies available through your department with 

the road system they already have in place. 

If they can choose to construct new roads now at 100 per cent 

of their cost, then they're not going to lose anything because 

they're already getting the maximum amounts.  And that was 

my question.  Are they getting the maximum amounts or do 

you have some control over them? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- In regard to the grant allocation, with 

maintenance, the allocation for last year was taken up 100 per 

cent, which was about $2.9 million.  In the regravelling 

program, $2.9 million were used out of a total budget of 3.2.  

So there were some RMs who did not take up the grants 

allocated for that year. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well I'll suggest to you, having been a reeve 

for a number of years, Madam Minister, that the fact that they 

didn't take you up on the maximum on the gravel has 

absolutely nothing to do with the amount of roads that they're 

going to construct for the future or might apply for. 

 

It has to do with common sense used by municipal councils 

throughout the province in that when they see a road has 

enough gravel on it, they don't simply put some more on it 

because they can hook you with half the price.  They look at 

their roads; they say they don't need gravel, they don't put it on; 

if they do need gravel, they do put it on. 

 

And you have only the good judgement and the honorary 

characteristics of the people that are involved in municipal 

government throughout the province to thank for that saving, 

because they are people that use discretion.  And even when 

there is a free dollar available, they know very well that it's not 

free, that it's going to be their tax dollar. They're the taxpayer; 

they'll end up having to pay it some place.  So they use 

discretion in that area. 

 

It has nothing to do with you having the ability to maintain any 

kind of control whatsoever on the standards of roads except 

through the grant system.  That's why it was set up that way 

many years ago, was to provide the province with an intricate 

system of interlinking roads from one municipality to the other 

with a stable standard of construction and safety. 

 

Mainly the standards that roads are built by has to do with the 

safety factor.  It's got to do with lines of vision.  It's got to do 

with slopes of ditches so that you can ride a car through the 

ditch without rolling it.  It's got to do with the ability of 

machinery and equipment to be able to operate on those kinds 

of slopes, because they're made at certain regulations and are 

clearly indicated to the workers where there are variances to 

that so that they don't get killed when they're mowing grass, 

and all those kinds of things.  You have the rocks removed 

from the ditches and whatnot. 

 

So the whole system was put into place in order for there to be 

an incentive for municipalities to cooperate in this system of 

road networks which now is breaking down because of your 

choices -- the choices that you are making with your 

government to not extend these programs because you no 

longer now have anything to offer to the municipalities as an 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1749 

incentive if they have to finance it on their own. 

 

And by the way, I've already seen letters from municipalities 

who tried to circumvent the old system of standards.  And of 

course they were turned down; I saw the replies.  And the 

reasons for those replies were given. 

 

The reality is that if there were municipalities that were 

thinking that it would be advantageous to them to reduce the 

standards in their municipalities before this incentive was taken 

away, they certainly now, if they have to pay the 100 per cent 

of the costs themselves and can get out of your administrative 

clutches, they will certainly build substandard roads because 

they've already indicated that desire by those letters previously. 

 

So the road system is in jeopardy, as the people who write this 

letter from the RM of Clinworth and several hundreds of others 

have indicated to you. 

 

The reality is that the road system is seriously in jeopardy 

because there is no longer a standard that can be maintained in 

the province when you went to this decision to change from the 

accrual to the cash system and used that as a manipulative tool 

to reduce the funding from 19 million to $15 million, which of 

course means that all you're really doing is trying to take 

another $4 million out of the municipal system through the 

futures program as time goes by in order to get a saving bigger 

than the 3 per cent that you have put in the budget for this year. 

 

In other words, what I'm saying to you is that you are 

manipulating the grant structure the same as the minister did 

last year when we caught him saying that he had reduced by 7 

per cent the amount of monies that we're going to 

municipalities, and it turned out in fact on his own pieces of 

paper that he supplied to us that he had reduced the funding to 

the municipalities by 18 per cent and more. 

 

And the reality is that you're using the system to manipulate 

again the reduction of monies to the municipalities.  You're 

offloading through this system, and you're destroying the road 

system as you do it.  And the municipalities are saying they've 

caught you red-handed doing it and they're bringing it to your 

attention in a very nice and honourable way and offering you a 

chance to save face by bailing out and extending the future's 

program, because it costs you absolutely nothing in terms of 

this year's cost. 

 

It's a cost for two years down the road or three years down the 

road, has absolutely nothing to do with your $23.16 million of 

conditional funding for this year that you were giving 100 per 

cent or last year that you gave 100 per cent.  It has to do with 

the funding under that particular grant formula for the years to 

come -- two years down the road, three years down the road.  It 

has nothing to do with this year's cost. 

 

And it's only a cost that is vaguely related to the governments 

because of their accrual accounting system, which most 

municipalities recognize as 

nothing but a phoney attempt to try to download on them some 

more of your downloaded procedures and costs. 

 

The other day I'm told that you had promised to deliver a 

revenue-sharing breakdown for each RM in the province.  

Have you got that with you today? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We have here the data for the revenue 

sharing by RMs for 1993-94.  We also have it by urbans and 

we have it for the northern municipalities.  And we'll ask the 

page to deliver it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  We will be 

happy to review your figures. 

 

A minute ago you referred to 90 municipalities as having been 

directly affected by the future's revenue changes that have been 

made with regards to limiting to two years the amount of 

funding that people can be owed.  Of the other 208 

municipalities in the province, how many of them will be 

building roads and how many miles will they be building under 

this program of revenue sharing? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- At this point in time, 117 RMs have 

indicated that they will be building this year a total of 552 

klicks at a total cost of $7.2 million. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Of that 117 that are going to be building these 

552 klicks, have they . . . any of those 117 asked for more 

klicks than they have been granted? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, they have. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Would you say that that might be in the order 

of about 90? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Apparently no more than a dozen have 

asked, not 90.  Maybe 12. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well there's no sense in playing with the 

figures, Minister.  What I'm simply going to do is say exactly 

what's on my mind here.  And that is that in reality you've got 

maybe 90 or 100 RMs that wish to go into large construction 

programs.  The other 200 municipalities probably are either 

caught up in their needs for building programs or find 

themselves in a financial position where they can't afford their 

half share of the cost any more because their taxes haven't 

come in, or perhaps they're municipalities where roads are not 

as important as they might be in some other areas. 

 

So the reality is that probably in any given year only a hundred 

municipalities would be considering major construction 

programs in the province of Saskatchewan, so that if you 

eliminate 90 of them because they are overexpended due to a 

formula that you have changed, then in fact you have affected 

probably 90 per cent of all the municipalities that were 

intending to use the program to begin with. 



1750 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

Now how many kilometres have been turned down in the 

province of Saskatchewan this year that municipalities would 

have built if you hadn't brought in this new regulation? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- In the last two years between 160 to 170 

RMs built between 650 and 700 kilometres.  And so 

subtracting that from our figures we have now, we're down 

about 150 kilometres from what would be normal. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Is it not true that you've had meetings with 

municipalities in the eastern part of our province where they 

indicated to you that they estimated a thousand kilometres had 

been affected in their area alone? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- There was a meeting.  Their estimation 

was far overstated, and according to our figures it is not 

correct. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- So you're saying the people in those 

municipalities don't know what they're talking about. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I guess it would depend on how far back 

you go in history.  In 1990 -- and you'll recall that was under 

the former administration -- there was about 14 to 1,500 

kilometres built per year.  In the budget of 1991, which you 

brought in, you reduced the grant allocation by 40 per cent, and 

this is where we dropped to about 700 kilometres, which I 

spoke of a minute ago. 

 

So I guess if you or some RMs are making an estimate about 

the number of kilometres that have decreased, it depends on 

what you use as your base year.  If you're using the base year of 

1990, it might be that amount.  But if you use a base year of 

1992, it is of course much less. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Madam Minister, I think that the 

municipalities that had the meeting in the Yorkton area were 

talking about the road conditions and the road construction 

programs that they were planning for 1993.  I don't think they 

cared one bit about 1990 or 1991 or 1942.  They want to talk 

about 1993, the year in question, this year, the year that they're 

saying that you have seriously curtailed their construction 

program throughout that area and throughout the province. 

 

And their estimate is that a thousand kilometres of road will be 

built less in this province this year, 1993, as a direct result of 

your actions in this grant process. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, I think whether 

you're an urban municipality or rural municipality, whenever 

there's a change in grant allocation, it hurts.  They obviously 

have certain responsibilities and certain services that they have 

always provided for their constituents and for their people.  

And it is simply a fact of living in Saskatchewan at this point in 

time that when there are cuts, everybody is obliged to share in 

some way in those cuts. 

If we had choices that you had five and six years ago, if we 

would have had those choices today, we would not be making 

the cuts that we have to make today.  I will just for the record 

point out to you, if we had even 10 per cent of the money that 

we spend on interest payments -- interest payment being $847 

million -- if we had 10 per cent of that to allocate to RMs 

instead of to foreign debt holders we would, of course, would 

have a very, very fine infrastructure program in Saskatchewan.  

But that is not the case at this point in time.  We have to live 

within our means. 

 

I know that SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) at a number of conventions, going back four 

and five years ago, were asking for the provincial government 

to balance their budget.  They realize that we can't go on going 

further and further into debt. 

 

I would say to you, sir, that if Mr. Kirwan and the board of 

directors of SARM had been managing this province in the last 

10 years, we would not have to pay that $847 million interest 

payment that we have to now, because I believe those people 

are very aware of balanced budgets and they are very good 

administrators, and I don't believe that we would be facing the 

crisis that we are today.  But we are.  They have acknowledged 

it as well as everybody else, and they are participating in the 

move towards getting this province's fiscal situation under 

control. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't know where the 

minister thinks she gets off at by lecturing me about the past 

administration.  The fact of life is it's got nothing to do with the 

question I asked.  First of all, I didn't ask you to give me a big 

long spiel about how a municipality should be willing to share 

the responsibility of cuts. 

 

What I asked you to do was to confirm how many kilometres 

of road are not going to be constructed this year in the province 

of Saskatchewan as a direct result of your decisions -- nothing 

more, nothing less, nothing back in history. 

 

But just for your information, if it hadn't been for $15 billion 

worth of debt, half of which is accumulated bailing out the 

agricultural sector in this province, you'd have 25,000 farmers 

left in Saskatchewan instead of 50,000.  You'd have lost half 

the base of your taxation and half of the people in that primary 

industry. 

 

That money was well spent to take debt out of the hands of 

farmers that couldn't control it and couldn't do anything about 

it.  Now it's either-or.  Either you sink the ship of the farmers 

individually, or the government takes over the responsibility 

and tries to handle it for them.  That's what was done and that's 

where your deficit came from. 

 

Money wisely spent in order to purchase something for the 

future is not wrongly spent, even if it is a debt.  Every person in 

this province that mortgages a house has to pay his interest.  It's 

a question of how you administrate it and how you tune that 

debt to your 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1751 

ability to repay. 

 

And I'll say to you that if the SARM had been in charge of 

things as you say, they would have done so much better. They 

would have negotiated this year that instead of paying 12 per 

cent interest to some German firms, or 11 per cent, in order to 

borrow money, they'd be borrowing money at 5 and 6 per cent 

and they'd have saved that $700 million quite easily on $15 

billion worth of debt.  Get your calculator out.  The difference 

between 5 per cent and 11 per cent interest, they'd have saved 

more than $700 million in interest payments right there just by 

renegotiating and doing some proper and decent fiscal 

management and some responsible financing. 

 

You don't know how to run a wheelbarrow, let alone the 

finances of the province.  And you're going to stand here and 

lecture me about how come we've got a debt and how it's 

affecting your ability to let the municipalities build roads in 

this province.  Get real, lady. 

 

Now I want you to confirm how many miles of road . . . or how 

many kilometres are not going to be built in this province as a 

result of your grant structure changes. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Once again -- I told you a few minutes 

ago and I'll repeat it -- 650 to 700 kilometres for 117 RMs are 

anticipating construction this year. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- That wasn't the question.  How many have 

been turned down?  How many will not be built because you 

turned them down? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- There have been about 150 kilometres 

turned down. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Madam Minister, the municipalities of this 

province have been run by some of the most financially 

responsible and fiscally responsible and citizen responsible 

people that the world could ever hope to find in any kind of 

administration.  And they have said to you quite simply this: 

we want to continue to build good roads and we want to 

continue to have a good road network. 

 

I think that's why the SARM and the people involved with the 

rural municipalities fought so long and so hard to keep a 

ministry of Rural Development, because they knew the minute 

that there was no ministry of Rural Development with people 

that knew them and understood them, that the whole thing 

would blow up. 

 

I'm not taking anything away from you, but I'm suggesting that 

you don't know what you're talking about when it comes to 

rural municipalities and rural affairs.  And if you had a ministry 

of Rural Development and Rural Affairs with people that were 

put into those positions and into those jobs to handle the 

problems in rural Saskatchewan with the rural road network, 

you wouldn't be in this bind right now. 

 

Because those people would have understood that 

there's ways of getting around the accounting procedures and 

the snags that you've built into the process for no real 

legitimate reason.  And because these people are so astute at 

financing their own affairs, they know how wacky it is to put 

into place a system of grants such as you have done.  Because 

you have to plan for the future in building roads.  You can't just 

expect the whole system to fall into place each year.  You've 

got to plan ahead and you've got to do it in segments as you can 

afford it as time goes by. 

 

(1615) 

 

And the whole process, Madam Minister, is deteriorating 

because of the move to eliminate the ministry of Rural 

Development.  It should never have been eliminated this year 

to start with. 

 

And I will say with all due respect that you are the wrong 

person for the job.  You shouldn't be doing what you're doing.  

You shouldn't be there.  You don't understand rural road 

networks.  You don't understand rural people. 

 

You went to the meeting supposedly, or you were invited to be 

there.  I don't know if you ever showed up or not.  Apparently 

you must not have been there because you certainly don't seem 

to know anything about the facts and the figures and the reports 

that were given to everybody that went.  They were distributed 

to other people in the mail.  I'm sure you must have some 

contact.  But you don't seem to know anything about what went 

on at those meetings.  You don't relate the right figures to the 

right answers.  You haven't got a clue what's going on here. 

 

So I see very little reason to ask many more questions.  

Because it's quite obvious that you think you're so much more 

intelligent than all the people in rural Saskatchewan running 

the rural municipal systems that you don't have to answer to 

their questions.  All they want is the ability and the right to 

continue to build a good road network and a road system, and 

you're denying them that. 

 

Now I suggest, madam, that you could answer for them a 

question that might alleviate some of their concerns and their 

worries.  Will you meet with the municipal officials and assure 

them that you will work out with them a process that will work, 

that will allow them to continue with the road construction 

programs in the province of Saskatchewan to allow the 

contractors, the culvert manufacturing companies, the 

engineers, and all of the people related with the construction 

industry and the system -- will you allow them all to go back to 

work?  Will you meet with them and come to some kind of a 

compromise on getting this process back to work to provide all 

of these jobs that are so necessary this year? 

 

I see the member wants to introduce guests, and I'll give the 

floor to him. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview-Haultain on his feet? 



1752 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would beg leave 

to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  And 

thanks to my hon. friend from Maple Creek, and to the 

minister. 

 

It is my pleasure, Mr. Chairman, to introduce in the Speaker's 

gallery to you and through you to members of the Assembly, 

some 27 grade 8 students from Alvin Buckwold School in 

Saskatoon, along with Mr. Semko, the principal; Mr. Joorisity, 

the teacher; and chaperons Mrs. Gedir, Mrs. Rudolf, Mrs. Ast, 

Mrs. Porter, Mrs. Cammidge, Mrs. Krieger; and the bus driver, 

Joe.  And I hope I have everybody that's on my list here. 

 

I say it's a special honour, Mr. Chairman, and members, 

because of course Alvin Buckwold School is just around the 

corner from our house.  That school was named after a very 

special physician, doctor, in Saskatoon, and our boys went 

from kindergarten to grade 8 in that school -- very dedicated 

teachers and parents in the area. 

 

And also, Mr. Chairman, Alvin Buckwold had one of the very 

first out-of-school child care centre programs in Saskatchewan, 

and I had the pleasure of being the chairman of the board for 

that centre for the first three years.  And it's still operating.  So 

that's maybe a surprise to some of the members here, but it's a 

great facility. 

 

The students are spending the day in Regina.  We'll be meeting 

in a few minutes, and I look forward to having the photo taken 

with you, and to your questions and comments.  Have a safe 

trip back to Saskatoon.  And I know all members will want to 

join with me in extending a very warm welcome to you here.  

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Municipal Government 

Vote 24 

 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite's 

question.  Just so that we have no misunderstanding, the 

amount of grant allocation this year, under revenue sharing 

there's $36.12 million.  That breaks down into $31.52 million 

plus 4.6 out of the futures program. 

 

Now when we decided that we would proceed in this direction, 

we met with the president of SARM to discuss how we would 

allocate funds this year.  The SARM was aware that we would 

be freezing the 

futures allocation at $15 million.  He was aware that some 90 

RMs would have allocations frozen because they were more 

than two and a half years into the futures. 

 

We have had many discussions with the SARM.  The officials 

in my department are in constant communication with them.  I 

have met with the board of directors once already.  I will be 

attending all of their regional meetings that they will be having 

in June, and tomorrow I'm meeting with the rural 

administrators association. 

 

I believe that people in rural Saskatchewan are very much 

aware that the province is managing a very difficult situation in 

regards to its budget.  They're willing to participate.  It is 

difficult to maintain the rural infrastructure network, but I 

believe that they have made a determination that they will 

contribute the best they can to get through this difficult period.  

And I respect them for that and I commend them for that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- About all you could respect and commend 

them for is having the decency not to tell you how upset they 

really are.  The fact of the matter is that just because people 

listen to you and are aware of what you're doing doesn't mean 

they necessarily agree. 

 

And I suggest to you, Madam Minister, that they don't agree.  

They don't agree with your process because there is a different 

way of doing it.  You can balance the books and you can make 

your system work and you can allow the construction work and 

the job creation to go on in this province. 

 

There is no need to have road construction crews sitting idle in 

rural Saskatchewan when municipalities have roads that need 

to be built and they want to build them.  There are processes 

and ways of getting around these things to do them.  They can 

do it.  They can finance it at the start, so long as they get their 

share in the future. 

 

You see, that's why they call it futures grants.  It's something 

you pay back in the future.  It's something that they then can 

build into their budgetary process for years down the road.  

That's what's called planning, you know, looking ahead, getting 

things in order. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, all I've asked you very simply in the 

last question was this.  I'm glad that you met with the RM 

officials and I hope you continue, but will you give them 

assurance that you will go back to the drawing table and try to 

figure out a way with them, with their input, of how you can 

get this thousand kilometres of road built this year that is 

scheduled by different municipalities that have now been 

turned down? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We are in constant communication with 

the RMs and with the administration at the SARM.  We give 

our assurances that we will continue to stay on top of this issue.  

It is a difficult issue and we realize there's a lot of pressures, 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1753 

but there are virtually very few options that we have to work 

with here, and we anticipate that, as we continue to work 

together, the SARM and the individual RMs will be able to 

allocate their funds that we provide through the various grant 

allocations in the best way possible to provide the best 

infrastructure network in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well there's no question, Madam Minister, 

that the municipalities are intelligent enough to survive until 

they get rid of your government.  And they will do that; they've 

done that before. 

 

You haven't seemed to have the ability to commit to a process 

of negotiation and compromise with the municipalities.  So 

maybe after supper you might find it easier to think, so we'll 

just go on to some other areas for a while. 

 

I'd like to know on these lists that you sent over, revenue 

sharing, could you tell me in the town of Assiniboia, I think it 

is, or it says Assiniboia anyway, I'm presuming that's for the 

town, $199,418.  What would they get that grant for? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I'm afraid I didn't hear the last part of the 

member opposite's question, but I take it he was looking at the 

urban assistance program, not the RM assistance program.  It's 

an unconditional grant allocated to urban governments under a 

funding formula that we have. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay, under all of these sheets I've got here, 

I've got names of all kinds of towns and are all of these just the 

towns or are the rural municipal grants separate from these 

sheets? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The information that you have is for all 

of the urban governments for their revenue-sharing program 

and for all of the RMs. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I have it sorted 

out now.  In my left hand I have all of the towns and cities in 

Saskatchewan, and in my right hand I have all the rural 

municipalities, I guess -- at least up to 160 of them I see for 

sure, so I'm presuming they're all here. 

 

The significance that I want to bring to your attention is this.  I 

find most of these municipalities in around 56, 98, 73, 35, 70, 

$96,000.  I look over here and I see the urban grants at . . . 

Warman -- a very small town, I think; I'm not even sure how 

big it is -- 226,000 anyway.  Assiniboia is, as I said, 199,000; 

Battlefords, 329,000.  True, these are bigger centres, but there's 

a trend here.  Biggar, the small town of Biggar, $169,000; 

Swift Current, 969,000 -- almost a million dollars.  Tisdale, I 

don't know how big that is, but it's got 215,000.  Unity, 

161,000; Watrous, 144,000; Weyburn, 697,000.  And the list 

goes on and on.  Yorkton here, 939,000. 

 

Now granted these are bigger cities, and they probably need 

more grants to run their administration, but it seems very 

significant to me that the 

municipalities are running in around 100,000 and less in grants 

while the cities are running from 300,000 to a million dollars 

each.  And I think that that is exactly the problem we're going 

to run into by having these two departments amalgamated.  The 

cities are going to get all the money, and the rural 

municipalities are not going to get very much. 

 

I don't think there's any consistency in the way the grant 

structure is being allocated, and your manipulation of the 

structure that is in rural Saskatchewan has again seriously 

reduced the abilities of the municipalities to continue with their 

programs.  And I think there's a deliberate manipulation in your 

department to convert all of the grant structure to the urban 

centres.  Is that true, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, to the member opposite, absolutely it 

is not true.  Most of the people in Saskatchewan are living in an 

urban municipality whether it's a city or a village or a town, 

and a lot of the work that's carried on by the RMs is work 

related to infrastructure on our transportation system.  So there 

is a different formula for funding the RMs as opposed to 

funding the urban municipalities. 

 

But by no means do we intend now or in the future to deplete 

the revenue-sharing pool for the RMs in order to allocate it to 

the urban governments.  There is a sense of responsibility both 

to the urban and the rural, and both have services that they 

provide that are unique to each government.  So there is a 

formula that is applied.  It has been the same formula as in the 

past.  The pool this year is very much like the pool that was in 

years past.  And we'll continue along those lines in the future. 

 

But I want to make it very clear to the member opposite and to 

the RMs . . . and I don't feel they feel the same sense of threat 

that the member opposite has alluded to, and I think it's 

probably an over-active imagination. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, I 

don't think my colleague has an over-active imagination. 

 

On April 19 there was a meeting in Yorkton addressing that 

very issue of revenue sharing and it was hosted by the RM of 

Saltcoats.  And some of the comments that I received when I 

was at that meeting were a number of the RMs at that meeting 

indicated that under the former administration with the 

Department of Rural Development, the minister at the time -- 

and I think the minister was well appreciated and respected, 

was a respected individual -- certainly appeared at most, if not 

all, of the regional meetings that he was invited to or had 

representation at them. 

 

And one of the questions that the RMs and the individuals who 

took the time from their busy schedule to come and attend that 

meeting were asking was why you didn't have someone or why 

you weren't there personally at that meeting. 



1754 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

And I'm not sure where you were that day, Madam Minister.  

But maybe you could let us know where you were and why you 

didn't take the time to go and at least meet with the individuals, 

the number of RMs from that eastern portion, mid 

_central, I guess, district that met in Yorkton on the 19th. 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- First of all, to the question on the meeting 

that Saltcoats had organized in Yorkton, a number of officials 

both from our department and from Highways did attend that 

meeting and I will be attending all the regional meetings that 

SARM will be having this spring and through the course of the 

summer. 

 

So I anticipate that I will be meeting the councils of those RMs 

that have these concerns and we'll be working with them to try 

to resolve some of the problems that they feel might have been 

brought about by the reduction in revenue sharing. 

 

But there is not much we can do to help people when the need 

is so great and the money that we have to allocate is so 

reduced, so little.  So if it's a matter of trying to put more 

money into the system, I'm afraid our hands are tied. 

 

But we'll certainly listen to whatever proposals they might have 

that could better design a system that might help in today's 

environment of trying to cope with reduced funding. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Madam Minister, the major question is why 

you didn't take the time to attend the meeting in Yorkton on the 

19th.  It's certainly fine to indicate that you're planning on 

attending regional meetings that'll be coming up shortly. But I 

think this question regarding the allocation of funding for 

construction of roads is most rural municipalities get their 

budgets in place and basically a number of them are already in 

the process of starting to move some dirt and getting their road 

construction projects on the go. 

 

And the other area that they're all concerned about as well, the 

RM I was councillor in a few years back, as an RM we had our 

own construction equipment so we did all our own construction 

work; we didn't hire it.  But there are a number of RMs north of 

us around that Yorkton area and that Kamsack area and I'm not 

sure, maybe even in your area, where RMs hired local 

contractors.  And because of the decisions of the government 

right now, it's not just RMs and the fact that they won't be able 

to maintain their road programs, but we have a lot of 

contractors on the hook as well. 

 

Now I wonder if you could first of all indicate why you didn't 

take the time to at least attend that meeting to address the 

concerns in light of the fact that RMs were busy trying to get 

their road construction budgets in place.  And secondly, maybe 

we can get into some discussion regarding the effect it's going 

to have on road contractors throughout this province. 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I will have to check my schedule.  I 

believe I was tied up that day, but I would have to check back.  

Again I will say that I'm willing to meet with any of the RMs 

as we go through this difficult period.  But it's, I think, going to 

require some patience on all of our parts. 

 

In regard to the issue of funding, again I will remind the 

minister I know that we have a reduction . . . the member 

opposite, we have a reduction in funding.  The SARM is aware 

of it.  The road builders were people who had a lot of concerns.  

I have met with the executive of the Saskatchewan road 

builders association.  We have agreed to provide them with 

some information that we have at the departmental level, and 

we are working with them to try to best manage the problem 

we have regarding road construction this year in this province. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, what kind of dollars would we 

be talking of as far as road contractors and the loss, the spin-off 

that would be lost through the reduction in road construction? 

 

I think my colleague brought out the fact . . . at the meeting in 

Yorkton I believe it was raised . . . the question that was raised 

at that time was the concern over about a thousand miles . . . or 

kilometres of road in this province.  It would seem to me, 

Madam Minister, that that's going to have a very significant 

effect on revenue coming, even being revenue generated by the 

province as well. 

 

Certainly there's an outlay by the province and by the 

department to RMs through the unconditional grants.  But at 

the same time while these contractors are working, there's 

revenue derived through fuel taxes and road taxes and also the 

taxes that are paid by all the employees and a number of these 

employees who don't have any other source of income.  They're 

seasonal employees and the jobs . . . their job market that 

they're involved in . . . or the jobs they're involved in are tied 

directly into seasonal jobs.  And in some cases some of the 

road contractors indicated many of them were trying to find 

even enough weeks' work so that these individuals when they 

shut down or when they finished their construction phase that 

the people working for them had enough weeks so that they 

could apply for unemployment insurance rather than being on 

the welfare rolls.  What kind of revenue loss is that going to be 

to employees involved in the construction, to construction 

contractors, as well as the loss to the provincial government 

through taxation? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well in regard to what would have been 

the loss, 2 to $3 million was the value of the construction that 

has been lost because of the change in the grant allocation.  

That's 2 to $3 million which was the combined amount that 

both the provincial government and the municipal governments 

would have allocated to the construction program. 

 

In regard to how much that has reduced the income to the 

Department of Finance, we don't have that study -- perhaps the 

Department of Finance has it -- but we 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1755 

have not done a study into finding out what the reduction in 

spin-off would have been if these people had been working. 

 

I do realize and our government realizes that it is a difficult 

time for small contractors in rural Saskatchewan, as it has been 

for the last number of years, and to the greatest extent possible 

we'll work with them and try to make sure that there is a future 

and a method for them to continue to provide construction 

work in this province. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Well, Madam 

Minister, we all realize . . . And it's not just yesterday or today 

that we've been facing some difficulties in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  In fact the former government was actually 

bringing in some . . . trying to bring in some ways of trying to 

downsize and trying to streamline government.  And many of 

your officials were there at that time as well and knew of some 

of the difficulties that were placed on their shoulders as they 

were working, not only with rural municipalities, but urban 

municipalities, to address the escalating costs and trying to find 

a way of working effectively with communities in addressing 

their needs and their requirements. 

 

My colleague mentioned about the fact you . . . or I believe you 

had raised the question of how many RMs had actually raised 

the concern regarding the unconditional grants.  And certainly 

RMs that aren't directly affected aren't going to be that 

concerned.  They know their grants are going to be coming. 

 

It's the RMs that have had aggressive road-building 

construction programs that are affected.  And yes, they would 

be raising the issue because the fact that these conditional 

grants are now stretched out over four years means that they've 

got to look at ways of bringing in the revenue to maintain their 

present budgets. 

 

It seems to me when I was at the meeting in Yorkton and 

someone had -- I'm not sure if it was my colleague -- indicated 

that it seems like RMs have been beat on the heads.  And I'm 

just not just certain it's the rural municipalities feel that they 

don't have much to go . . . or anywhere to go, anywhere, that no 

one's really listening. 

 

Or health boards, it's like the health boards across this province 

or the educational boards.  Everyone that I talked to is certainly 

trying to . . . is looking at offering some ideas.  And it seemed 

to me that whenever the former government made a decision 

like this people were ranting and raving and angry. 

 

Now I think you're dealing with individuals as the Premier 

indicated.  In rural Saskatchewan a lot of people there have a 

conservative philosophy of at least trying to address the 

concerns and trying to deal with the concerns in a very 

legitimate fashion rather than just becoming angry. 

 

And I would suggest to you what RMs are doing is they're 

trying to preserve their role in Saskatchewan. 

And that's why they haven't become as aggressive as some 

other groups would be.  I would suggest if it was a 

union-organized type of group that they would probably have 

been on the Legislative Assembly steps already. 

 

Madam Minister, what I would like to know is what your 

department has done regarding the resolution that came out of 

that Yorkton meeting.  There was a resolution passed at the 

Yorkton meeting.  And I'll just read the last part, or the 

resolution that was passed.  I won't read the preamble. 

 

The resolution says: Therefore be it resolved that we request 

the Minister of Municipal Government to reconsider the 

decision of allowing only those RMs with futures less than two 

times the current construction allocation by having the 

province slow the process of reducing the accounts payable. 

 

And I wonder what the department has done in response to this 

resolution that came from that meeting. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The problem we have is of course with 

our debt.  And whether it's a debt to the RMs or a debt to a 

bond holder, a debt is a debt.  And we decided that we would 

reduce the amount of debt that the province carried. 

 

And so it is going to be very difficult for us to reverse the 

situation and say it doesn't matter if it's a debt account 

receivable into the future on road construction to the RMs, it's 

still a debt, and it still rides on our books as a debt. 

 

So there isn't too much we can do about the situation because 

unfortunately, like everything else that is happening in 

Saskatchewan, we have to be able to manage our debt load and 

manage the finances of the province. 

 

And everybody has a legitimate cause why they should have 

more money.  Of course the RMs are saying very seriously, this 

impacts upon us in a very negative way.  We need to have this 

road transportation system in Saskatchewan.  We provide a lot 

of work for our communities and so they can make a very 

legitimate request for us to go back and try to reformulate the 

policy that was developed on our last budget. 

 

But it's just not easy.  We can't find money that we don't have; 

it's not there.  And if we're going to balance the budget and be 

able to maintain a credit rating, we've got to be serious about 

what we're doing.  And I believe that the people in rural 

Saskatchewan have made a commitment with this government 

to make sure that our future is stable and secure, and they will 

make the sacrifices that they have to make. 

 

There is no more money in the system; we can't find it; I can't 

give them what we haven't got.  I can't say that we're going to 

change the futures program again so that they can go further 

into the futures; all it does is 



1756 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

put us further into debt.  It can't be done.  Even though there's a 

hundred ways of saying it should be done and it's the best thing 

for people in rural Saskatchewan, unfortunately the reality of 

the situation that we face says that we can't do it. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I find that 

interesting, having chaired the minister's advisory committee 

on rural development.  And you're very well aware, Madam 

Minister, of the requests that you brought forward regarding 

municipal policing, or rural policing, and the police issue, and 

that had everything to do regarding funding. 

 

And at that time the issue wasn't whether we had the money to 

pay for it, it was that the province . . . it was the province's, the 

federal government's, responsibility to continue the present 

ratio of funding.  And so if it was okay then, how come all of a 

sudden now we've got to look at ways of reducing the deficit? 

 

Now I would suggest, Madam Minister, that to talk about 

reducing deficit -- and you mentioned that, okay, through the 

futures program it would be extended over four years' program 

instead of a two-year pay-out -- I would suggest when we're 

looking at deficit financing . . . and to dwell on the deficit, the 

deficit will not be taken care of in one or two years, and we all 

know that.  At least I think most people in Saskatchewan are 

aware of that. 

 

If you're going to look at deficit reduction, you're going to have 

to look at a long term.  And I wonder what you have done or 

what your government has done in sitting down and consulting 

with local governments and getting their input prior to sending 

out letters that indicate right now that we have -- due to the 

difficulties, due to the financial constraints that this 

government is facing -- we're going to have to make certain 

restrictions or restrict certain programs or cut back. 

 

What kind of consultation took place prior to these decisions 

that were made with the . . . let's start with Rural Development 

or Rural Affairs. 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- You make a very good point, that we 

have to continue to work in partnership with local 

governments, and we are starting that process now.  We 

understand the pressure that they're under and the pressure on 

the property tax, and we are working on a number of avenues 

in which we can engage in a process that would better keep 

them involved and provide us with better advice and with 

better information. 

 

So in that regard I agree with you that it is going to be very 

difficult to initiate a plan for recovery in Saskatchewan without 

the full participation and encouragement of local governments. 

 

In regard to what consultation took place as we prepared our 

budget, they were aware of the 

reduction of $3.8 million to their revenue-sharing pool.  We 

had informed them about that before we announced the budget. 

 

The issue of the $4.6 million which is drawing down from the 

futures, they were not consulted. That was a decision that was 

made through the Department of Finance as they looked at the 

overall debt load of the province.  And the decision was made 

that the futures would be drawn down from 19.6 to 15 and that 

4.6 that is there would be allocated through the Department of 

Finance to the rural municipalities.  That was not part of the 

consultation process prior to the budget. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, I 

wonder if we could change the subject a little bit to deal with 

the situation at Sled Lake.  You're familiar with the voting 

irregularity problem that they seem to have on a regular basis.  

I wonder if there's any new information about that that you 

might want to share with us. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The situation at Sled Lake has been going 

on for a number of years.  It is a community problem and we 

try as best we can at the departmental level to stay out of issues 

where we feel there's personality conflicts or family conflicts at 

a community level. 

 

So we have had officials who have been monitoring the 

situation at Sled Lake, but we have not intervened in that.  And 

if you want an update, I will provide you with our latest 

correspondence on that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Yes, Madam Minister, that would be very much 

appreciated.  I received a telephone call this afternoon, early 

afternoon, about the situation again.  Apparently, the latest 

information that I have anyway is that there were a couple of 

resignations from the town council, and then there was another 

opportunity for an election, and subsequent to that, there was 

allegations once again of voter irregularities. 

 

I think you're probably basically correct when you suggest that 

it's a situation that seems to be a family and a couple of other 

families that have some real serious personal conflicts and 

everything else like that.  But when they bring forward 

allegations of voter irregularities and those kinds of things, I 

think they have to be at least checked out and substantiated to 

see if there's any truth to the matter at all. 

 

But I would respect your thoughts on that and appreciate any 

information you may have on that situation. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We have officials in the department who 

have been working with the village of Sled Lake.  If there are 

voting irregularities, then our officials will of course take 

action.  At this point in time, I think it would be premature to 

make any statement around that at all. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I think the 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1757 

allegations, as I understand them, are such that people voting 

that shouldn't be allowed to vote, basically is what it amounts 

to; people outside of the community that are voting in the 

community, suggesting that they have status to vote in that 

community when indeed they may or may not.  But that's 

basically the allegation, so I'd appreciate it if your department 

would take some opportunity to check that out. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 24 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to first, 

like to thank the members of the opposition for their questions 

today, and I would like to thank the Municipal Government 

officials that were here to help us this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, as 

well we thank you for your answers in the past few days with 

respect to the questions we are asking and thank the officials 

too for their help in answering them. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


