




















































Hansard: April 21, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1065 

 April 21, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have petitions 

here from various people from across Saskatchewan.  They 

deal with health care.  And I'll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker.  It 

says: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that the 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government; 

 

 That the entire health care system is being restructured and 

that the people in the communities affected have not had time 

or opportunity to properly have input into this process; 

 

 And that with legislation involving far less dislocation and 

potential for social ill, your Assembly has seen fit to defer 

consideration of the legislation until a long process of 

consultation by the Assembly itself; 

 

 And that there is little more disruptive and threatening to a 

community than the threat of having basic health care 

services removed or placed under the control of non-local 

authorities. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I have signatures here from Rama, Invermay, Sheho, the areas 

of Macklin and Denzil and Margo and I want to present them 

to the Assembly here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also would 

present petitions today.  Many pages here from Saskatchewan 

citizens.  I'll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, today I have petitioners from the communities of 

Invermay, Margo, Margo, Invermay, Hazel Dell, Lintlaw, 

Buchanan.  It looks like communities all up and down the west 

side of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  I would so 

table these petitions today. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I as well have 

petitions from all over rural Saskatchewan with respect to 

health care in the province.  I'll just quickly read through the 

prayer. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from places like Margo, 

Saskatchewan; Kerrobert, Saskatchewan; Kindersley, Eston, 

Eastend, Frontier, Shaunavon.  Mr. Speaker, primarily on the 

west side of the province, these ones are from.  I present those 

before the House now. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 

present a number of petitions to this Assembly.  Allow me to 

read the prayer into the records: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are petitions here signed by 

individuals from Luseland, Kerrobert, Dodsland, Major, 

Springwater, and Wolseley, Mr. Speaker, and Invermay. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have several 

pages of petitions I would like to lay on the Table today.  And I 

would like to read the prayer into the record also, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 And wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 



1066 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1993 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are from places like Invermay, 

Saskatoon, Yorkton, Regina.  We have gone into Buchanan, 

Lintlaw, Saskatoon, Shilo, Rama, Springside, on and on 

through Hodgeville, Vanguard, and pretty well through that 

area, Pambrun. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now lay these on the Table. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a 

large number of petitions to present to the House today.  I will 

read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from Kerrobert, Major, Climax, Bracken, 

Shaunavon, Swift Current, Eastend, Consul, Ravenscrag, 

Weyburn, Maple Creek, Dollard, from all across 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On this very 

important day it gives me pleasure to present petitions to the 

Assembly.  I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

From various communities around the province.  Saskatoon 

city is represented here; Macklin, Vanguard, Invermay, 

Hodgeville, Pambrun; just a whole host of places like Oxbow, 

Alameda, Alida, lots of places down that side of the province.  

In all, I have 28 pages of about 400 names to present to the 

Table today. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is also a 

pleasure for me to lay on the Table petitions pertaining to this 

Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you request, I'll just read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts 

Act so that communities may continue their efforts to 

organize their people and have a genuine impact on the 

process without intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by 

the government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have approximately 15 pages full from . . . it 

looks like they're all from southern Saskatchewan; Neville — 

two pages from Neville; Vanguard was here today; Pambrun; 

there's even some from Moose Jaw; Eston; Eston.  You look all 

through that same area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Most exciting to me, Mr. Speaker, is approximately — just 

gathered up in a few days — is from my home town of Craik, 

approximately 300 names here, and it's a pleasure for me, Mr. 

Speaker, to lay these on the Table. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too 

have some petitions that I'm very pleased and proud to be able 

to present to the Legislative Assembly this afternoon on behalf 

of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I will read the prayer.  This is slightly different than the ones 

that my colleagues have been reading: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to urge the provincial 

government to provide proper funding to continue the 

operation of Souris Valley Regional Care Centre because it 

provides special services for persons with special needs 

which are not available anywhere else in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these are mostly from Weyburn, and 

certainly from towns surrounding Weyburn.  And indeed, when 

you page through them, Mr. Speaker, right across the province.  

Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure now to hand 

in a total of 5,674 signatures on behalf of those people in 

Saskatchewan concerned about Souris Valley Regional Care 

Centre. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

The Clerk: — According to order, the following petitions have 

been reviewed and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read 

and received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan, humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to order SaskPower to facilitate the production of 

non-utility generated power in areas of increased demand. 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan, 



April 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1067 

humbly praying that your Honourable Assembly may be 

pleased to postpone consideration of The Health Districts 

Act. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce 

some guests in your gallery.  They are here from the town of 

Cabri.  I know I can't talk about any policy, but I know they're 

here today to witness the scene in the Legislative Assembly 

and around the building.  And I want to welcome those people 

from Cabri here today who are seriously concerned about the 

process that's going on.  Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a great 

pleasure today to introduce to you and the members of the 

legislature the mayor of the town of Craik, Ted Obrigewitsch.  

Ted, if you would stand in the gallery, please, in your gallery, 

Mr. Speaker.  And along with him is his wife, Loretta, and Joan 

Maier from Craik. 

 

These people have been very instrumental in our community, 

and I'm very glad to have them here today for the cause that 

we're talking about here in this House today and surrounding 

the buildings.  And I ask all members to welcome my people 

from Craik here today.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm truly happy 

today to introduce people from my constituency who are in the 

galleries.  It isn't often that we have the pleasure to introduce 

through you and to the Assembly people from our constituency 

simply because of the geography and the number of miles that 

it takes to get here. 

 

In the Speaker's gallery we have with us Les Potter who is an 

old friend from Gull Lake, Saskatchewan, who is on the health 

board and the RM (rural municipality) council down there, and 

of course is taking part in the festivities here today. 

 

Close beside him is Jo-Anne Elmslie.  She is a nurse in the 

Gull Lake hospital.  Very concerned about our province.  Her 

husband is the mayor of Gull Lake and couldn't make it up the 

steps because of his bad hip.  But we know that she will be 

happy to report to him what is happening in the House today. 

 

We also have in the opposition gallery Walter Laberge, the 

theatre operator down at Gull Lake who is also very much 

interested in the businesses that go on in our province. 

 

We have Colleen Smith from Abbey, and she's in the Speaker's 

gallery and she's the hotel owner and operator in both Abbey 

and Cabri. 

 

And so I hope that all of the members will join me in 

welcoming these people to the Assembly today. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Through you 

and to . . . through you to the Assembly I'd like to introduce 

two of my constituents from Alida that have travelled to 

Regina today — Jeanne and Garnet Ball up in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I would ask that the Assembly welcome them 

here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Through you and to all 

members of this Assembly I'd like to introduce a group of 

individuals who have again joined Vonda Kosloski to come 

and take the time to — they're sitting in your gallery — take 

the time just to witness the proceedings in this Assembly.  

We're glad to see that there are people in this province who are 

interested in what's taking place here.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Health Care Changes Deadlines 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today my 

question is to the Minister of Health. 

 

Madam Minister, you've just had the opportunity to listen to 

hundreds of Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan taxpayers, 

many of whom have travelled great distances to bring a 

message to you today.  Right now, Madam Minister, you have 

a unique opportunity to stand in this House and show that you 

are listening to that message. 

 

My question, Madam Minister, is a very simple one and I think 

it's a question that all the people who came today deserve a 

straightforward answer to.  Madam Minister, will you slow 

down your process of health reform.  Will you postpone the 

closure of 52 acute facilities, give the decision making back to 

the communities where it belongs, and give these people time 

to develop community-based solutions that will keep people 

and health services in their community?  Yes or no, Madam 

Minister?  Will you give these people what they are asking for? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order.  Before the minister answers, I 

will ask our invited guests please not to participate in any way 

either by applause or comments, in the activities on the floor. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, a few short months ago, 

the members opposite were saying that we didn't have enough 

direction and should be making these tough decisions.  A few 

short months ago the 



1068 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1993 

members opposite were saying that health reform . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — A few short months ago the members 

opposite were telling us that we needed to move health care 

reform along with more directions, more guidelines, and more 

information as to when district boards should be in place.  The 

hospitals and the integrated facilities that are affected have six 

months to make alternative arrangements and to talk to other 

communities within the district — well till October 1. 

 

There is time.  This isn't happening overnight.  There is time 

for them to look at ways of dealing with any of the problems 

that may exist in the conversion.  And the members opposite 

are fully aware of that.  However it is either from their point of 

view we should be making the decisions, and when we do, we 

shouldn't be; or that we should be speeding up health reform, 

and then when we do, we shouldn't be.  It is simply a political 

stance the members opposite take, not one of principle, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Madam Minister, it is becoming very painfully 

obvious that you don't listen very well.  I mean what do people 

in this province have to do to get through to you?  They're 

simply asking for more time, more information, and more 

authority to make their own decisions to determine the future 

of their communities without your heavy hand in place.  Is that 

too much to ask? 

 

I mean your government got elected, Madam Minister, to be 

open and accountable and by promising to protect health care.  

Now it's time, Madam Minister, that you show you know how 

to listen.  Will you postpone those closures and allow these 

decisions to be made at the local level and take the closure off 

this Assembly?  Will you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 

the ones that weren't listening to the people for the last 10 

years.  The members opposite were drumming up a debt in this 

province that is virtually crippling this province and making it 

impossible, making it impossible for us to maintain medicare 

as it has been in the past.  It is therefore necessary for us to 

look at reform and we described at length the reform. 

 

It's the members opposite who don't listen and who play 

political games.  We are listening to the people.  We've been 

throughout this province.  There is a lot of support for health 

reform.  There's a lot of support throughout this province to 

move health reform quickly because the financial situation in 

the province brings an urgency to it and because health reform 

is right. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Madam Minister, your officials go around this 

province and tell the folks in these 

communities . . . 15,000 at the present who've met together to 

question your people: is this going to save any money?  And 

your officials say no.  Don't throw that out at us. 

 

Madam Minister, you are creating two classes of citizens when 

it comes to health care in this province.  Yesterday you were 

caught trying to create two classes of citizens when it came to 

children's dental care.  Today you are telling the people in this 

province that they are second-class citizens; that they have not 

the same rights to quality health care as other residents. 

 

You can't call this fair, Madam Minister.  All these people are 

asking for is to be treated fairly.  Give them the right to make 

their own decisions without you holding the hammer all the 

time. 

 

You said out there today, Madam Minister, that you were going 

to meet with people for the next two weeks all over this 

province.  It's simple, Madam Minister.  Give them that right.  

Take the closure off, go meet them, and then be prepared to 

come back to this Assembly with a sane plan.  Will you do that, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, one of the biggest 

problems here is the fact that the opposition members have 

been fearmongering and spreading misinformation and doing a 

disservice to their constituents.  And I hear from their 

constituents — especially from the member from Kindersley 

— people who write to me and people who phone me and tell 

me that the misinformation that's being spread throughout his 

constituency is doing a disservice to the people in that 

constituency.  It's fearmongering, it's irresponsible, and it's 

scare tactics, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now with respect to the district legislation, we need the district 

legislation to set up boards so we can do the kind of planning 

that has to be done in health reform, so that local communities 

can have a say.  And the Saskatchewan Health-Care 

Association sent — representing hundreds of boards 

throughout this province — sent a letter saying: our 

membership is concerned about the length of time it is taking 

for the legislation to be passed. 

 

Many areas are ready to form their district and it's essential . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order.  Order.  I would like to ask the 

member from Arm River not to interject that often.  Order.  

Give the member a chance.  You've asked your question.  I 

think the people in the galleries, it's very difficult for them to 

hear in the galleries if there's a constant interruption.  Give the 

minister a chance to answer the question.  I think she's 

sufficiently answered on this one.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

that last answer is simply misleading.  I mean that's saying to 

people in this province that yes, that you're improving services.  

They don't believe that 



April 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1069 

because nothing you've said to date is going to keep a doctor in 

a community when all the diagnostic services are shut down.  

Without a lab they simply can't remain in their communities.  

How can you maintain quality health care if you can't keep a 

doctor, Madam Minister? 

 

Madam Minister, that's what they were saying out there today, 

is that this thing has to be rethought.  Because what it's doing is 

driving out the doctor and it's driving out the diagnostic 

services and it's driving out the health care professionals who 

are absolutely fundamental to maintain the service in the 

community. 

 

Madam Minister, these people are in favour of change.  I want 

you to tell them today that your changes won't mean the doctor 

leaving, the lab leaving, the diagnostic services leaving, and the 

health care professionals leaving.  I want you to tell them that 

today, Madam Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I want to finish the quote I 

was reading from the Saskatchewan Health-Care Association, 

the Saskatchewan Health-Care Association that represents 

hundreds of boards throughout this province: 

 

 Many areas are ready to form their district and it's essential 

that a legal framework be in place to enable them to do so. 

 

They are asking for the district legislation. 

 

With respect to X-ray and diagnostic services, it's not us saying 

they won't have availability to that — it's the members 

opposite.  And that's the kind of misinformation they're 

spreading throughout this province.  X-ray and diagnostic 

services can continue to be used within a hospital facility.  Six 

per cent, on average, of a doctor's income is in-patient acute 

care.  It's not a big part of the income.  Doctors shouldn't leave 

their communities and their towns for that proportion. 

 

And talking about doctors, I only have to remind the members 

opposite of a letter they received from Dr. Kendel last year, 

decrying the political manoeuvring and manipulation and the 

misinformation that they were spreading — the 

misinformation.  The fact . . . this doctor thought that the way 

you were behaving about trying to destroy health reform was 

absolutely unforgivable.  And that's what you continue to do.  

You haven't listened.  You haven't learnt your lesson. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Madam Minister, there's going to be places in 

this province where you'll be able to get a veterinarian quicker 

than you will a doctor, and that's the truth — a veterinarian.  

People's dogs will have better service than what you're 

proposing for rural Saskatchewan. 

Madam Minister, Tommy Douglas and the people that you so 

revere brought medicare through this Assembly without closure 

hanging over the heads of the people of this province.  Today, 

Madam Minister, you have an opportunity to go out and 

consult as your predecessors did, without closure hanging over 

this Assembly.  The people of this province deserve as much. 

 

Madam Minister, why don't you stand in your place today and 

say that closure has no place while you do your homework?  

Would you do that today, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

would study things to death.  They spent 1.8 million on a study 

by the Murray Commission which they then put on the shelves.  

And they'd study it and they'd study it to try and keep people 

pacified and busy studying and not doing anything, nothing to 

save medicare, nothing to save the province.  Spend, spend, 

spend, spend, bankrupt the province — it doesn't matter.  Don't 

accept any responsibility.  Stand up here and blame somebody 

else — that's their philosophy, that's their political philosophy, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to quote from Dr. Kendel's letter that was sent to the 

member opposite from Rosthern, where he said: 

 

 We do our rural citizens a grave disservice if we continue to 

support and foster the idea that maintenance of a hospital in 

their community is the only basis for assuring high-quality 

accessible health care.  That is (and I quote, that is) frankly, 

dishonest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Care Cost Savings 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  And 

yes, you're correct, that flushed me out.  Because when that 

Madam Minister gets up and makes accusations like that and 

considers me to be dishonest, Madam Minister, I cannot let that 

go unchallenged.  You are dishonest, madam, because you're 

only giving half the picture, half the picture. 

 

That letter from Dr. Kendel, you are accurate in what you are 

saying.  He is the executive director of the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons.  You forgot to quote from the letter 

that was subsequent to that from the president of the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons, where the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons disown themselves from Dr. Kendel's remarks. 

 

Why do you not quote and give the whole picture, Madam 

Minister?  There's the other letter involved that you 

conveniently forgot to talk about. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, there has been an uproar outside.  

There has been an uproar that we heard from inside this 

Assembly.  There has been an uproar from 



1070 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1993 

the people in this Assembly — although it was a mild one — 

because, Madam Minister, like your Premier said, the people of 

this province are decent people.  But you are testing their 

patience, Madam Minister. 

 

Now outside — I'm coming to the question, Mr. Speaker — 

outside you said there was a $5 million saving — $5 million 

saving.  The province of this debt is $16 billion. 

 

The Speaker: — Order.  I want the member to put his question 

please. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, I will do as you have instructed. 

 

My question to you, Madam Speaker, is: what proportion is 5 

million on 16 billion?  Is that worth the destruction of the 

medicare system as we know it in Saskatchewan?  Is that worth 

it, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, it's a $20 

million saving annualized, not 5.  Secondly — the members 

opposite agree with me, it's 20 million annualized — secondly, 

it is not the destruction of the health care system.  That is 

exactly the kind of fearmongering and scare tactics that we've 

witnessed over the last few weeks in this province.  The 

destruction of the health care system?  Come on.  Let's not be 

ridiculous. 

 

What we hope to do by organizing communities on a district 

basis is to create a larger population so that we can deliver 

more services to smaller communities in the long run. 

 

Look at some of the other health centres in the province.  The 

matron from Delisle said on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation) the other morning that they provide better 

services than their hospital did. 

 

Look at the opportunities within the change, the potential 

within the change to channel dollars from the institutional 

sector to more community-based services.  But not the 

members opposite; they don't want to change.  Not because 

their own commission didn't tell them to change, but because 

for selfish, political reasons they want to grandstander, they 

want to fearmonger, they're vying for political . . . Each of 

them — one, two, three, four, who knows how many, maybe 

back there — wanting to be the leader of the next PC 

(Progressive Conservative) Party.  They're vying for attention . 

. . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — It's rally time again, Mr. Speaker.  When the 

minister gets into trouble, the caucus gets in full support there, 

to try to damage control. 

 

Madam Minister, you say we are fearmongering.  You 

say that we're spreading mistruths.  Take a look around you, 

look those people in the eye.  Look the people of Saskatchewan 

in the eye, Madam Minister, and tell them that they are wrong.  

Tell them that they have no fear.  Tell them that there is no 

fear, that they will continue to have quality health service 

throughout this province under all conditions.  Madam 

Minister, we'll come to that in a subsequent question yet. 

 

But, Madam Minister, I want to ask you a question that I find 

appalling.  That you cannot find $5 million . . . There's your 

deputy minister sitting beside you; he's getting $800,000 extra 

this year in his ministry to run the federal NDP (New 

Democratic Party) election — right there alone, 500 . . . 

$800,000.  Why don't you use money like that to restore the 

dental plan for the children, Madam Minister? 

 

There are choices to be made, Madam Minister.  You are 

making the wrong choices.  And like my colleague, the leader 

of this party, has said, you are not giving them enough time. 

 

And I ask you once more, Madam Minister:  will you do as 

these hundreds of people today in front of the steps of this 

legislature and inside have requested to you to do — is to give 

them time to have proper input, meaningful input.  Will you do 

that, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the people in 

Saskatchewan will have quality health care in every corner of 

Saskatchewan.  They will have access . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — They will have access to quality health 

care services. 

 

And we never said the people in the galleries were 

fearmongering.  We said the PC opposition was fearmongering.  

And for you to suggest and twist the words is just an example 

of your . . . of PC tactics, scare tactics, fearmongering, and 

misinformation.  Another example. 

 

They know it's 20 million annualized.  They said that's next 

year.  But they're still talking only 5 million.  Another piece of 

misinformation by the PCs opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, people will have time to develop their 

plans and to work through this in the context of a district.  The 

department will be working with them.  I will be meeting with 

people.  There will be time for communities to get organized 

under the new directions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — It's kind of interesting, Mr. Speaker, when we 

hear the member get up, and the Premier on other occasions, 

and talk about fearmongering.  They should recognize it when 

they see it, I suppose, because they are the experts in it. 



April 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1071 

Your Premier told us, and told the people of 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, all five hospitals would be closed.  

You remember Social Services said, when we put in a $125 

deductible for drug plan, that people would now have to choose 

between drugs and food.  Now you've got it up to $1,720, 

Madam Minister, you are running around the province saying 

that our government at the time was responsible for the death 

of people.  That's what you did, Madam Minister.  You talk 

about fearmongering. 

 

But, Madam Minister, I hope that one thing that this rally today 

has done for you, and that has made you realize that people out 

there are not here because of politics.  People out there cut 

across the political stream.  Everyone was there from whatever, 

even your own party, where some members from your own 

party were your strongest critics on this plan, Madam Minister. 

 

They voted for you at the one time because . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order.  Order.  Does the member have a 

question?  The member put his question please. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Madam Minister, is it any wonder that these 

people today, in Saskatchewan, are hurt — feel hurt; feel 

frustrated.  They feel angry and betrayed, as my colleague says.  

How do you justify that betrayal, Madam Minister?  How do 

you justify closing 52 Saskatchewan hospitals, considering the 

commitments that you and your Premier and colleagues made 

across this province during the election, that you would do 

more with less, that you would spend more on health and 

education, full well knowing the amount of the deficit being 

$14.2 billion at the time. 

 

You knew it and yet . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order.  Order.  Let the minister answer. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have 

always refused to put the real picture out.  In 1986, prior to the 

election, they predicted the deficit to be $365 million.  And 

after the election they said whoops, it's 1.2 billion.  That's the 

kind of information this province has had.  That's the kind of 

information the Premier and my other colleagues in 

government have had through the years as we have spoken to 

Saskatchewan people.  Leading up to the election in 1991, the 

New Democratic Party said that first and foremost we'd get a 

handle on the deficit and when money was available we would 

use it to improve programs.  And that's our commitment today, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now let's just talk about the members opposite and their record 

and what Mr. Grant Hodgins had to say about their record.  On 

June 17, 1991, Mr. Hodgins had this to say about those 

members, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 We have a responsibility, Mr. Speaker, to deliver government 

services to the people in 

the most efficient manner possible.  This province is on the 

verge of bankruptcy . . . 

 

Verge of bankruptcy.  That's because of your mismanagement, 

it's because of your overspending, your deficit budgeting, 

deficit after deficit after deficit, 11 years in a row. 

 

 This province is on the verge of bankruptcy, and we cannot 

afford to do otherwise. 

 

That's what he said then . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I have a letter here, Mr. Speaker, that was 

hand-delivered to me today.  It's dated April 19 and it's 

addressed to the Hon. Louise Simard from a Joy Moe.  And I'm 

going to pass on some of her comments to you now, Madam 

Minister — and you have received this letter as well.  And she 

says: 

 

 I am writing to you as a concerned parent and resident in 

rural Saskatchewan.  We have a daughter who is now nearly 

seven years old and has been handicapped from birth.  In the 

past we have had nothing but praise for life in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 On two occasions our daughter has suffered near fatal 

seizures where we believed immediate treatment saved her 

life.  The 80 kilometre trip to our nearest hospital suggested 

by your recent cuts would in all likelihood have cost us our 

daughter's life.  And we are not alone.  There are many 

people, young and old, in our community and others like it, 

whose lives have been . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order.  Order.  Does the member have 

a question?  Does the member have a question? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I do, Mr. Speaker, and the question is based 

on this last sentence: 

 

 There are many people, young and old, in our community and 

others like it, whose lives have been saved by immediate 

medical care in our town. 

 

You have received that letter, Madam Minister.  How are you 

going to answer that lady and her daughter? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I have 

answered this question in this legislature numerous times.  The 

members opposite know the answer, but they want to continue 

to spread misinformation. 

 

The emergency services that are available to that person today 

will be available tomorrow.  We will be maintaining 

emergency acute care services in those communities.  We've 

said it a hundred times.  Health centres throughout the province 

have the capacity to 



1072 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1993 

do emergency acute care services, and so do ambulances do 

that.  Those services will be provided. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Madam Minister, you and your troops did a 

pretty good job out there in the crowd, working the crowd, 

telling them that they didn't have to worry, that they were a 

special case.  Every one of your men and women out there said 

this to everybody who had approached them: don't worry, don't 

worry, you will be taken care of; your town is going to get 

special treatment; your town is going to get special 

consideration; nothing adverse will happen. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, you can't have it both ways.  Either 

you're going to try to save money, which your own hospital 

utilization report that you're holding off till the end of May says 

there is no saving of money, and yet out there you're telling 

them you're doing it to save money. 

 

Madam Minister, how do you square that?  How do you square 

that, Madam Minister?  I'd like you to get up and tell the people 

in this province which it is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, with the establishment of 

district boards that have already taken place there have been 

economies of scale and savings realized.  It's already happened 

— several million dollars in Saskatoon and Regina.  Midwest 

and Twin Rivers are looking at that; P.A. (Prince Albert) is 

looking at saving; Moose Jaw.  Wherever there has been a 

district board, Mr. Speaker, there's a plan being put in place 

and there will be efficiencies realized. 

 

However, we are not embarking on health reform for the 

purpose of cost containment only.  It is also for the purpose of 

coordinating and integrating services in Saskatchewan, and it is 

for the purpose of moving institutional dollars to more 

community-based services so that we can provide a broader 

range of services and more appropriately meet real health care 

needs.  It is also for the purpose of spending more on health 

promotion and disease prevention, filling in gaps, and 

providing a much more comprehensive health care system for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I'd like leave to introduce some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, in your gallery a couple of 

gentlemen I'd like to introduce to the Assembly — a former 

reeve of the RM of Walpole, Dennis Lamontagne, and another 

businessman from my area, Orville Swayze.  We'd just like to 

extend a welcome to 

them today for having taken the time to come into the gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Martens: — I'd like to have leave to introduce some 

guests also. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In the gallery we 

have some people from the community of Vanguard which is a 

very enterprising young community.  And they have had a fair 

degree of representation in the Assembly here today, in the 

galleries, of students and young people.  And they closed the 

school down there, Mr. Speaker, to come to the Assembly 

today, and I want to welcome them here for their efforts and 

thank them for coming. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Beechy 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move first 

reading of a Bill to restore health care to services out of the 

community of Beechy. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:45 p.m. until 2:50 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd Haverstock 

— 10 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Lyons 

Thompson Pringle 

Tchorzewski Lautermilch 

Lingenfelter Murray 

Teichrob Hamilton 

Shillington Trew 

Koskie Serby 

Anguish Whitmore 

Goulet Roy 

Atkinson Cline 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Carson Stanger 

Mitchell Knezacek 

Upshall Harper 

Hagel Langford 

Koenker Jess 

Lorje  

— 33 

              A Bill to restore health care services to the  



April 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1073 

community of Eston 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It was a pleasure 

to move first reading of a Bill to restore health care services to 

the community of Eston. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:53 p.m. until 2:54 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd  

— 9 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Pringle 

Thompson Lautermilch 

Wiens Murray 

Lingenfelter Hamilton 

Teichrob Trew 

Shillington Serby 

Koskie Whitmore 

Anguish Roy 

Goulet Cline 

Atkinson Crofford 

Kowalsky Stanger 

Carson Knezacek 

Hagel Harper 

Koenker Langford 

Lorje Jess 

Lyons  

— 31 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — To ask leave for the introduction of 

guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure to introduce 

to you and through you to the other members of the legislature, 

a couple of groups of guests here.  My uncle Lorne and aunt 

Lorraine Dickson, who are in the gallery opposite here.  And 

John and Lindy Buhr from Lucky Lake, and Lois Lowe from 

Kyle — friends and committed Saskatchewan citizens.  I 

welcome you to the legislature and thank you for taking the 

time to watch the proceedings. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Bengough 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's with a great 

deal of pleasure today that I move first reading of a Bill to 

restore health care services to the community 

of Bengough. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:56 p.m. until 2:57 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Boyd 

Muirhead Toth 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

— 10 

Nays 

 

Van Mulligen Lautermilch 

Wiens Murray 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Teichrob Serby 

Shillington Roy 

Anguish Cline 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Carson Stanger 

Koenker Knezacek 

Lorje Langford 

Lyons Jess 

Pringle  

— 23 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Grenfell 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's with a great 

deal of pleasure that I rise in my place today to move the first 

reading of a Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Grenfell. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:59 p.m. until 3 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Boyd 

Muirhead Toth 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

— 10 

Nays 

Wiens Lautermilch 

Lingenfelter Murray 

Teichrob Trew 

Shillington Serby 

Anguish Roy 

Kowalsky Cline 

Carson Crofford 

Mitchell Stanger 

Koenker Knezacek 

Lorje Carlson 

Lyons Langford 

Pringle Jess 

— 24 

 

A Bill to restore health care services to the 



1074 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1993 

community of Cupar 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I move 

first reading of a Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Cupar. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:02 p.m. until 3:03 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Toth 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd  

— 9 

Nays 

Wiens Lautermilch 

Lingenfelter Murray 

Teichrob Trew 

Shillington Roy 

Anguish Cline 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Carson Stanger 

Mitchell Knezacek 

Koenker Carlson 

Lyons Langford 

Pringle Jess 

— 22 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — With leave, to make an introduction of 

another guest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you 

and through to the other members of the legislature a friend I 

met in 1980 on a farmers' exchange to China, Homer Beach, in 

the east gallery.  Homer is a long-time committed farmer and 

cooperator, a member of a co-op farm in the Ernfold district, 

and I'd like to welcome him to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Macklin 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I take it as a great 

privilege to move first reading of a Bill to restore health care 

services to the community of Macklin. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:05 p.m. until 3:06 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Toth t 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

— 8 

The Speaker: — Could we ask all guests in the galleries to 

please remove their hats or caps.  Thank you. 

 

Nays 

Wiens Murray 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Teichrob Cline 

Anguish Crofford 

Kowalsky Stanger 

Carson Knezacek 

Mitchell Carlson 

Koenker Langford 

Lyons Jess 

Pringle  

— 19 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Langenburg 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to 

restore health care services to the community of Langenburg. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:08 p.m. until 3:10 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Toth 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd  

— 7 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Pringle 

Wiens Murray 

Lingenfelter Cline 

Teichrob Crofford 

Kowalsky Stanger 

Carson Knezacek 

Mitchell Carlson 

Koenker Langford 

Lyons Jess 

— 18 

 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Kincaid 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure that 

I rise today to move first reading of a Bill to restore health care 

services to the community of Kincaid. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:12 p.m. until 3:13 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Boyd t 

 



April 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1075 

 

Devine Toth 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens  

— 7 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Lautermilch 

Wiens Murray 

Lingenfelter Cline 

Teichrob McPherson 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Carson Stanger 

Mitchell Knezacek 

Koenker Carlson 

Lyons Langford 

Pringle Jess 

— 20 

 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Cut Knife 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's again a 

pleasure to move first reading of a Bill to restore health care 

services to the community of Cut Knife. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:15 p.m. until 3:16 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Boyd 

Devine Toth 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

— 8 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Murray 

Wiens Cline 

Lingenfelter McPherson 

Teichrob Crofford 

Kowalsky Stanger 

Carson Knezacek 

Mitchell Carlson 

Lyons Langford 

Pringle Jess 

Lautermilch  

— 19 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate matters and being 

able to continue on on other House business, I would request 

that you move from item 12 to item 46 and we will stand all 

those Bills at this time. 

 

The Speaker: — Items 12 to 46 are stood. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend The Association of School 

Business Officials of Saskatchewan Act 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to explain 

the purpose of this Bill which is very simple and 

straightforward.  The Association of School Business Officials 

of Saskatchewan is the professional organization for 

individuals employed as treasurers, secretary treasurers, 

superintendents of administration in our school divisions. 

 

The association has requested that the name under which it is 

incorporated be changed to the Saskatchewan Association of 

School Business Officials. The acronym by which the 

association is commonly known would then change from 

ASBOS (Association of School Business Officials of 

Saskatchewan) to SASBO (Saskatchewan Association of 

School Business Officials). 

 

Mr. Speaker, the association has indicated that its members feel 

that the new name would be more suitable and that it would 

parallel the name of similar organizations in other provinces. 

 

This Bill involves no amendments other than the change in 

name of the association and a couple of consequential 

amendments to other statutes. 

 

I'm therefore pleased to move that Bill No. 27, An Act to 

amend the Association of School Business Officials of 

Saskatchewan Act, be now read a second time. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I just 

want to take a moment to comment on the fact that till we 

really see the Bill and what it really means, and I take the 

minister's words with great . . . We've listened to what the 

minister has said and the fact that she has indicated that the Bill 

before this Assembly, other than a name change, really doesn't 

imply that there's major changes to the Bill before us, or it's 

just an amendment to the Bill. 

 

It would appear to me just from the comments that there really 

isn't a lot that the opposition would really see wrong. 

 

But it would also be fitting, I think, for the opposition to take a 

little more time to review the Bill and have a closer look at it to 

indeed verify that what the minister is saying is true and 

adequate so that at the end of the day everyone will feel that the 

amendment, the motion, and the Bill has been properly dealt 

with and school officials, business officials across the province 

of Saskatchewan, will feel that they have had a proper voice 

and have been heard and listened to effectively in this province. 

 

Therefore at this time, Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment of 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Martens: — Could I have leave, Mr. Speaker, to 



1076 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1993 

introduce some guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Martens: — In the east gallery, Mr. Speaker, are a family 

from Glenbain, Murray Janis and his family, and I want to 

recognize him.  He's contributed significantly to the Sask 

Wheat Pool and also to the constituency and I want to thank 

him for it and acknowledge his work — and welcome here.  

And I want the members of the Assembly to join me in 

welcoming him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker.  I've got a few brief remarks concerning this Bill 

which is basically housekeeping in nature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act corrects an oversight contained in the 

underlying SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation) Act.  At present the Act enables SPMC to provide 

and administer facilities and services which are defined in the 

regulations.  Therein, Mr. Speaker, lies the difficulty because 

there are no regulations; none were ever created. 

 

The result is that our friends in the Department of Justice tell us 

there is a possible legal argument that SPMC doesn't have the 

authority to provide many of the services and the facilities it 

currently offers to its clients.  Obviously this places the 

corporation in an untenable position. 

 

One solution would be to pass regulations, which we believe to 

be unnecessary, and it would also require an exhaustive listing 

of all the services and facilities that SPMC currently provides 

or would conceivably provide in the future.  The result would 

inevitably be further complications down the road. 

 

Repealing of the offending sections is a similar and a complete 

solution.  It affirms SPMC's authority to do business both today 

and in the future.  It does not enlarge on the corporation's 

powers, nor does it further burden the system with unnecessary 

regulations.  And that is the intent of the legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It repeals two sections of the existing Act which contain the 

definitions of the terms "facility" and "service", which refer to 

the non-existent regulations, as I referred to earlier.  Repealing 

the definition will mean that the ordinary common-law 

definitions of service and facilities would prevail in 

interpreting the Act. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, the current Act refers to regulations 

that do not exist.  The omission may limit 

SPMC's authority to do business and the amendments correct 

this by removing references to regulations, allowing terms to 

take their common-law definitions. 

 

I am therefore pleased, Mr. Speaker, to move second reading of 

An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Regarding Bill No. 28, 

the Bill to . . . An Act discussing the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation amendment Act, to bring the 

amendments forward to this House, I can appreciate some of 

the comments the minister made regarding the fact that 

possibly SPMC doesn't have the authority that maybe they felt 

they had in administering and looking after . . . providing 

responsibility to administer facilities and services around this 

province and the fact that it might have been, as the minister 

indicated, simple to just bring in the appropriate regulations.  

And I think over the time many governments have gone to the 

regulations.  But I also realize when you're bringing forward 

regulations, that is time consuming as well. 

 

And I think, as I've heard the minister introducing the 

reasoning for the . . . and the rationale behind this Bill, that the 

idea was felt it was much easier and a cleaner process to just 

amend the Bill in the Assembly rather than going through the 

whole format of bringing in regulations to address the shortfalls 

in the original Bill.  And I can see nothing wrong with that 

process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

However I think it would be fair to allow the opposition an 

opportunity to get the actual Bill and review it, and then at a 

later date to, if there are any concerns that maybe — or 

additional pieces of information that we would pick up — 

maybe we would like to raise them.  And certainly I'm sure the 

government and the minister would be more than willing to 

accept any recommendations we may have so that indeed as we 

amend the present Bill before the Assembly . . . or the new Bill 

that's being brought forward — and indeed addresses all 

concerns that are apparent today and maybe even apparent 

tomorrow. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 

No. 28. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 37 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 

Act, 1984 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second 

reading of Bill No. 37, An Act to amend the Urban 

Municipality Act, 1984. 

 

Among the provisions of this Bill are amendments to restore 

the ward system in Saskatchewan for urban municipalities.  

Members of this House will recall that two Bills were 

previously introduced on this subject.  They were referred to 

another second . . . after another second reading, to a Standing 

Committee on 



April 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1077 

Municipal Law, chaired by the member for Regina Wascana 

Plains. 

 

The standing committee held public hearings on the wards Bill 

early in 1992.  This committee evidently agreed with the 

substance of the Bill.  However, the standing committee made 

two suggestions for improvements, both of which are 

incorporated into this Bill. 

 

One suggestion was to require the wards commission to hold 

public hearings on establishments or alterations for ward 

boundaries.  In previous legislation these hearings were 

optional. 

 

The second recommendation was to place a numerical limit on 

the population variance between wards when territory is added 

or withdrawn from a community through annexation.  This is a 

technical change, but it is also reflected in this Bill. 

 

Because the legislature prorogued, the wards provision have 

now been introduced again, Mr. Speaker.  Let me say a word or 

two about the purpose of these provisions. 

 

They restore the ward system that the previous government 

abolished in 1988 and that had been in use in Regina, 

Saskatoon, and Prince Albert.  The ward system had become 

popular in these cities by bringing the members of council into 

a closer relationship with the voters. 

 

Prior to 1988, plebisites were held in all three of these cities, 

Mr. Speaker, and each time the voters demonstrated their 

support for the ward system.  For example, in 1977 about 70 

per cent of Regina voters supported the retention of wards, and 

in 1988 the support rose to 74 per cent. 

 

Despite these votes of support, the wards legislation was 

replaced with a Bill that permitted cities to return to the at-large 

system or to use a split system.  None of the cities accepted the 

split system which would have seen half of the council elected 

at large and the other half, wards. 

 

Instead the cities, SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association), and other groups immediately began an effort to 

have the wards restored.  SUMA passed resolutions.  Nine of 

the cities formally requested the use of wards again be 

permitted in legislation.  The Provincial Association of Resort 

Communities and other community groups also called for 

legislation that would permit use of wards. 

 

(1530) 

 

With the abolishment of wards in Saskatoon voters were faced 

with a ballot containing 70 names.  Similarly in the election of 

1991 in Regina, voters were confused by a large list of 48 

names on one ballot.  It was no longer possible for voters to 

make informed choices with so many candidates on a single 

ballot.  Nor was it easy for voters to hold council 

members accountable as there was no identifiable council 

member for any specific area.  Moreover it was difficult for 

candidates of ordinary financial means to shoulder the cost of a 

citywide campaign. 

 

In addition the loss of wards resulted in a loss of representation 

for some areas of the city by resident council members.  A 

study by the city of Regina in 1988 surveyed some 25 cities 

throughout Canada that had a population of over 100,000.  Of 

these, 19 used a ward system; 4 used at-large system; and only 

2 used a split ward/at-large system.  Thus about four-fifths of 

large cities, over 100,000 in population, had ward systems in 

place. 

 

Let me make one final note respecting the provision of wards 

restored in Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert, where they 

previously existed and are optional for all other municipalities.  

The mandatory feature reflects the fact that in these centres 

wards had been previously shown to be desired by residents.  

These provisions we have today simply restore that to effect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of a Bill No. 37, An 

Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as I was 

listening to the minister of Community Services speaking, or 

Municipal Government, I guess it is now, Mr. Speaker, in 

introducing this Bill to the Assembly, I think back to the debate 

that took place about — I think it was approximately four years 

ago — and this whole question of the formation of wards, in 

this Assembly.  And certainly a number of ministers sitting 

across the floor and members in this Assembly at the time got 

involved in the debate. 

 

And if I can recall, Mr. Speaker, one of the major concerns 

raised at that time regarding the former government was the 

lack of possible consultation and the lack of allowing 

communities the ability to manage, if you will, their own 

affairs and make their own choices. 

 

Now if I understand, as I was listening to the minister, if I 

understand correctly I believe the government in this Bill is 

basically reinstating the ward system in large communities 

such as Saskatoon and Regina, Prince Albert, and Moose Jaw, 

and allowing for other communities to decide whether or not 

they want to . . . or would like to have a ward system. 

 

Now from what I have heard in the debate that has taken place 

to date in some of the communities, the discussion regarding 

the ward system and the reinstatement or the re-establishment 

of the ward system in these large centres, it seems to me that 

most communities are asking for the ability to make their own 

choice. 

 

Now if indeed the government is saying fine, the legislation 

here that we are proposing will allow communities to choose 

whether or not they want the ward system; or whether they're 

going to just say yes, 



1078 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1993 

in certain communities the ward system will now be reinstated 

and in other communities you had the choice, it would appear 

to me that possibly the government has failed again to listen to 

people and listen to a number of people in the communities. 

 

Now when I listened to what was said, it seems to me that a lot 

of people were indicated . . . as the minister indicated, the 

statistics will show that many of the people would like a ward 

system.  And there's no doubt, no doubt there's an advantage in 

having a ward system and allowing for people to vote on the 

basis of boundaries and maybe have some feeling of being . . . 

having their councillors more accountable or more accessible. 

 

And I guess the major question that we want to know, is the 

government allowing, through the Bill, communities to make 

the final choice whether or not they adopt and design their own 

ward systems, or is the government going to lay out what they 

believe is an appropriate ward system for, say, the city of 

Regina? 

 

I think it would be more appropriate for the council and for 

people and residents of the city of Regina to decide and design 

their own ward system and how they plan on implementing it, 

and even in Saskatoon and even in Prince Albert and Moose 

Jaw. 

 

And as the minister has indicated in bringing this legislation 

forward, that it's a process of allowing these communities to 

develop a system that would be adequate, that would work 

within the communities, then, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe we 

really have any problem with the Bill before this Assembly.  

But we just want to remind the minister, remind the 

government of the fact that as we introduce legislation into this 

Assembly at any time that is going to affect people on the 

outside, let's be careful and make sure that we had indeed 

allowed them to be the people that implement the changes that 

will be made in their own communities. 

 

And if indeed that's what the Bill is going to do just by creating 

the avenue and the ability for communities to do this, then 

certainly, Mr. Speaker, I don't really have a lot of problems 

with it.  I don't believe my colleagues have as well. 

 

But just to allow for a little more debate, we will . . . I'm going 

to move adjournment of the debate at this time so that we can 

look at the Bill and certainly come back having reviewed it 

more carefully.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 30 — An Act to amend The Local Government 

Election Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second 

reading of Bill No. 30, An Act to amend The Local 

Government Election Act.  This Bill includes companion 

provisions to the wards provisions in the Bill amending The 

Urban Municipality Act, 1984. 

This Bill now before the House makes some necessary 

amendments to the local election Act law to permit elections to 

be held on the basis of wards.  The Bill contains two specific 

amendments.  It repeals all provisions that set out election 

procedures for the split ward/at-large system which will no 

longer be in use.  Previous legislation contemplated a system 

where half the council would be elected by wards and half from 

an at-large system.  No city in fact used the split system during 

the years it has existed as an option since 1988. 

 

These election procedures are no longer needed because a 

companion provision in the amendments to The Urban 

Municipality Act, 1984, will remove the option to use a split 

ward/at-large system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the wards-related provisions of this Bill were 

referred to the Standing Committee on Municipal Law after 

second readings when originally introduced.  The standing 

committee found no problems with the Bill; however the earlier 

Bill died on the order paper when the House prorogued, 

therefore the provisions are being reintroduced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have added one provision to that original Bill.  

This new feature permits the two cities with populations in 

excess of 100,000 to delay filling any vacancy that might occur 

in council until the next regular civic election in 1994. 

 

This is a transitional provision only.  It would be costly in these 

centres to elect a candidate for a by-election from a city at large 

in this interim period, while the local electoral system is 

changing over to the ward system. 

 

Each by-election in the two large cities costs about $100,000.  

When the ward system comes into effect in Regina and 

Saskatoon in 1994, this transitional provision will no longer be 

in effect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of an Act to amend 

The Local Government Election Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, if I 

understand the minister correctly, Bill No. 30, basically I 

understand, goes hand in hand with Bill No. 37, and is 

addressing some of the questions that were raised regarding the 

split system that was allowed in the former Bill, and I believe is 

eliminating that, if I understand, that split system of 

government was really never used and utilized in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And it would appear to me that that is certainly a move well 

worth taking.  As it is not much point in having regulations or 

points into a Bill that no one is really interested and looking 

forward at utilizing. 

 

And so in my opinion, I don't there is a lot here to really dwell 

or take the time of the Assembly on it at the present time.  

However I would like to allow the critics the ability to at least 

peruse the Bill.  And therefore I move adjournment of the 

debate. 



April 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1079 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 31 — An Act to amend The Heritage Property Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Act is 

to improve the efficiency of The Heritage Property Act, 

particularly as it relates to the creation and the operation of 

municipal heritage conservation districts.  As well, these 

amendments clarify the procedures for disposing of heritage 

property and palaeontology objects. 

 

Finally, changes are proposed which will reduce both the 

workload and the costs for municipal governments involved in 

designating heritage property. 

 

With these few comments, Mr. Speaker, I now move second 

reading of Bill No. 31, The Heritage Property Amendment Act, 

1993. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Just a few comments 

regarding The Heritage Property Amendment Act.  I believe 

the Act is indeed allowing for creation of municipal districts, or 

heritage property districts in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we're all aware of the fact that across this 

province we have a rich heritage.  And many communities, 

many individuals, have over the period of time, at least the time 

that I've been involved as an MLA, have come and requested at 

times assistance and looked towards the government, or looked 

to the government for some help then in preserving some of 

that heritage that we have right across this province. 

 

Now as . . . when I look at heritage, and I look at the heritage 

property we have across the province, I look at some of the old 

school districts that are still remaining in the province, and 

some of the health areas and regions, sometimes I wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, in what people really hope to achieve regarding the 

establishment of and trying to preserve some of the district, 

some of the old structures and buildings we have right around 

this province. 

 

And I think of a community in my area that are looking at 

restoring an old school.  And I've had a number of people have 

come to me with some major concerns because one of the 

problems they see happening as we look at maintaining our 

heritage, by just restoring facilities out in rural areas of this 

province, facilities that aren't even close to existing farmyards, 

or farm sites, or communities, and as we just continue to just 

pour money into municipal heritage and property sites, Mr. 

Speaker, one has to begin . . . has to ask themselves, is it frugal 

handling of our financial resources to put funding into facilities 

and buildings that are far removed from individuals, or 

communities, or people who would take the time to make sure 

and maintain the upkeep of these facilities. 

 

And one of the areas that I know, a community that is looking 

at restoring an old schoolhouse and adding . . . 

possibly picking up and bringing the old livery barn back to the 

school yard, are very concerned about the fact that dollars 

would be spent in restoring this property and not having 

anyone there to maintain and to keep track of it, and observe 

whether or not that property is being looked after, and in some 

cases, Mr. Speaker, protecting it from vandalism. 

 

And as we look at the municipal districts, as we look at 

heritage properties across this province, I think, Mr. Speaker, 

we all have to decide at the end of the day how much . . . how 

many of these properties, or these old school districts, or 

whatever people are looking at, old church sites . . . to maintain 

them in their present format and at the present location, if it 

would not be more appropriate to recognize some of these 

areas, say through our museum system that is already in 

existence across the province and in our communities where 

people can keep an eye on what has been established and built 

up. 

 

And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because I'm quite well aware of 

circumstances where people have gone to a lot of hard work, 

where government dollars have been spent to restore 

properties.  It's out in a rural area that's not very accessible and 

yet because no one has been there to oversee and to keep an 

eye on the property, people have moved in, individuals who 

maybe haven't had a lot of respect for the work that has gone 

into restoring of that property and have vandalized it.  And a lot 

of people are saying to me, is that the way we should be using 

our tax dollars? 

 

(1545) 

 

Now I'm not exactly sure what all The Heritage Property Act 

has in it, what all it is going to allow for, but it would . . . I 

think I raised a number of concerns here, just to bring to the 

minister's attention, that certainly as we get into further reading 

and debate on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, I think some of my 

colleagues would also have something they would like to add. 

 

Therefore I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 34 — An Act to amend The SaskEnergy Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise in the 

House today to move second reading of An Act to amend The 

SaskEnergy Act.  The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 1993 

proposes two changes in The SaskEnergy Act. 

 

Firstly, the proposed amendment to section 12 is necessary to 

clarify the corporation's position with respect to exposure to 

liability.  The corporation is liable only in the activities causing 

damage when it's carried out unreasonably, whether the activity 

occurs during supply, transportation, or distribution of natural 

gas or whether there is a failure to supply prior to or beyond the 

point of delivery. 

 

Secondly, the proposed amendment to section 59 of The 

SaskEnergy Act is necessary to clarify the 



1080 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1993 

corporation's position with respect to payments in lieu of taxes 

for direct sale customers.  The amendment will distinguish the 

obligation of the corporation regarding direct sale customers 

and full service customers with respect to payments in lieu of 

taxes. 

 

Without this amendment the corporation is obligated to make a 

global payment in lieu of taxes to municipalities regardless of 

the corporation's ability to collect the surcharge from direct 

sales customers. 

 

This amendment eliminates difficulties the corporation may 

encounter in collecting the surcharge for the payment in lieu of 

taxes from direct sale customers. 

 

The proposed amendment will further empower SaskEnergy to 

carry out its mandate more effectively for the people of the 

province.  Natural gas will play a key role in fulfilling 

Saskatchewan's energy needs in an environmentally sound 

manner.  SaskEnergy is ready for that challenge and will be 

part of the economic solution in revitalizing our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

SaskEnergy Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I can 

appreciate the comments the minister has made regarding the 

amendments to . . . The SaskEnergy Amendment Act. 

 

First of all, we're all aware in this province and all aware of the 

liability suits that are taking place and that are coming into play 

not only in the province of Saskatchewan . . . maybe not as 

much here as in other jurisdictions.  And it is only fair that 

SaskEnergy certainly look at a way in how it may cover itself 

to protect itself from any liability suit that may come at it. 

 

And in view of the fact that in delivery of gas to the province 

of Saskatchewan, whether it's to large businesses or to farm 

families or to communities, Mr. Speaker, we must be aware of 

some of the complications that may arise in the delivery 

system. 

 

And I know that SaskEnergy is doing everything in its power to 

ensure that the piping is adequately entrenched and that the 

delivery system has very few, if any, flaws.  It's doing 

everything it can to make sure that gas is delivered effectively, 

cheaply, and that they're protecting the citizens.  But at the 

same time they want to make sure that they are protecting 

themselves too in case an accident happens beyond their 

control, making sure that they are covered off and that they 

have . . . any liability that would be brought against them is 

covered off. 

 

And so I think it sounds to me like it was appropriate that 

section 12 be changed and addressed, also for other sections in 

the Bill. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know my colleague, who has a little more 

information, would like to add more as we have a greater 

ability to review the Bill.  Therefore at this time I move to 

adjourn debate. 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 44 — An Act respecting the Inspection of Gas 

Installations and Gas Equipment 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

honour today to speak in the Legislative Assembly to several 

changes that the government is proposing to The Gas 

Inspection Act of Saskatchewan. 

 

As members know, The Gas Inspection Act outlines the duties 

and responsibilities of SaskPower's gas inspection division.  

This government is seeking the approval of the Assembly for 

changes that will improve The Gas Inspection Act by 

introducing additional safeguards for public safety in the gas 

sector.  If I may, as minister responsible for SaskPower I would 

like to highlight a few of the significant changes that the 

government is proposing in this legislation. 

 

For the first time in this province, propane services will come 

within the purview of The Gas Inspection Act.  Although there 

has been no legislative authority over propane, the gas 

inspection division at SaskPower, in conjunction with the 

industry, has developed and enforced high safety standards for 

its use. 

 

These amendments will provide the statutory authority to these 

practices and procedures that have been in place in 

Saskatchewan for some time.  We are proposing amendments 

to The Gas Inspection Act that will enhance the ability of gas 

inspectors to carry out their duties to maintain the highest 

public safety standards. 

 

We are asking this legislature to extend the coverage of The 

Gas Inspection Act to include the design, manufacture, display, 

advertising, sale, and use of gas equipment.  If these 

amendments are passed by the Assembly — and I hope they 

are, Mr. Speaker — a permit will be required before a gas 

supplier can connect to a gas installation.  This is to ensure that 

the installations have been safely installed. 

 

To further public safety, we are proposing to give gas 

inspectors the authority to halt construction of a propane 

container or gas installation if its safety requirements are not 

being met. 

 

In the interest of public safety in the province, I hope this 

legislature will approve the amendments before you to The Gas 

Inspection Act.  The proposed amendments that are being 

considered today will not impose any additional burdens on 

either industry nor the general public.  These amendments, in 

my judgement and the judgement of the government, will in 

fact contribute to the comfort and safety of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to 

amend The Gas Inspection Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Just a couple 

of comments regarding The Gas Inspection  



April 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1081 

Act.  I think most people of the province will agree that it is 

important that we have legislation laid out that gives the proper 

authority for individuals to act as inspectors to properly inspect 

gas installations around the province, indeed to protect and 

safeguard the public of Saskatchewan.  And no one will 

question that fact. 

 

In fact most people would feel quite relieved to know that we 

have a proper inspection authority in place, that we have 

individuals that are qualified and well trained to take out . . . 

perform these duties and to indeed inspect the gas hook-ups 

and delivery of the gas service; not just gas, I understand, 

propane and any flammable goods, I believe will be covered 

basically under this Act. 

 

And I believe it's appropriate for the government, for this 

legislature, to bring in proper amendments to cover all aspects 

of inspection in the province of Saskatchewan.  And I move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 45 — An Act respecting the Inspection of Electrical 

Equipment, Installations and Materials 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — It's my honour today to speak to the 

changes that this government is proposing to The Electrical 

Inspection Act of Saskatchewan.  As members know, The 

Electrical Inspection Act outlines the duties and responsibilities 

of SaskPower's electrical inspection division. 

 

The government is seeking the approval of the Assembly for 

changes that will improve The Electrical Inspection Act by 

introducing additional safeguards for public safety in the 

electrical sector. 

 

If I may, as minister responsible for SaskPower I would like to 

highlight a few of the significant changes that we are proposing 

to the legislature.  As I suggested a moment ago, these 

amendments will enhance the ability of the electrical inspectors 

to enforce safety standards.  We are proposing to give the 

province's electrical inspectors statutory backing to order the 

repair of an electric hazard within a reasonable period of time.  

Public safety must come first. 

 

The proposed changes before us today also clarify the legal 

circumstances under which electrical permits can be issued and 

cancelled.  Under the new Act the circumstances leading to the 

cancellation of an electrical permit will be listed. 

 

In the interest of general electrical safety, we hope this 

legislature will support the changes that will make all electrical 

equipment subject to inspection. 

 

And through the amendments before us today we are making it 

possible to prevent the display or advertising of electrical 

equipment that is neither approved or certified.  Here we are 

taking steps to further protect the public from the purchase of 

potentially dangerous electrical equipment. 

In the interest of electrical safety in our province, I hope that 

members of the Legislative Assembly will approve the 

amendments to The Electrical Inspection Act that are under 

consideration. 

 

These changes, I am pleased to say, will not impose any 

additional burdens upon either the industry or the general 

public.  In my judgement, Mr. Speaker, these changes will 

contribute to the comfort and safety of people in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

I hereby move second reading to an Act to amend The 

Electrical Inspection Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, regarding Bill No. 45, an Act to amend The Electrical 

Inspection Act, I think as an opposition we are appreciative of 

the fact that the government is taking the time to review the 

process of inspection and giving the inspectors the ability to 

indeed uphold the standards of electrical inspection and 

electrical installation in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I believe the minister made a comment about enhancing the 

ability of inspectors to force the standards.  And one of the 

areas that I believe as an opposition we will be certainly 

following up as we take a moment to review the Bill is to 

indeed make sure that the Bill complies with the rights of the 

people as well. 

 

And we're not only talking about protecting people and 

protecting individuals and businesses, but we do not want to 

just freely pass amendments to a Bill that may indeed give 

inspectors added abilities to enforce rules and maybe go against 

the rights of individuals and protection of their property. 

 

I think it's also appropriate that we clarify the issuing of 

permits to make sure that the inspectors and certainly the 

electrical contractors of this province fulfil the responsibilities 

that they have as they are constructing homes and providing 

services to the people of Saskatchewan — that they are 

protected, that they are following the standards.  And therefore, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1600) 

 

Bill No. 48 — An Act to amend The Police Act, 1990 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today 

to move second reading of The Police Amendment Act, 1993.  

This amending legislation is intended to address certain issues 

which have arisen in the operation of The Police Act, 1990. 

 

The Royal Canadian Mounted Police have indicated that as a 

matter of policy they will not enter directly into new policing 

service contracts for policing 



1082 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1993 

services with municipalities which have a population of less 

than 5,000 people.  This will not affect municipalities currently 

contracting for policing services. 

 

It does, however, necessitate an amendment to the Act to 

provide that the minister may enter into an agreement with a 

municipality having a population of 5,000 or less for the 

services of the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police).  This 

change will facilitate communities with populations of less 

than 5,000 choosing the option of having the RCMP deliver 

their policing services. 

 

This is very topical, Mr. Speaker.  This amendment is very 

topical when you consider the situation of the town of 

Martensville which does have a population of less than 5,000 

people which did make a decision the night before last to 

disband its own police force.  And the amendment will make it 

possible for myself as minister to enter into an arrangement to 

provide RCMP services to the town of Martensville, and that 

will be done if this legislation receives the approval of this 

House. 

 

The Bill also provides for an amendment to the definition of 

the term municipality to include only northern towns for the 

purposes of this Act and not northern villages or resorts. 

 

This amendment recognizes the current policing practices in 

northern Saskatchewan and removes what is an unintended 

definitional overlap so far as northern communities are 

concerned.  Currently only the communities of La Ronge and 

Creighton are northern towns which provide policing services.  

Where in the future, communities express a desire to provide 

their own policing services, such communities may be added as 

required. 

 

This Bill also clarifies the relationship between a local 

municipal police board and its chief of police.  The Act is 

amended to specifically provide that a police chief may be 

hired pursuant to the terms of a contract directly with the local 

police board; and to provide that the terms of that contract may 

displace the statutory, disciplinary, or dismissal procedure in 

case of termination. 

 

This amendment recognizes the special relationship which a 

chief of police has with the elected officials of a municipality 

and allows the terms of a duly negotiated contract to govern 

where appropriate. 

 

Finally, the Bill amends the process through which the 

population of a municipality is determined for the purposes of 

the Act.  The change will provide for ministerial discretion to 

determine the population of a community where that is 

appropriate.  The existing procedure for determining 

population is somewhat unwieldy in that it relies on the data 

contained in the Saskatchewan Municipal Directory to 

determine population levels.  This process is and will continue 

to be effective for the majority of communities. 

 

However, where municipalities are close to population break 

points, additional discretion on behalf of the minister is 

required to avoid requiring police services to be provided by 

municipalities that 

have dropped below the population of 500, until such time as a 

municipal directory can be amended.  In the interest of fairness 

this provision will allow for much more timely recognition of 

sudden population changes or small population shifts which are 

close to important break points. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 

Police Act, 1990. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the minister as he was making his comments to the 

Assembly, talked about the problem that many small 

communities and municipalities have in trying to acquire 

RCMP services in their communities, especially for a 

community that has under 5,000 people or less. 

 

And I guess one of the areas and questions that possibly we'd 

like to be raising with the minister as we get into committee is 

when we're talking of communities under 5,000, I wonder are 

we basically talking of the urban centre, or are we talking of an 

urban community with a surrounding area of . . . including the 

rural municipality as well and achieving that 5,000 factor? 

 

Because policing in rural Saskatchewan is a subject that has 

been of major concern for a period of time, and certainly the 

minister for municipal government will be quite well aware of 

it.  And it's been a debate that has taken place over the last 

period of years on a number of concerns that communities have 

in trying to provide adequate policing to their area, and to their 

communities, realizing the problems that everyone is finding, 

as they're confronted with a greater burden of some of the 

costs. 

 

And I'm pleased to see that, even as I noted on the news last 

night, certainly the town of Martensville has now entered into a 

working relationship with the RCMP due to some of the 

problems that were created in circumstances that we're quite 

well aware of that have arisen, and possibly a lack of trust in 

some of the people that had responsibility. 

 

And I think it's appropriate, in view of the fact that the tradition 

of the RCMP in this country and in this province, has been one 

of great respect.  People have shown respect.  They respect the 

RCMP for the police services they provide. 

 

And I believe it's also appropriate that the minister is given the 

ability to offer the town of Martensville a working 

arrangement, or a way in which they can work together with 

the RCMP to provide adequate policing services, and at the 

same time to build up a relationship of trust as well again with 

police services across not only our province, but certainly in 

North America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I really don't at the present time see a lot in this 

Bill that we would be opposed to, other than a few minor 

questions.  However I would just like to take a moment to 

peruse the Bill.  And therefore at this time, I move that we 

adjourn debate. 



April 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1083 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 49 — An Act respecting Correctional Services 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today 

to move second reading of The Correctional Services Act. 

 

The existing corrections Act has been in place since 1967, and 

has not undergone significant amendments since 1973.  The 

time has come to implement new legislation which will update 

the existing Act and allow for future improvements in the 

delivery of correctional services. 

 

The Correctional Services Act provides a framework for the 

delivery of correctional services to offenders who are serving 

sentences within the community; for example, persons placed 

on probation by the court.  The Act also provides for the 

delivery of services to individuals who have been sentenced to 

a period of incarceration of less than two years, or who are 

incarcerated for a provincial offence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in general terms this new legislation focuses on 

programs which seek to reintegrate offenders into the 

community as law-abiding citizens.  This intention reflects a 

change of emphasis between institutional and 

community-based correctional programs. 

 

Whereas in the past corrections legislation was structured 

around institutional custody, the new Act will allow for 

stronger and more effective cooperative community-based 

programs.  The institutional programs will of course continue 

for those offenders who must be incarcerated for reasons of 

public protection and for general deterrence. 

 

With respect to community-based correctional programs, this 

legislation allows local community organizations to have 

greater opportunity to participate in the design and delivery of 

correctional service programs in order to ensure those 

programs are relevant to local community needs and 

conditions. 

 

In more specific terms, this Bill will further facilitate 

agreements between the province and individual persons, 

agencies, or organizations to assist in research, development, 

and improved delivery of correctional services. 

 

Currently the Gabriel Dumont Institute is operating a 

community training residence in Saskatoon for incarcerated 

women.  And it is hoped this type of cooperative delivery of 

correctional services can be expanded. 

 

The legislation also provides for a greater role for volunteers in 

the delivery of correctional services.  For example, a volunteer 

could be used to assume temporary custody of an inmate to 

escort that inmate to a funeral or to participate in a 

rehabilitation 

program offered in the community.  In addition, it is hoped that 

volunteers can be used to participate more broadly in the 

development of sentencing alternatives. 

 

This Act will provide for more flexibility in funding 

arrangements in the delivery of correctional programs.  This 

will allow correctional services to enter partnerships with 

communities and to share scarce resources.  One example of 

this type of program is the community development worker 

who is currently hired and paid for between the Prince Albert 

Tribal Council and the corrections branch of the Department of 

Justice. 

 

A further amendment provides for the transfer of the legislative 

provisions regarding probation and other community 

correctional programs from The Summary Offences Procedure 

Act, 1990 to the correctional services Act. 

 

This Act also sets out formal recognition of the highly 

successful prison industries program.  Prison industries 

programs recognize the shared responsibility of government 

and the business community to provide productive work 

experiences for inmates seeking to re-enter society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act also legislates a mandate for greater 

emphasis on the pre-release preparation of inmates who have 

higher rehabilitation needs.  Through community training 

residences and reduced custody programs, inmates will have an 

ability to learn to successfully perform practical tasks under a 

24-hour-per-day supervision by staff prior to actual release. 

 

A further example of innovation in correctional services are 

amendments that will allow correctional officials to require the 

electronic monitoring of an inmate as a condition of an 

authorized absence from a correctional facility.  Through 

fostering a better balance between institutional and community 

corrections programs, we believe that inmates can be released 

with increased opportunity for reintegration into the 

community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes the dual 

responsibility it bears to ensure the protection of the general 

public and to provide a reasonable opportunity for 

rehabilitation to each inmate.  This legislation strikes a balance 

between community and institutional-based delivery of 

correctional services in an effort to better achieve this dual 

responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting 

Correctional Services. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to 

be able to rise on this Bill today.  Changes to the correction 

services, Mr. Speaker, are indeed important, and since they 

have not been looked at since 1973, perhaps it is indeed time 

that we do take a look at them because people in the public do 

have a concern as to how the people, the inmates within our 

systems are treated, how they are released, and under 



1084 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1993 

what kind of supervisions do they come out of those facilities 

and what impact does that have on the community. 

 

There is a concern, Mr. Speaker, about those that have violent 

histories and those that are a danger to society, and in what 

kind of times do they get out of our institutions and how are 

they assessed before they leave that institution. And perhaps 

the minister is planning on having a look at that. 

 

I believe that the community input that he has talked about, that 

those are part of the things that should be discussed with the 

communities. 

 

We do have one concern, Mr. Speaker, as to the cost of the 

research that he has talked about.  What kind of research is 

going to be done at what kind of a cost?  That is one of those 

items that needs to be reviewed, Mr. Speaker.  The idea of 

using volunteers within the corrections system does have a 

significant amount of merit, Mr. Speaker, and that is one of the 

areas that I believe that there could be some cost savings and 

could be some integration of the community and those that are 

incarcerated. 

 

(1615) 

 

One of the ideas that the minister mentioned was flexibility of 

funding, of using communities to provide some of that 

flexibility of funding.  If the minister is talking of using those 

which have caused some problems within society, using them 

within the community to provide some work programs, then, 

Mr. Speaker, that is a good idea.  This would allow those 

people to maintain some skills or learn some skills which 

would have some application once they were no longer wards 

of the state.  It would also provide some benefit for those 

communities that would have the opportunities to utilize them. 

 

Down at Moose Mountain Provincial Park over the years, Mr. 

Speaker, there has been a program there of using those that are 

short-term residents, guests of the province, to provide some of 

the services within the park, and it has proven out to be a very 

worthwhile program for the park and for those which are given 

that opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The critic, I'm sure, would like to have the opportunity to 

debate this Bill with the minister.  Therefore I would move that 

Bill 49 now be adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 14 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 14 — An Act to 

amend the Statute Law be now read a second time. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 15 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 15 — An Act to 

amend The Limitation of Actions Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I'd like to make a few comments regarding this Act 

prior to allowing it to proceed to committee. 

 

As I review the Act and as I look over some of the areas that 

the Act is addressing regarding limitations of actions that can 

be taken and the fact of opening up a period of time which a 

person could bring forward actions against an individual or 

individuals that they feel may have certainly abused their rights 

and privileges, and especially as young children, it would 

appear to me that some of the major concerns we have in our 

society today is the accessibility or the ease in which 

accusations can be brought forward.  And the fact that we do 

not seem to have a system in place that protects an individual 

until . . . our laws basically say that individuals are innocent 

until proven guilty. 

 

But when we look at child abuse and we look at sexual abuse 

situations that arise, and certainly we don't take them lightly 

and we do not want to take lightly at any time the suggestion 

by an individual or the accusation by a person, be they young 

or old or be they male or female or whatever the terms are, Mr. 

Speaker, we do not want to take lightly the fact that someone 

would suggest that their rights as an individual, maybe that 

they were taken advantage of. 

 

And as the minister has indicated, the fact of setting time limits 

may not be appropriate, especially in view of the fact that it's 

very difficult for an individual to really determine whether or 

not their rights were interfered with. 

 

It's hard for a child who maybe has a lot of respect and love for 

a parent or an adult.  And in a lot of cases some of the child 

abuse cases that arise up before us happen to take place 

amongst or between people and individuals that that child 

knows, and it's hard for them to determine exactly whether 

their rights were offended. 

 

And therefore I can see why the Act would allow for a greater 

time, wouldn't place a limitation on the process, so that if down 

the road and later time in life when a person is maybe facing 

some other problems and going through therapy recalls some 

act of childhood that had taken place, it indeed gives that 

individual the opportunity to at least go back.  Because in the 

healing process sometimes it's a matter of getting some of the 

long-term matters out of the way, and addressed. 

 

But I would also like to suggest that I think it's 



April 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1085 

appropriate that our system of democracy should allow for 

people to speak up freely even as quickly as possible, as well as 

recognizing the fact that any time an individual is maybe 

accused of a crime or accused of an indecency, that their rights 

are protected.  And we all know the difficulties that creates, 

especially in situations of child abuse or sexual abuse or 

spousal abuse. 

 

Certainly the public in general, if a person is challenged and an 

accusation is brought against an individual, even the 

neighbours find it very difficult to accept that individual as a 

person who is having not overly taking advantage of the 

situation, and they begin to question whether or not that 

individual rights are protected.  And a lot of times young 

children or women or other individuals in society can be 

shunned by their community. 

 

And very recently — I believe it was just the other day — I just 

read an article in one of our . . . a community in this province 

where an accusation was brought by a young teenager against a 

very well-respected individual. 

 

And what happened, it basically split the community because it 

was hard for people in the community to really determine 

whether or not that individual could have interfered with the 

rights of that teenage girl in imposing his will or his way on 

that girl.  While at the same time, other individuals in the 

community were wondering if the girl was not using her 

position to try and get some public exposure. 

 

And I think we must be very careful when we're looking at this.  

Number one, Mr. Speaker, we must be sure that we protect the 

rights of the innocent, but at the same time, Mr. Speaker, we 

must be very cognizant that we give people the ability to raise 

questions and accusations and come forward to public officials 

to make sure that their rights are not interfered with. 

 

And the fact of extending the limitation period, I'm not exactly 

sure how effective it will be in the long run or if indeed at the 

end of the day we are going to stir up, if you will, old wounds 

that may in the long term prove to be . . . accusations that are 

brought up say 20 or 30 years down the road.  We may run into 

situations where at the end of the day a person's livelihood is 

put on the line, their ability to work with people is put on the 

line, simply because 30 years ago someone may have 

determined all of a sudden that an action was not appropriate.  

And I think that it would be only fair, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

when we amend the limitation Act and extend limitations, that 

there are safeguards to protect individuals all along the way. 

 

And knowing the minister responsible for Justice, I'm sure that 

the minister has probably addressed some of these concerns 

already, but I think there are some questions that we can get 

into.  And we'll allow the minister to give his assurances that as 

we open the doors and extend the limitation period, that some 

of the areas and concerns that I've raised at this point have been 

addressed, have been dealt with, so that the 

rights of individuals from the accused to the accuser are 

protected so that at the end of the day people are treated fairly. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I'll allow this Bill to go to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 18 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 18 — An Act to 

amend The Victims of Crime Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, just a couple of comments.  

I believe this Bill allows for ". . . the one-year period 

mentioned in subsection (2) begins to run when the victim 

understands the nature of the injuries and recognizes the effects 

of the misconduct". 

 

And what it does is extends the time period for a victim to 

make claims.  And I really don't see a lot of problems with this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, and I'll therefore allow the Bill to move to 

committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 16 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 16 — An Act 

respecting the Interpretation of Enactments and 

prescribing Rules Governing Acts be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  This 

Act deals with a number of different issues, one of which is the 

times set out in an Act for certain things to happen.  And when 

that time falls on a statutory holiday, Mr. Speaker, then the Act 

moves the action required on that particular day to the next day 

which is not a statutory holiday.  It also extends it to the next 

working day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would contend that this should also apply to 

Crown corporations actions.  What I'm particularly thinking 

about here is SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), as an 

example.  People's licences run out on the last day of a 

particular month.  At times that time frame runs out during the 

weekend when SGI offices are not open to renew your licence 

or on a statutory holiday.  That time frame should be moved 

back to the next business day to allow those people who are 

affected by that time frame running out to have access to fulfil 

the business necessary. 

 

It also deals with concerns of liabilities of officers and directors 

of Crown corporations.  And this may have a large impact on 

the business community of this province, Mr. Speaker, so this 

needs to be reviewed. 



1086 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1993 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we should take a look at that 

and delve into it more deeply to find out what the implications 

are going to be to those people who may be affected by this. 

 

But at the present time, Mr. Speaker, we feel that these kinds of 

questions, these kinds of concerns, can be brought up to the 

minister in committee.  Therefore we're prepared to allow this 

Bill to go to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 17 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 17 — An Act to 

amend The Fatal Accidents Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the questions that 

we have on this Act we certainly can address in committee.  So 

therefore I'm prepared at this time to allow the Bill to move to 

committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1630) 

Bill No. 19 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 19 — An Act 

respecting Survivorship be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I'm sure this Act is an area that a lot of people 

probably have some questions on and some concerns about.  

It's an Act that addresses the fact of survivorship, and one of 

the things over the past number of years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

think most people have been very concerned about . . . and 

we're all aware of the fact that accidents do happen and can 

happen and they're not intended to happen — but I'm sure 

many people have wondered at the time when an accident takes 

place and say a husband and wife involved in that accident are 

both killed, it's very difficult to determine whether or not . . . 

which person survived or was the last person to die in the 

accident.  I think that we've always taken for granted that it's 

the female person who possibly died after the husband. 

 

And there's always been a question.   There's been a question 

over the years as to survivorship and who the inheritance 

would go to.  And in today's society many people are quite 

concerned about the relationships and about where inheritance 

should go.  Unfortunately a lot of people today have always 

believed, and maybe there's many people in this Assembly as 

well who seem to think that at a young age, why should we 

even think about whether we should be planning wills or 

whether we should be worried about survivorship or 

inheritances. 

And what the Bill does with this Act here is just lays out the 

definition of the survivor and tries to determine the whole 

process of where . . . who the survivor is and how they should 

be treated and tries to address some of the concerns we have 

there.  A lot of the concerns aren't that great and therefore I'll 

allow the Bill to move to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 32 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 32 — An Act to 

amend The Family Maintenance Act by now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I guess one of 

the major concerns that many people have today, especially 

when we look at the breakdown of the family, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is how people are taken care of and especially how 

children are taken care of.  And one of the major areas that 

always comes across my desk is specifically, say, the wife in a 

relationship where it has broken down and where the courts 

have awarded compensation or were awarded a monthly sum to 

be paid for maintenance of children, many times, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we find many women find it difficult to get access to 

these funds and to even allow for or have the funds transferred 

to their accounts and to maintain and look after their children. 

 

And I believe it's appropriate that the government look at ways 

in which it can follow up.  And we've certainly over the past 

number of years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, governments of the day 

have brought forward pieces of legislation that have made it 

easier for individuals and courts to follow through and make 

sure that indeed people who are becoming delinquent in their 

accounts are indeed carrying out their responsibility or whether 

it be fathers. 

 

So we also are aware of the fact that we need to have 

reasonable child support available for individuals because in 

our society it's difficult for especially single mothers to raise a 

family and even try to find a substantive job to maintain a 

home, to clothe and feed their children, and provide the home 

environment for that family.  And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I 

review the Bill, I believe what it does is addresses reasonable 

child support and how it should maintain and be offered to 

individuals. 

 

Another thing that I think is very important, another area of 

concern that is raised in separation, the separation process, is 

access to the children.  And, Mr. Speaker, certainly I think 

most of us would feel it would be much greater if families and 

couples would look at a way of possibly maintaining a 

relationship rather than taking the route of separating, then 

trying to decide, divide up the spoils, and also have access to 

children and whether they have received fair access or not. 



April 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1087 

And I think it's important that we raise this question, that we 

make sure that there is fair access, that the husband has equal 

access to his children, to spend some time with them, just as 

much as the wife. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are a few things that 

we wanted to just have clarified by the minister as we get into 

committee.  And therefore I'll move that this Bill move to 

committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 6 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 6 — An Act 

to amend The Prairie and Forest Fires Act, 1982 be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I have 

been reviewing the Act on The Prairie and Forest Fires Act, 

and while it will be our intention of course to allow this to go 

into committee, we do have some concerns that we want to 

discuss in order to provide the minister and his deputies the 

opportunity to search out the answers so that when we do get 

into the committee, they can facilitate us with the things that 

we need to know in order to show us that in fact this Act, 

amendment to the Act, will provide for the people of the 

province a better working tool. 

 

In the explanation we have some concern, as we have with 

other Bills, Mr. Speaker, about the somewhat subtle move in 

the Bill to get more power for the minister.  Now we 

understand that it's important for ministers to have the power to 

make regulations and rules work in the province, but there is 

always, it seems, built into each one of these Acts a few lines 

that gives the minister extreme power.  And we worry about 

this.  It seems to be a trend. 

 

And I'm sure the people of Saskatchewan want our province to 

work and operate in a fair and reasonable way without 

unnecessary halts or obstructions, but at the same time to 

provide ministers with more power than they need seems to 

take away a lot of the rights of the people in a democracy. 

 

And I'll just want to read the explanation part of this Bill so that 

the folks will know exactly what they're dealing with.  It says 

the proposed changes will correct a drafting deficiency in the 

Act.  Normally definitions are merely used to define the 

meaning of specified terms and are not used to make a 

substantive law.  However the definition of burning permit area 

in The Prairie and Forest Fires Act, 1982 purports to give the 

minister authority to expand the burning permit area. 

 

This is more than defining the term and involves substantive 

law.  Consequently it is recommended that an additional 

section be added to the Act to give the minister clear authority 

to expand the burning permit area rather than relying on the 

purported authority 

provided in the definition. 

 

Now it's obvious, Mr. Speaker, that when you have a fire 

situation, people do have to have the authority to do what's 

necessary in order to contain a fire.  And we're not saying that 

in this case it would be altogether bad to expand this, but what 

we're saying is we want everybody to clearly examine all areas 

in every Bill where ministers' powers are being expanded. 

 

Because we have the feeling that, as I mentioned before, that 

this subtle move to giving more and more power to ministers is 

actually creating a situation where we're losing our democracy 

and our freedom to challenge the rights of the ministers.  And 

it's extremely difficult once it's set into law to ever change 

these kinds of directions of power.  So we want folks to be 

aware that this subtle move is again in this Bill.  We've seen it 

in just about every other Bill, and we really are concerned 

about this movement throughout the entire tenure of this 

administration. 

 

Now I'm also concerned with the implications that are in the 

explanation on section 6, this section of the Bill.  The Prairie 

and Forest Fires Act has an existing provision — 13.1, 13.2, 

and 13.3.  I think I'll just read the explanation part because we 

don't want to get into the whole thing, but so people will 

understand where my argument is coming from.  The existing 

provision is based on the compulsory conscription, which 

means that individuals can be forced to fight forest fires against 

their will.  Now because the Act does not specify the 

circumstances under which compulsory conscription is 

available — e.i., emergencies, etc. — the section is almost 

certainly contrary to the Canadian Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms. 

 

Now I'm not sure if that's reality or not, Mr. Speaker.  Who am 

I to say what the Charter of Rights and Freedoms would be 

interpreted as by the Supreme Court justices if they were put to 

the test?  However I'm prepared to accept the fact that possibly 

there could be a problem there. 

 

So what it says that even if the authority for the compulsory 

conscription were limited to emergency situations — for 

example, involving potential loss of life or property — it is 

uncertain whether such a provision could be demonstrably 

justified under the charter.  Well I suspect that . . . when I read 

that, the first impression that came to my mind, Mr. Speaker, 

was that if life and limb of people are at stake, I'd really doubt 

if judges, even at the Supreme Court level, would say, no you 

don't have to be there, you don't have to help these folks.  

Somehow I think that in our country we believe that if you can 

help somebody that needs help, you've got to do that. 

 

I know that there are laws if you run away from an accident 

and don't help an accident victim on a road, if you hit and run 

somebody and don't help them, there are laws that say you have 

to help.  So I'm wondering if the rationale is totally there. 

 

However they do go on to explain why they think they 



1088 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1993 

can get around this, and I'll read it to be fair.  It says: however 

in truth, compulsory conscription is no longer used in northern 

forest fighting practices. 

 

Now I suspect that for the most part, that's true.  But I suspect 

there's also a chance you might have an exception.  You might 

have an exception where you do have a fire and you don't have 

anybody professional around, and you may have to ask some 

local folks to get in there and do the job. 

 

If you, in law, prohibit the minister and his authorities from 

being able to commandeer those people to do the job, I wonder 

if you're really serving the best interests of society, because 

there's always an exception to every rule.  And in the 

mainstream, I'm quite sure that as this explanation goes on, Mr. 

Speaker, I'm quite sure that for the most part it is accurate.  But 

there are these exceptions that worry us. 

 

Now it says, as it goes on here: fire-fighters, including 

conscripted fire-fighters, are usually trained and experienced 

individuals who voluntarily provide their services to the 

department. 

 

And that's true.  And I think it has to be that way.  No question 

about the fact that you don't want somebody that doesn't know 

how to fight a fire getting caught in a backdraft or something 

like that.  And I think most of us have had some experience 

with fire as kids, and one thing and another.  We've all 

probably tried the trick of throwing a little bit of gasoline on a 

fire and watched how it can explode and blow up in your face 

kind of a thing.  And we've all learned our lesson very well that 

you don't fool with that kind of stuff without knowing what 

you're doing. 

 

So the idea that you're going to mostly be using trained 

professionals is a good one, and it's a fact of life.  But there are 

always these exceptions, and to sort of hamstring the minister 

and his people in this area by not allowing them the 

opportunity to bring in people in an emergency has me worried. 

 

Fire is something that I've had a little experience with, not as 

much as a fire chief or people that fight fires, but I've had 

occasion to have a little fire on my farm and I know that if you 

don't get it under control within the first two or three minutes, 

then it becomes a really difficult situation to get under control. 

 

I think forest fires and fires on prairies are probably very much 

similar.  If you can contain them when they're small or before 

the wind catches them and whips them up, you probably have a 

pretty good chance of saving a lot of trouble.  If you can 

commandeer a little bit of help very quickly, then you have no 

problem with it.  So we're worried about this idea. 

 

We also wonder, as I read through the rest of this, and I don't 

want to read any more of it, Mr. Speaker, because the day is 

getting on and I want to get on with the business of the House, 

but I have a concern that we may be heading in the direction 

with the bottom part of this explanation to providing a situation 

where 

the workers in the fire fighting crews might, by necessity then, 

have to become union workers.  And we could end up finding 

ourselves in some serious problems in that area. 

 

(1645) 

 

If we find ourselves in a situation where only union workers 

then would be allowed to fight fires, we would even hamstring 

the minister and his authorities beneath him a lot further.  And I 

think we have to be careful of that.  I have nothing against the 

unions bargaining for negotiations of salaries and things, but I 

would have a lot of trouble if we ran into a situation where we 

had supposedly a strike or something like that and we couldn't 

fight the fires because of that kind of a problem. 

 

So I'm cautioning the government not to put themselves into a 

corner here with this legislation.  Having the unions put into a 

position where they might be put in a corner would also be bad 

for them. 

 

So we have a lot of serious concerns about this Bill, but we do 

want to move it on to committee and we do want the minister 

to know that we will be going into some depth on it when the 

time comes.  So thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 21 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 21 — An 

Act to amend The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Here we have an 

amendment to a Bill, and I think for the most part again it's 

meant in a positive vein. 

 

We like the concept, obviously.  I'm sure that anyone who 

realizes which side of the House we sit on would have to 

understand that any kind of a program that helps people to 

invest in the very business that their job is connected to has to 

be a positive factor in our view. 

 

The amendments of course though do go into some areas that 

are going to need some discussion and they're going to need 

some questions answered to make sure that we don't wreck 

what is already a very good idea.  We want this to be 

encouraged; we want it to be developed. 

 

We want people to know in our province that they will be 

rewarded for extra efforts.  And when you go to the extra effort 

of getting your colleagues together and forming a group that's 

willing to not only do the manual labour of a business but 

you're willing to do all of the other work of marketing and 

manufacturing and building and creating that you should be 



April 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1089 

rewarded for it.  And we want to be sure that that reward is not 

taken away from the folks through amendments. 

 

If people are going to go to this kind of trouble and they're 

going to set things up to make things work — we can use the 

brewery in Saskatoon as an example — we'd hate to see that 

legislation somehow affect the way that they're able to succeed. 

 

So we want to go through this very carefully, Minister.  We 

want to check this out as we go.  We want things like the 

amendment that permits a type A corporation to raise capital 

from individual residents in Saskatchewan as opposed to only 

those who are employed by an employer having five or more 

employees . . . we want that kind of thing checked out very 

carefully as we go here because obviously when we start 

spreading the ability of ownership in these kinds of venture 

capital corporations, we start spreading the ownership . . . if we 

spread that ownership too thin, it may very well happen that the 

people who started the thing might not be in control after 

awhile. 

 

I know that the members opposite would not want to have that 

happen because they believe in the workers having control of 

their own destiny.  And we believe in that too and we don't 

want it spread too thin.  I would hate to see a lot of these shares 

end up offered for sale.  To be quite honest with you, in spite of 

the fact, member, in spite of the fact that I'm on this side of the 

House with this opposition, I wouldn't want to see these shares 

sold in New York or Hong Kong to somebody else.  I want 

these kind of venture programs to stay in Saskatchewan for 

Saskatchewan workers and Saskatchewan people.  So that 

worries me a little bit. 

 

And just . . . we'll hurry right on.  I had a couple of more 

points.  So long as the control and the ownership remains with 

Saskatchewan people, is the note I have written here, and we 

don't shift away from our community too far.  To say we'll let it 

expand within the province is okay, but once we start to expand 

it we've got to be really careful that we don't turn the whole 

thing loose and end up losing the whole effect of what we're 

trying to accomplish, which is to have workers owning and 

controlling their businesses within Saskatchewan and have that 

pride and the profit that goes with it. 

 

We have a restriction being removed of $5 million in the 

existing provisions; that too needs to be carefully examined.  I 

know that a lot of people say that big is better but the reality is 

that if we let things get too big, sometimes we go so hard after 

efficiency that we lose our job-creating potential. 

 

And even though I'm a Conservative, I want you to know that 

we're concerned about trying to save extra jobs in this province 

right now because we're in that kind of a turn in the cycle of 

our economy where we have to create jobs and get more job 

base.  And so we want to be careful that we don't destroy that 

potential in this whole process as we go through these 

amendments.  So I hope government will take a look at that and 

resolve it. 

 

The sections here, 4(e), (f), and on, all deal with RRSPs 

(registered retirement savings plan) and the ability to invest 

money through your RRSPs into these kind of programs.  I 

think that's excellent.  I think the government is bang dead right 

on here, and I give them a pat on the back for getting into this 

area of allowing people to invest their RRSPs at home here in 

the province through this process. 

 

Let's be careful, though, that we set it up so that it is fair, so 

that it works well and all those kinds of things, and we'll do 

that in Committee of the Whole. 

 

I wanted to mention the 4(j) here.  It says this amendment 

permits early redemption of shares of type A corporation prior 

to the five-year holding period if the tax credits are repaid. 

 

Now we've got to be really careful, Mr. Speaker, when we do 

this kind of thing because you can, if you allow people to bail 

out of a contract on an investment, while it's nice for the 

investor to have that freedom and that latitude, it also can put a 

corporation into serious financial trouble if people bail out at 

the wrong time. 

 

So if you have too many people bailing out all of a sudden, you 

can leave a corporation or a small company that's been formed 

into a cash-strapped situation where they have no cash flow in 

fact and they'd have to go and borrow a bunch of money.  It 

could break them.  So we have to be careful that we don't let 

people bail out of contracts too quickly.  So let's be careful of 

that.  Let's take another look at how it's going to work.  Let's 

look at the other provisions in this.  We're talking about risk 

capital under number 7.  And we have to be careful of how we 

define that and how far we let those things go.  And we want 

the minister to know that we're going to question these things 

very carefully. 

 

The one last explanation I want cover here is this amendment 

permits the RRSPs of an eligible investor to purchase shares of 

the labour-sponsored venture capital corporation directly while 

allowing the tax credit to be issued to the individual.  I have to 

admit that I'm not quite sure what that is and I want the 

minister to be sure that he explains that to us when we get there 

because we have to know and understand what's going on 

before we can support you completely.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:53 p.m. 

 


