




















































Hansard: June 03, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2201 

 June 3, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 38 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 38 -- An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code be now read a 

second time and the proposed amendment thereto moved by 

Mr. Toth 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The minister is . . 

. I told him I may be three hours tonight, and then he's 

signalling maybe half an hour, and I think maybe the last figure 

is maybe closer to it.  I'll do the best I can, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Minister, to cover the few points I want to cover and then we'll 

be moving on. 

 

I just want to reiterate a little bit, Mr. Speaker, of what we're 

talking about before supper, is one of the most dangerous parts 

of the Bill -- unless the minister can tell us something different 

in his closing speech or in Committee of the Whole -- that I'm 

really worried about and what I'd say that the bulk of my 

conversations with people pertaining to Bill 38 seems to be, 

their children in the schools. 

 

Like I said before the supper break, Mr. Speaker, that in the 

adult world as far as people having jobs and working in the 

workplace, if they rub shoulders with a homosexual or a 

lesbian they're a grown individual and they can take care of 

themselves.  But children, we do not want them to grow up in 

this province being taught and looking at their teachers that 

may be a lesbian or a homosexual, believing in their heart as 

they grow up that that's a normal lifestyle.  It is not a normal 

lifestyle.  Every member in this Assembly knows that a 

homosexual or a lesbian is not normal.  It's not a normal 

lifestyle.  If you believe that well then I'd say you're not 

normal.  Anybody believes that a gay lifestyle, the gay society, 

is a normal lifestyle then I would say the members that believe 

that are not normal themselves.  It's as simple as that.  It is 

very, very clear.  The Scriptures make it clear.  It couldn't be 

any more clear that they are not normal.  If they were normal 

they would be a heterosexual and they would be living with 

opposite-sex partners. 

 

And I just want to leave that with you, Mr. Minister, Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Minister, and I'm hoping that you have a good 

answer in second reading or in Committee of the Whole 

amendments to assure, assure the people of this province of 

Saskatchewan, that if you don't vote for our amendment tonight 

and let it go on for six months to think about this, that you'll 

have something there to protect our children so they do not 

have to be taught by an open, professed gay.  It just cannot be. 

 

It doesn't hurt them.  I've rubbed shoulders with them all my 

life and didn't know it.  I mean I probably have 

 you people have, I'm sure some of my colleagues have, that 

you could rub shoulders with a gay in your workplace or at 

school or whatever.  But if you don't know it, it didn't hurt you.  

That means they didn't let anybody know what they were. 

 

Now what you're doing now is you're going to open it up.  You 

should be taking a lesson over this next six months where 

you're thinking about this, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister.  You 

should be thinking about what's happening in United States.  I 

was in Honolulu when President Clinton was sworn in as the 

President of the United States on inauguration day.  And before 

the day was out his first piece of business was to have the 

Armed Forces protected for the gay community in the Armed 

Forces.  If you were a gay you would be protected. 

 

Well he's had trouble with that.  He's had to listen to General 

Schwarzkopf and a few people like him that were saying this is 

wrong, and will be wrong, and then people . . . As soon as he 

stood up and was counted, people come forth.  And it's not 

happening.  They're not getting that to happen down there. 

 

So I urge you, Mr. Government, Mr. Speaker, I urge the 

government, for goodness' sakes, think this out more carefully 

than you have.  Think about the 90-some per cent of people 

that don't agree with you and quit discriminating upon them. 

 

Mr. Minister, it seems to be a very funny thing that the 

provinces that aren't thinking this out are the socialist provinces 

like British Columbia, and Ontario, and now Saskatchewan.  

Why is it in the socialist provinces?  Why is it the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) conventions that don't think this out?  

Maybe if they just thought about it for six months straight 

they'd think it out that they're the ones that always have 

adoptions and bring in to their conventions endorsing what 

we're doing here today. 

 

We wouldn't be here if it wasn't for the NDP Party endorsing it.  

They've endorsed it all your conventions, because when I spoke 

earlier on second reading, it was come right from your 

convention.  So it's the NDP people of this province, the 

majority of them, that's brought this Bill to this here legislature. 

 

And if you would just stop and think about it, there's no way 

you could proceed.  You let cooler heads think this thing out.  

Listen to the people.  Listen to the group of people that was in 

this Assembly today.  There was a group here today and they 

had a press conference this morning.  I watched them on the 

news tonight.  They're concerned about, and they want you to 

think about it, and they know about our amendment of pulling 

this here Bill for six months. 

 

They want you to think about it and they don't understand that, 

and they don't believe, and their lawyers don't believe . . . As I 

said before supper, our lawyers do not believe, Mr. Minister, 

that this Bill is as simple as it seems to be.  It opens the door.  

It's going to open the door to the homosexual society.  And 

they do 



2202 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

not have it coming.  They do not have one thing more coming 

than I've got coming.  If they can hold a job in the workplace 

and I can hold a job in the workplace, it should be our own 

talents that does that.  It shouldn't have to be . . . You should 

think about that. 

 

Think about that while this Bill's being closed.  Think about it 

very, very carefully.  The minister should be thinking about it 

very carefully that why should . . . just think it out.  Why 

should a homosexual have preference in the workplace over 

anybody else?  There's just no reason for it whatsoever.  You 

are wrong, wrong, wrong, and the people of Saskatchewan say 

you are wrong. 

 

Another concern of mine, Mr. Speaker, that I'd like them to 

think about is what's going to happen . . . and a very great 

concern has come to me from the Bible schools in this province 

of Saskatchewan.  I'm talking about church schools and Bible 

schools.  Like Caronport is a non-denominational Bible school, 

but we have a Catholic school at Muenster.  You go talk to 

these people.  They are wondering what's going to happen if 

gay people apply to teach at these schools. 

 

Are they going to be forced . . . that's another one I want you, 

Mr. Minister, to think very carefully about over the next while 

if you're going to go ahead with the Bill and then not listen to 

our amendment.  If you're going to go ahead, I want you, Mr. 

Minister, to think very clearly how you can protect the people 

in the Bible schools and the church schools that they do not 

have gay teachers forced upon them. 

 

It would be absolutely wrong.  You'd be discriminating upon 

the whole school and all the people that believe in that Bible 

school or that church school.  It is absolutely wrong. 

 

I've had many, many letters from schools such as this.  I've had 

contact from the Lutheran college in Outlook.  I've had many 

contacts from Caronport, Muenster, a Catholic school as I said 

before.  They show concern. 

 

So please, Mr. Speaker, I say to the government do not 

discriminate these people.  Whatever you're going to do, make 

sure you protect the people that believe otherwise, that they do 

not have to have their teachers forced upon them that are not of 

the same thinking as far as Bill 38 is concerned.  They must be 

protected. 

 

You're the government.  We're only the opposition.  We can 

only bring you what the people are saying.  And everything 

we're saying here, everything that my colleagues have said in 

the last month, debating this Bill . . . It hasn't been on the Table 

for pretty near four weeks, but we did debate it I think.  Or not 

debate it, we spoke on it, and now we'll be debating it in 

Committee of the Whole if you don't listen to our amendment 

or vote for our amendment tonight. 

 

But it's very, very important that you listen to us because every 

letter that we've got, almost every letter I've got, has been 

copied to the Minister of Justice, the Premier of this province.  

And so I'm sure if they're not just letting their staff read those 

letters and they're 

reading themselves, it must mean something to them.  It must 

surely.  Think it out.  Protect these people. 

 

If you want to go out and protect the homosexual and lesbian 

people, the gay society, well then do as you may.  But don't 

discriminate upon the rest of us while you're doing it.  Do not 

let me have to hear from the alliance, Canadian Bible College 

in Regina that there'll be teachers move in there, apply there, 

that are gay.  I want protection in this Bill if you're not going to 

pull it, protection for these people. 

 

Now I suppose the Canadian Bible College is strictly Bible . . . 

and it may not be an open school, but the Muenster school and 

the Caronport Bible school, that's an open-unit school, so 

there's children from eight and under in the surrounding area go 

there.  And it would be a terrible injustice to the Caronport 

Bible school if they have to have a gay teacher teaching their 

children and they believe otherwise.  It's very, very important.  

And I urge the minister, and I'm sure that he will think of 

something, to protect these people if he already hasn't. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess what's really very important here . . . Oh, I 

think now, Mr. Speaker, what I'll do is, I think it's only fair 

after the hundreds of letters that I have received -- I went 

through them today when I found out I was going to be 

speaking again, Mr. Speaker -- I just picked out six letters and 

they're very short, and they're kind of a cross-cut of them all.  

And it's something that I'd like the members to . . . I want it on 

the record.  And it's something I'd like them to think about over 

this next six months if they're going to vote for our amendment.  

So I'm going to read just the highlights of these letters.  And 

some of them are short.  I'll read them all. 

 

And these are six out of several hundred letters.  But they're 

kind of a cross-cut that will pretty well tie in what people are 

saying.  This, Mr. Speaker, these letters will pretty well say 

what the people of Saskatchewan are saying: 

 

 The NDP government of the (and I won't say his name; it 

would be the Premier) . . . plan to introduce amendment 

legislation next month that will grant special rights to those 

who choose to practice the homosexual lifestyle.  This 

amendment will redefine family marriage, spouse, and the 

right to adopt children, as well as other family privileges, to a 

specific group.  God detests homosexuality.  It does not bless 

same-sex marriages. 

 

 Leviticus 18:22 -- "You shall not lie with the male as with a 

woman.  It is abomination."  Chapter 18 of Leviticus deals 

with the laws of sexual morality. 

 

 Has the time come when Christianity and logic has become 

obsolete and the ten commandments are no longer guidelines 

to our morality laws? 

 

 What gay men or lesbians do in their bedrooms 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2203 

is their business but they should not or do not need special 

legislation giving them special status. 

 

 I ask you to use your . . . debating skills and join the majority 

of Saskatchewan citizens that oppose the amendment. 

 

This is not even from my constituency; it's from a Bob . . .  

sincerely, Bob Schmidt, Langenburg, Saskatchewan. 

 

The next letter: 

 

 I am very concerned and opposed to any legislation that gives 

homosexual . . . (and lesbians) the same status as marriage of 

two persons of opposite sex. 

 

 If they get that right, what is next?  I fear for the future 

generations.  I trust you will do all you can to prevent this 

legislation. 

 

Edith Obrigewitsch from Davidson. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had many, many letters from the Davidson area 

and I just picked out the ones to read because they seemed to 

be an average of what they were saying. 

 

This letter -- I'm not sure what town -- enclosed his letter to the 

Premier asking him to stop any legislation that grants special 

rights to homosexuals. 

 

 Please! help protect our country & the future of our children 

& grandchildren. 

 

(1915) 

 

Frances Haugerud . . . oh yes, Craik, Saskatchewan.  This is the 

only one I used from Craik. 

 

And this is the letter to the Premier: 

 

 I am writing to ask you to stop any legislation granting rights 

to homosexuals. 

 

 They claim to need protection because they are so badly 

treated.  They are really looking for special status not enjoyed 

by others.  In Colorado recently voters passed an amendment 

which guaranteed that Homosexuals had the same rights as 

anyone else.  Homosexuals were enraged and organized a 

nationwide boycott against Colorado.  This proves to me that 

they are looking for special status not equal rights. 

 

 When it comes to rights I always remember the insight taught 

by Eric Blair better known as George Orwell in Animal Farm 

where he said everybody is equal but some are more equal 

than others.  This proposed legislation will make 

homosexuals more equal than others in Saskatchewan, and 

I'm firmly opposed to it. 

 Homosexuals such as Evanna Simpson have expressed 

delight with the proposed NDP law, saying it will "open the 

door" for the rest of the homosexual agenda.  I regret to say 

that she is probably right about this.  I do not want this door 

open, and I ask you to reject this proposed legislation. 

 

Frances Haugerud from Craik.  It's right on the money here.  

She's saying that Evanna Simpson has expressed delight with 

this Bill, expressed delight that the proposed NDP law will 

open the door for the rest of the homosexual agenda.  That's the 

fear in the province of Saskatchewan.  It's going to open the 

door for the homosexual agenda. 

 

And for goodness' sakes, you people that have got a good 

thinking head on you, think this out.  Think it out.  This is the 

last thing that we can do.  Many things have happened in North 

America in the last few years that we've . . . our morality is 

slipping down the drain.  And here we have this happening in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Once this is adopted, there goes Saskatchewan along with 

many other parts of the world.  In fact in some of the European 

countries, they're better than we are.  They're coming back out 

of some of this immoral Bills that they've put through and 

things that they've allowed in the last years, and they're 

stopping it because it was the ruination of their country. 

 

 Please note.  We are opposed to any legislation that gives 

homosexuals . . . the same status as the marriage of two 

persons of the opposite sex. 

 

 This is a devious pressure tactic, producing a crack that will 

"open the door" to the abandonment of all moral standards. 

 

 It is a grave mistake to "open the door" to all these 

destructive . . . 

 

 We ask that you please "burn" proposed homosexual rights 

legislation.  Harvey and Bernice Anderson. 

 

 Eldon and I are very perturbed regarding the recent letter in 

the Davidson Leader regarding the preferential treatment 

proposed by forthcoming legislation.  We know from reading 

your articles that you are strongly against such legislation. 

 

 We have learned from reliable sources that as Christians our 

views don't really count in these matters but as Canadians we 

can put a stop to this if enough like-minded people form 

groups or coalitions and block this by getting an injunction 

against it because it is not legal to give preference to one 

group over another. 

 

 We send our support to anything you can do in your capacity 

as our member. 

 

 We ask God's blessing on your efforts.  Eldon and Mary 

McClaren. 



2204 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

Mr. Speaker, these are very, very important letters I'm reading 

here because . . . and I'm reading six out of several hundred 

letters, and this covers what people are thinking in this 

province of Saskatchewan.  And as I said before, Mr. Speaker, 

the Minister of Justice and the Premier and many members 

over there have had these same letters, and if they were 

digesting it and really thinking it out, we wouldn't be in this 

position we are today. 

 

Another letter, and this is not from my constituency either.  It's 

from Langbank, Saskatchewan. 

 

 Dear Sir:  I'm writing in regard to the granting of special 

rights to those who choose to practise homosexuality. 

 

 As I understand the present law, a homosexual has the same 

rights everyone in this province has. 

 

 I don't believe that less than 1 or 2 per cent of the population 

should have special rights. 

 

 We believe in the current definition of the family -- man and  

woman publicly married under God and the State and if they 

desire, have children, which creates a bond of love which we 

build our society on. 

 

 Please give this matter your careful attention and vote against 

this legislation of sexual orientation.  Yours truly, Mr. and 

Mrs. Paul Toth from Langbank, Saskatchewan. 

 

And that is a real good, average letter.  Now the last one, Mr. 

Speaker, it's just a letter that came to me and an article out of 

the paper.  This was sent to all MLAs (Members of the 

Legislative Assembly), Mr. Speaker.  And this is another good 

point why should we be thinking about this and thinking what 

we're doing. 

 

And I'm just going to read a few highlights of the article.  

Because on here . . . this person . . . is from Frank and Barbara 

Leier, and I'm not even sure where they're from.  It just says, 

MLA, Gerald Muirhead.  I'm not sure where they're from. 

 

Frank and Barbara Leier to all MLAs.  And the article is "Gay 

isn't okay". 

 

 Forcing people to accept homosexuality as an alternative 

lifestyle smacks of propaganda.  I have several gay relatives 

and other gay friends.  I have read a lot about gay people 

from many sources, religious and secular.  My believe is that 

most cases result from an unhappy family life, lack of role 

model, physical or mental abuse, or exposure to pornography, 

to name the most extreme causes.  Very few cases are 

genetically determined. 

 

 The February 4 Journalism Post editorial tends to agree.  So 

what about these cases that aren't genetically determined?  

Do these people have 

emotional problems or are they gay by choice?  Certainly the 

more our society suffers from emotional problems and the 

more natural the choice of being gay is perceived, the more 

homosexuality will increase. 

 

 Is this what is being advocated?  Full acceptance of 

homosexuality no matter what the reason? 

 

I won't read on any more; that's just the main part that she 

underlined and wanted all MLAs in the province of 

Saskatchewan to read that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's very important that we . . . 

 

I'd like to enlarge on a little bit about what the member from 

Nipawin was talking about tonight about . . . and more reasons 

why we should be thinking this out very carefully and why we 

should be putting a hold on this Bill for six months.  For ever 

would be better for me, Mr. Speaker, and that is my own 

personal belief along with thousands of people in the province 

of Saskatchewan, like thousands and thousands, as God's word 

in the Scriptures is very, very clear. 

 

Either this province, either this government, either all the 

members of the Assembly believe in the Scriptures, believe in 

God, or we don't.  If we don't, Mr. Speaker, why don't we stop 

calling ourselves a Christian nation and let us be a heathen 

nation.  Why do we say the nice prayer that you say each day, 

Mr. Speaker, when we open this Assembly?  Why do we make 

a mockery of ourselves and then turn around and go against the 

Scriptures?  Because that's exactly what we're doing. 

 

And if you would read all the passages that I gave in second 

reading, Mr. Speaker, if they were all digested, you would 

understand that it is wrong what you're doing and that it is 

wrong, wrong, wrong, the belief that so many people believe.  

If you just stop and think it out and read God's word in the 

Scriptures and look around you at statistics that homosexuals 

and lesbian people are not born that way.  They are made that 

way from sin after birth. 

 

Now there is such in instances . . . There is some instances 

where it is kind of hard to believe that.  Some people perhaps 

could be born with a tendency to be that way.  But don't forget 

God's word in the Scriptures says very clearly that man can 

suffer for your forefather's sins.  So you're not always born free 

of sin.  Everybody is born in sin.  They must become into a 

new life when they grow up, and each person has to think for 

themselves, and they must either live through God's rule in the 

Scriptures, what he teaches us . . . You either believe that way 

or you don't.  So if you let yourself go and live in sin, you will 

sometimes, if you have a tendency, you become an acting 

homosexual or a lesbian person. 

 

And the proof of this to me is the Scriptures, but let's go 

outside the Scriptures, Mr. Speaker.  Let's go outside the 

Scriptures. 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2205 

Mr. Speaker, I don't know why you're shaking your head at me 

tonight.  I don't think the Speaker should shake their head at 

anybody. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order!  I've been listening a 

long time to the member, and the member is referring to a 

second-reading debate.  He knows that he is on the amendment 

moved by his colleague.  And that amendment says that this 

Bill should not be read now, but six months hence. 

 

And the member therefore cannot have a wide-ranging debate.  

I've been very generous with him this evening, and I'm asking 

him to get back to the amendment and not on second-reading 

debate.  He had his opportunity for second reading, and he's 

now on a very narrow, restricted debate on the amendment.  So 

I ask the member to get back to his amendment. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, that's fine.  I have no problem 

with that at all because I can just take longer and connect 

everything I say with six-month's thinking.  We're only play 

games.  If you don't like, Mr. Speaker, what I'm doing, please 

just get up and stop me.  Don't shake your head at me while I'm 

speaking. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I will ask the member to withdraw 

those words implicating that the Speaker is being negative to 

him.  I simply indicated to him that he is out of order by 

making it very wide, his discussion.  The member can take all 

evening if he wants to debate, but the member is going to abide 

by the rules of this House just like anybody else.  And I ask 

him to get back to the amendment as moved by his colleague 

the member from Moosomin.  If the member doesn't want to, 

I'll call upon another member. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Now as I was 

saying, Mr. Speaker, that we're talking about the most serious 

thing that's ever happened, as far as I'm concerned, in the 

province of Saskatchewan -- the most serious Bill that ever has 

come before this House, ever. 

 

And I don't think it's wrong that our colleague from Moosomin 

put an amendment in that we think about this for six more 

months.  And certainly I can connect everything I say with the 

six months, and I will do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps we should think very, very clearly about 

the facts.  There's so many people that laugh at the Scriptures 

and say that they're not correct.  And let's just call ourselves a 

Christian nation, as we do.  We consider ourselves a Christian 

nation.  God made us.  God made the earth; God made the sea.  

He made the land and the waters.  There's nothing he didn't do 

right.  He put fish in the sea; he put the animals on the earth.  

And then he made man.  And no one, no one on earth -- and I 

want you to think about this very, very carefully -- no one on 

earth has ever seen the fish in the sea or the animals mate with 

same sex.  It's only sin and man and woman that does that. 

 

So God didn't make us imperfect like he made the 

animals and the fish perfect.  There is no mistake on what God 

does perform.  It's only man that promotes sin and lives in sin. 

 

So I want you to think very carefully upon this, that you people 

that are feeling so sorry for somebody that is born a 

homosexual or a gay.  They are not born that way.  They 

become that way. 

 

And Mr. Speaker and all the members can shake their fists at 

me as much as they want, but all they're doing is lowering their 

own . . . they're lowering themselves by doing that.  Because 

read . . . instead of shaking their hands at me, Mr. Speaker, 

they'd be far better if they opened the Scriptures and read God's 

word. 

 

Or else come right out and say it, come right out and say it that 

we're not a Christian nation any more.  Well that we are not.  

Say that you, the NDP government, are not a Christian nation.  

Say that we're a heathen bunch of people and we are going to 

do these things. 

 

Because that's what I'm going to leave when I close here to the 

Minister of Justice, that when we move to the Committee of the 

Whole, that I have faith in him.  That he is a decent enough 

man to think these things out and have strong, strong 

amendments that will stand up to any court in Canada 

pertaining to marriages, and adoptions, and protecting our 

children from lesbian, homosexual teachers. 

 

(1930) 

 

This is what we must have.  We have to have men like you, Mr. 

Justice Minister; this is all on your hands.  It's up to you to set 

where we're going into Saskatchewan right now, whether we're 

going to call ourselves a heathen province and throw it wide 

open and promote homosexuality and the lesbian and gay 

society.  We're going to promote it or we're not. 

 

And it looks like that's what most of your people think, but I 

think that if they give it six months to think about it and talk 

about it, and wait until the vote comes in -- this plebiscite, 

they'll get over their hundred thousand names.  They have 

approximately 12, 15,000 names in Regina alone on petitions.  

They have approximately another 35 to 40,000 that's been 

gathered up by another group, and there's about another 15 to 

20,000 that are sitting throughout the province now, partly 

filled and now that seeding is over there's going to be a great 

move out there, Mr. Speaker, to get these here plebiscites filled 

and we'll get over a hundred thousand names.  I'm sure the 

people involved will come up with their hundred thousand 

names.  I'm absolutely sure of it. 

 

Then we'll have to have a vote.  So why wouldn't this 

government do the opposite what the Minister of Justice said 

one time, that we wouldn't honour it anyway, and I'm sure he 

didn't mean that.  I'm sure when his head cooled that the 

Minister of Justice will say when the people of Saskatchewan 

speak we will listen.  This is too important.  This is not debt, 

like I said before, this is talking about things that are of a 

serious nature. 



2206 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to leave again . . . If we're not 

going to vote . . . we're hoping, Mr. Speaker, that they vote for 

the amendment and give it six months so all people can think 

this over and give this of course again a chance for this here 

petition to get in and let the people speak. 

 

But if not I leave this message with the Minister of Justice.  I 

talked to the Premier in the hallway after I spoke at suppertime, 

and the Premier said very clearly to me when he put his hand 

on my shoulder that your concerns will be met when the 

Minister of Justice speaks on second reading and with 

amendments.  So I say, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier is 

concerned.  He's concerned with my views and the views of my 

colleagues.  He is concerned. 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Minister of Justice, not to come in with 

some weak amendments that doesn't get by, stand up in court.  

So all I'm saying is, Mr. Minister, if you're going to proceed, 

and we have to proceed into committee, then we're asking you 

to think it out very carefully to make sure that the statement 

you said in the fall of '92 and then several times this winter, 

that this government will never allow marriages or never allow 

the adoptions . . .  

 

And you'll be protecting these different provisions that we've 

been talking about in the Bill that we want protected.  That's 

not the homosexuals we're talking about being protected.  We 

don't believe in that at all.  We would like to see you pull the 

Bill.  We want them to be equal.  What we want you to do, Mr. 

Minister, if you're going to proceed, protect, be sure you 

protect the other 90-some per cent, the people that oppose the 

Bill.  Be sure that all their protections are there. 

 

So I leave that with you, Mr. Minister, and I ask you to . . . and 

there's a lot of people out there tonight.  I get phone calls every 

day that people, Christian people said they are praying for the 

Minister of Justice, that God will prevail in your mind and your 

heart to do the right thing for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I ask to adjourn the debate. 

 

The division bells rang from 7:34 p.m. until 7:44 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Toth 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens  

-- 5 

Nays 

Romanow Murray 

Tchorzewski Hamilton 

Shillington Johnson 

Kowalsky Draper 

Mitchell Sonntag 

Upshall Roy 

Hagel Wormsbecker 

Bradley Crofford 

 

Lorje Kluz 

Pringle Langford t 

-- 20 

The division bells rang from 7:47 p.m. until 7:57 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Toth 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens  

-- 5 

 

Nays 

Romanow Murray 

Tchorzewski Hamilton 

Lingenfelter Johnson 

Shillington Draper 

Kowalsky Sonntag 

Mitchell Roy 

Upshall Wormsbecker 

Hagel Crofford 

Bradley Kluz 

Lorje Langford 

Pringle  

-- 21 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I want to warn members at this time that the 

minister is about to close the debate on second reading.  If any 

member wishes to speak he or she should do so now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise tonight to close 

debate with respect to Bill No. 38 which amends the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code.  Mr. Speaker, surrounding 

this piece of legislation is a great deal of misunderstanding.  In 

my speech leading off this debate, I attempted to clarify the 

scope and effect of the Bill.  The debate which has occurred in 

this House makes it clear that some further explanation is 

needed. 

 

One of the members has remarked that there is no need for this 

Bill.  And another has questioned the government's motives in 

introducing legislation to include protection on the basis of 

sexual orientation.  It may not be apparent to most of us that 

discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation occurs.  It 

doesn't affect most of us.  However for homosexuals it is, 

unfortunately, a fact of life.  Without these amendments a 

homosexual person who is denied an apartment or who loses a 

job because of his or her sexual orientation doesn't have any 

means of redress and that's not fair. 

 

(2000) 

 

I believe that the members opposite would agree and have 

agreed that it is not fair.  This legislation is needed to address 

this unfairness.  The government's motive in passing this 

legislation is precisely that: to provide a means of redress when 

unfair distinctions are made on 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2207 

the basis of a person's sexual orientation. 

 

I would also like to point out that it is not only New 

Democratic Party governments in this country that have 

recognized that individuals face discrimination because of their 

sexual orientation and that legislation is needed to protect these 

individuals.  Legislation was passed in Ontario in 1986 by a 

Liberal government steering the amendments through their 

legislature.  In New Brunswick it was a Liberal government 

which included this protection.  And in Nova Scotia it was a 

Conservative government.  On the federal level, it is a 

Conservative government which has introduced amendments to 

their human rights legislation to include sexual orientation as a 

prohibited ground for discrimination. 

 

Despite the fact that this development has already occurred in 

most of the jurisdictions in Canada it is clear that many people 

still don't understand the concept of anti-discrimination 

legislation.  As I emphasized in my second-reading speech 

respecting this Bill, human rights legislation is not about 

extending anyone extra or special rights. 

 

Perhaps some examples, Mr. Speaker, will help to clarify what 

we're talking about.  We're talking about equal rights rather 

than extra rights.  For instance, the protection of the code on 

the basis of religion doesn't give special rights to Christians or 

Muslims or Jews, but provides that persons can't be 

discriminated against regardless of their religious belief and 

practice. 

 

Similarly the inclusion of race as a ground of discrimination 

doesn't give special rights to any particular race but serves to 

protect all of us regardless of our race.  Because race and sex 

are two grounds included in the code, persons of all races -- 

and both men and women -- are protected from discrimination 

in the situations covered by the code. 

 

In fact white persons rarely file complaints on the basis of race, 

and men rarely file complaints indicating that they have 

suffered discrimination on the basis of their sex.  Because 

non-whites and women are more likely to experience 

discrimination and thus file complaints on the basis of race or 

gender, this doesn't mean that they have received extra rights, 

or special rights, under the code. 

 

This leads me to another misapprehension which underlines 

opposition to the Bill.  The words "sexual orientation" do not 

simply mean homosexuality.  Protection from discrimination 

against heterosexuals, if it occurs, is also included in this 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to take this opportunity to directly address 

some of the members' concerns -- not all because we can get 

into specific concerns during committee -- but some of the 

concerns that I think are the main ones. 

 

First, several members have questioned the effect of this Bill 

upon the matter of adoption.  As I stated in my earlier speech, 

this legislation will in no way change 

the present law respecting adoptions.  Perhaps I can expand on 

that briefly tonight. 

 

The present Adoption Act, which was passed by the previous 

government in 1989, provides that married adults or an 

unmarried adult or any person that the court may allow may 

apply to adopt a child.  There's nothing in the Adoption Act 

that says only a heterosexual may apply.  This doesn't mean 

that the court has no control over where a child is placed. 

 

On the contrary, the deciding factor in every case is whether 

the adoption would be in the best interests of that child.  All 

relevant factors must be considered by the judge in determining 

what those interests are.  The simple fact, Mr. Speaker, is that 

Bill 38 will not change who may apply for an adoption nor will 

it change the way that each adoption is dealt with by the courts. 

 

Second.  Specific concerns have been expressed relating to the 

marriage of homosexual persons.  Again this Bill doesn't affect 

that issue.  Under the Canadian constitution, it is the federal 

government that has jurisdiction over matters relating to 

marriage.  The only matter that the province has within its 

control is the solemnization of marriages. 

 

Federal jurisdiction clearly includes the issue of capacity to 

marry.  It is therefore for the federal government to determine 

the rules regarding age, soundness of mind, and indeed the 

gender of the marriage partners.  Provincial legislation cannot 

affect those rules. 

 

Third.  Some are concerned about whether these amendments 

will entitle homosexuals to spousal benefits.  Generally, 

whether a homosexual partner will be entitled to employment 

benefits will depend upon the terms of the particular pension 

plan or dental plan or other benefit plan. 

 

If an employee wishes to designate his or her same-sex partner 

as his or her beneficiary, and this is contemplated by the terms 

of the plan, it is not the government's role to step in and say 

that this cannot occur.  Some pension plans refer to spousal 

benefits and do not provide for a designated beneficiary.  These 

plans have been the subject of some litigation in other 

provinces and that litigation has been mentioned in debate in 

this House, and the question in those cases is whether same-sex 

partners are included in such plans. 

 

Courts have come to different conclusions on the issue but the 

cases have shown that it is the Canadian Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms and the interpretation of the charter and the effect of 

the charter upon the provincial benefit plan legislation which 

will continue to be pre-eminent in guiding courts throughout 

this debate.  Whether or not we amend our provincial 

legislation as proposed in Bill 38 won't have any impact on the 

decision that the courts will ultimately reach on these 

questions. 

 

Fourth.  I would like to respond to comments that the 

amendments to this Bill, in the context of section 25, 



2208 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

will allow the promotion of homosexuality in schools.  I know 

that this is a legitimate concern.  It's been raised in the House 

and been raised outside the House.  Mr. Speaker, the fact is that 

the . . . It is inaccurate and misleading to argue that section 25 

has this effect.  I say that with respect.  But I say it with 

certainty. 

 

In the description of the Human Rights Commission's mandate 

the code states that the commission shall develop and conduct 

educational programs designed to eliminate discriminatory 

practices.  This mandate is not ambiguous.  It is not about 

promoting homosexuality.  It is not about teaching 

homosexuality any more than it is about promoting a particular 

religion or a particular marital status. 

 

It is not about school curricula.  School curricula are 

determined by school boards and by the Department of 

Education.  The inclusion of all the other grounds that are in 

the code and have been in the code for years don't give the 

Human Rights Commission the right to determine school 

curricula.  And neither, Mr. Speaker, do these amendments. 

 

The commission cannot require any school to teach 

homosexuality.  Likewise the commission cannot require any 

school to teach Seventh-Day Adventists doctrine, or Methodist 

doctrine, or Catholic doctrine, or to teach the benefits of being 

married as opposed to being single. 

 

What the commission is responsible for doing, Mr. Speaker, is 

educating the general public about what is in the code.  The 

commission provides information about what does constitute a 

discriminatory practice and what does not.  For example, if an 

employer wants to have someone come to his or her workplace 

to explain what behaviours are considered to be sexual 

harassment, the commission will provide that service.  The 

commission's responsibility is to educate and promote an 

attitude of tolerance.  Those who read something more into the 

commission's mandate are simply not correct in that 

interpretation. 

 

Fifth, Mr. Speaker, some members have raised concerns about 

the code's restrictions on the publication of information which 

is considered hate literature -- literature which has the effect of 

denying to homosexuals the right to be free from 

discrimination in employment or in public services.  This is 

prohibited under the amendments to the Human Rights Code. 

 

Some question whether this will have the effect of restricting 

individual expression on this issue.  It is important to remember 

that the code itself in more than one provision guarantees 

freedom of expression. 

 

Contrary to what some opponents have stated, section 14 will 

not prevent churches from quoting from the Bible or teaching 

the Bible or teaching doctrinal positions. 

 

Several members have wondered why sexual orientation is not 

defined in our amendments.  In fact a number of grounds are 

not defined, Mr. Speaker, so 

this isn't unusual.  The only grounds that are defined in the 

code are age, creed, disability, and sex.  The other grounds -- 

race, religion, colour, marital status, nationality, ancestry, and 

place of origin -- are not defined.  All but one of the provinces 

which have added sexual orientation to their legislation have 

not defined it either.  The fear underlying this objection appears 

to be that the code legitimizes conduct which is otherwise 

illegal, and to address this concern the government will be 

introducing a House amendment during the committee stage 

clarifying that the amendments will not protect illegal activity.  

The Criminal Code will continue to have precedence. 

 

I would also like to respond to the concern about affirmative 

action programs.  Section 47, which is the section under which 

affirmative action programs are approved, has been in the code 

since it came into force in 1979, since 1979.  So far affirmative 

action programs have been extended only to four categories -- 

women in non-traditional occupations, persons of aboriginal 

ancestry, the disabled, and most recently to visible minorities -- 

four grounds.  Although the commission has a broad right to 

order affirmative action programs for employers covering all 

matters in the code, they have never gone beyond those four 

heads. 

 

The affirmative action programs which exist are programs that 

have been voluntarily undertaken by employers and submitted 

to the Human Rights Commission for review and approval and 

that is the way it will continue to be, Mr. Speaker.  The groups, 

these four groups, to whom affirmative action programs have 

been extended in Saskatchewan are consistent with groups 

included in affirmative action programs across the country.  

There has been no move in any jurisdiction to include other 

groups with these programs.  I'm aware however, Mr. Speaker, 

that amendments to this provision in Bill 38 cause concern to a 

large number of people.  A lot of people have expressed their 

concern to my colleagues and to my friends across the aisle.  

And we will therefore be introducing a House amendment in 

the committee stage which states that affirmative action 

programs shall be extended only to the four groups recognized 

at the present time. 

 

Finally I want to emphasize again that these amendments do 

not in any way make any value judgements and they certainly 

don't force those value judgements upon anyone else.  All they 

promote are the principles of tolerance and fairness, principles 

which surely have the unanimous support of this Assembly. 

 

I hope, Mr. Speaker, that my comments tonight have clarified 

some of the misunderstandings which continue to impede this 

debate.  I know, even from the debate that occurred this 

afternoon and this evening, that there are other questions to be 

addressed.  And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, and my friends 

opposite, that I will be most happy to deal with those during the 

committee stage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 38. 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2209 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 8:15 p.m. until 8:45 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division 

 

Yeas 

Romanow Pringle 

Wiens Murray 

Tchorzewski Hamilton 

Lingenfelter Johnson 

Shillington Draper 

Kowalsky Sonntag 

Mitchell Roy 

Upshall Wormsbecker 

Hagel Crofford 

Bradley Kluz 

Lorje Langford 

-- 22 

 

Nays 

Muirhead Toth 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens  

-- 5 

 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 90 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 90 -- An Act to 

protect the financial viability of NewGrade Energy Inc. be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm certain that the 

Premier would like to definitely let her rip, as he has indicated, 

because the discussion that's taking place here -- and it's 

unfortunate that maybe the negotiations haven't been able to 

move along with the same ability and capability that the 

members would express in this House. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that as an opposition we have a moral 

obligation to the constituency of this province, to the electorate 

of this province, to at least address some of the issues here.  

And one of the major issues and major concerns before us 

today . . . as we've just noted on Bill 38 where the government 

has gone against the wishes of the majority of the people of 

Saskatchewan and continue to plow ahead with its Bill, Bill 38, 

amendments to the Human Rights Code. 

 

They also show that they are more than determined to move 

ahead with Bill No. 90, An Act to protect the financial viability 

of NewGrade Energy Inc.  And I find it interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, that the terminology they are using is . . . they're 

calling this an Act to protect the financial viability when in fact 

the reality is, Mr. Speaker, it's just another way this 

government is showing its willingness to impress and impose 

its views on the businesses across this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of points I want 

to raise, but a headline caught my attention, Mr. Speaker, and 

it's from the Star-Phoenix, Friday, May 14, the headline is 

"Business/government relations reach crossroads."  And I'm 

quoting from the article; it says: 

 

 The Romanow administration has reached an important 

mile(stone) in the life of its first term.  Which direction the 

government turns next will largely determine the tenor of the 

remainder of this term and its potential for a second stint in 

the corridors of power in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the article goes on to read: 

 

 This watershed is characterized by two important 

developments -- the blowout with the alliance of business 

groups and the Regina upgrader fiasco. 

 

 First, the relationship with this new coalition of business 

groups. 

 

And we go back to a comment that was made in this House a 

number of days ago by the Premier himself. 

 

 In recent days, a war of words has erupted over a call for an 

economic summit meeting issued by the business group.  

Premier Romanow reacted angrily to the idea saying he was 

blindsided by the suggestion.  The government and the 

business group, he said, had been in close contact on 

economic issues.  Each had kept the other side appraised of 

events as they unfolded.  Then, all of a sudden, this call for a 

summit and criticism of the government's economic 

performance comes. 

 

 The business coalition's reaction to the Premier's reaction is 

one of incredulity.  They can't believe his thin skin. 

 

 We felt betrayed over the budget, offers one member of the 

coalition who says they were promised the government 

would cut $2 in expenditures for every dollar it raised in new 

taxes.  When the budget was released, the exact opposite 

happened. 

 

And we're all aware of that, Mr. Speaker, and we've had a fair 

bit of debate on this Assembly . . . on that particular point in 

this Assembly over the past number of months.  And I'm sure 

that that question will be raised when and if the government 

finally screws up its courage to bring forward Executive 

Council and allow the Premier to come before this Assembly to 

answer questions in estimates or the Minister of Finance to 

come before the Assembly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And 

the Premier says he's willing to come any time. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would ask if the Premier would have his 

members here tomorrow and would bring Executive Council to 

deal with so that the Assembly can get into estimates on 

Executive Council.  And I believe that the Premier really holds 

true to his word, 



2210 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

he will do that.  He will be honourable.  He will bring his 

executive.  He will order his House Leader to allow him to 

come before the Assembly with this Executive Council and all 

his assistants and try to answer the questions, try to explain his 

way out of the way his government has manipulated and 

coerced the people of Saskatchewan into accepting and, as you 

will, just going along with what they're doing, in many cases 

simply because as we've seen and as the Bill before us shows, 

they have a willingness to hold an iron fist -- iron fist, it seems 

to me I've heard of that term over the years -- an iron fist over 

their heads while they negotiated. 

 

"On the government's side," -- and I continue on with this 

debate here. 

 

 On the government's side, the reaction went something like 

this.  They, meaning business, have to give us some room to 

move on issues.  Having flexibility, they argue, allows things 

to get done.  One example they cite is the AECL deal which 

was revived through quiet co-operation. 

 

 But the real irritant on this particular round is labor 

legislation.  Despite the apparently amicable relationship 

between business and government, the administration was 

planning labor law changes that terrify the business 

community. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, we've been discussing this, and 

there are two Bills presently before this Assembly, and I 

understand there's a third Bill on its way in tomorrow regarding 

labour legislation and the strengthening of labour legislation.  

And time will tell what that Bill has in it.  It will be interesting 

to see what the member from Regina Rosemont is proposing 

and the fact that his colleagues were not willing to accept his 

position on some stronger labour legislation. 

 

So when you look at the two pieces of legislation that are 

before the Assembly today, and the one that's coming 

tomorrow, and the Bill before us on the upgrader, Mr. Speaker, 

one has to wonder when will we ever see in this province a 

time and an opportunity for businesses to really feel 

comfortable in dealing and working with the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 Maybe the business community felt it was getting too cosy 

with the government and some members, feeling they were 

being co-opted, rebelled. 

 

Who knows the debate that has taken place? 

 

Mr. Speaker, as another article headline reads, "Set politics 

aside to rescue the upgrader."  One has to wonder if the 

government are not just crying because they didn't get what 

they wanted, if they're not crying because of the fact that they 

appointed a commissioner, Mr. Justice Estey, paying him 

$200,000 to give a report, hoping that at the end of the day he 

would bring a scathing report back to them criticizing FCL 

(Federated Co-operatives Ltd.), 

criticizing the former government, and criticizing the federal 

government on all the partners. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker,  at the end of the day Mr. Estey I believe 

tried to be as reasonable and as fair as he could.  The 

government specifically asked former Supreme Court Justice 

Willard Estey to explain once and for all how the deal was 

made.  Perhaps not surprisingly Estey refused to do that in his 

report on the upgrader released last week. 

 

And then the article continues: 

 

 While no one gets what it wants, Estey has at least provided a 

means out of the impasse. 

 

And we've heard a lot about that over the last couple of days.  

In fact, Mr. Speaker, as I was driving in for the House this 

morning, I happened to have the radio on.  And I don't often 

listen to the Harasen line.  It just so happened that Mr. Leland 

and Mr. Empey were on the Harasen line explaining their side 

of the issue regarding the NewGrade upgrader and FCL's side 

of the proposal. 

 

And it was interesting that at the end of the day they said they 

have been willing, more than willing to sit down and on the 

basis of the Estey report, sit down with the government and 

work out a fair and amicable solution to the problem before us. 

 

What the editorial says here: 

 

 While no one gets what it wants, Estey has at least provided a 

means out of the impasse.  The provincial government 

wanted an indictment of the Devine administration for having 

entered the deal under pressure in a provincial election.  It 

didn't get it.  In fact, Estey refused to go into the history of 

the deal in spite of the fact it was part of his terms of 

reference. 

 

So one has to wonder.  And it's fortunate that Chief Justice 

Estey lifted himself above the proposals to try and bring in as 

fair a report to the legislature and to the government as was 

possible under the terms that he was given. 

 

Mr. Estey also . . . the article also says: 

 

 The NDP also wanted an outside opinion to agree that FCL is 

being unreasonable about renegotiating the agreement.  It 

didn't get that either.  In fact Estey points out that FCL has 

insisted on no financial exposure from the start.  For its part, 

FCL wanted to stick with the status quo.  It didn't get that.  

Estey said the company has a large stake in the financial 

integrity of Saskatchewan and in the risk of excessive 

taxation of the residents of the province. 

 

So when you look at the report in general, Mr. Speaker, that 

report points out a number of things that have taken place and 

offers a number of suggestions.  And certainly it's within the 

hands of the government to take the report and to be fair and 

reasonable with 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2211 

Federated.  It's also in the hands of Federated to reach out, 

based on the report, and be fair and reasonable. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, to have a Bill before this Assembly 

suggesting that there is only one way to do it -- and the only 

reason I can see for the Bill right now, the government will 

argue that the reason for the Bill is that they don't see a way out 

of the impasse -- in fact one has to wonder how serious they are 

about trying to work their way out of the impasse. 

 

Are they really interested and trying to come to a resolve to the 

issue?  Or are they more interested, Mr. Speaker, in flexing 

their heavy muscle again as they did with the farmers on the 

GRIP (gross revenue income program) Bill, as they did in the 

GRIP debate, Mr. Speaker, where they took away the contracts. 

 

In fact just said to 60,000 producers across the province of 

Saskatchewan that no, in this case a contract is not really a 

contract because we just really can't.  Their argument I believe 

at the time was that they couldn't afford it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day because they didn't do 

their homework properly and they missed a deadline in 

notifying farmers of the changes to the contract, and so they 

said when we finally got through the debate on the GRIP Bill, 

well we'll just deem that we had the proper information . . . had 

been sent out, proper notification had been put in place.  And to 

protect ourselves from any farm group or organization or group 

of farmers who would decide to put up the equity and the 

financing to take them to court, they passed also in that same 

Bill, Mr. Speaker -- and we all remember that -- they passed a 

clause in the Bill that said no one could take them to court.  No 

one could challenge them in court.  No one had the right to. 

 

(2100) 

 

You know it's interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, in all the points 

that were brought out by the Minister of Justice yesterday when 

he read his second-reading speech, he pointed out four areas 

but he forgot one major area.  And the fact that section 16 of 

the Bill does the exact same thing that the GRIP Bill did in that 

it takes away any ability by Federated to go to the courts and 

challenge the decision by the government to unilaterally 

change the contract.  As we see, they're using their legislation 

again just to break the contract. 

 

And one has to begin to wonder, as I said earlier talking about 

business people, if governments can break contracts at their 

whim and if this is a democratic . . . if we really live in a 

democratic country and if we have a moral obligation under the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms . . . I believe it was the 

Provincial Secretary who made that comment the other evening 

that we have a moral obligation.  I believe it had to do with the 

French Bill we debated last night, Bill 39.  And one has to 

wonder where the moral obligation is when it comes to 

legislation that interferes with the basic rights of individuals, 

whether they be individuals or whether they be corporations, 

whether they be large businesses.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's 

what the whole debate is about today. 

 

In fact in each and every session since the 1991 election the 

NDP government has employed heavy-handed legislation to 

nullify legal and binding contracts, which is solid indication 

that contracts do not mean a lot to this government.  In fact 

they have even used the rules of this Assembly; they've 

designed the rules of the Assembly to limit the opposition.  

They not only designed the rules of the Assembly to limit the 

opposition but, Mr. Speaker, they have used this Assembly to 

just get what they haven't been able to do in the . . . (inaudible) 

. . . public opinion.  And one has to wonder whether this 

government has any integrity left at all, or whether integrity is 

a foreign word to the NDP government led by their member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one has to also wonder about their ethics.  

Are there any ethics on that side of the House?  And the 

Premier and a number of his members would laugh about 

ethics.  Well we really have to ask, where are the ethics?  

Where are the ethics of the so-called revolutionaries, you could 

almost call them, in the province of Saskatchewan.  Where are 

their ethics, Mr. Speaker? 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, one thing is true, one thing 

is sure.  This government has been very consistent in their 

actions.  They've been consistent from day one.  Consistently 

attacking people rather than trying to work with people as the 

minister from P.A. (Prince Albert) Carlton indicated to us the 

other evening in the debate on the Gaming Commission. 

 

And it's going to be interesting to see where the debate on the 

Gaming Commission finally boils down as well, Mr. Speaker.  

But his comment as we were debating his Bill before the 

Assembly was, a new day had dawned.  Well a day new had 

dawned all right.  And people are wondering today what kind 

of a new dawning really took place on October 22.  When they 

woke up October 22 after their . . . who knows whether it was a 

major hangover or a mild hangover.  But today they're basically 

wondering if they're not into a major hangover. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at what has taken place, when we 

see where this government is heading and we look at the days 

we've spent in this Legislative Assembly for the past number of 

months, weeks and months . . . And on many occasions the 

Government House Leader and a number of the . . . in fact I'm 

sure all the government members are wondering when are we 

finally going to get out of this place?  Well it would seem to 

me that this House could have adjourned long ago if the 

government members would have shown that they have respect 

for democracy in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I can go through a number of articles 

regarding the whole upgrader deal.  One such article says, the 

headline is: Why such a hurry, Roy?  What is the hurry, Mr. 

Deputy Deputy Speaker?  What is the hurry, one has to ask.  

And as I indicated last 



2212 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

night, and this article certainly raises a very strong point, that 

there is bound to be a fair bit of politics in this whole debate 

taking place today, in fact in what the government are doing. 

 

But as, I think it's the Premier has indicated in the province of 

Saskatchewan, there isn't anything . . . you really can't do a lot 

without politics entering in because of the very fibre of this 

province.  But it would seem to me that when politics starts to 

mix with business deals then we've gone a little too far. 

 

And so why the hurry? Why the hurry?  Unless it's the NDP 

leader taking on a business group, then it's okay.  Is that what it 

is, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker? 

 

And a number of the Saskatoon members suggesting that a deal 

was signed.  Well from what I've heard and from what I've seen 

and from what I understand, the deal wasn't officially signed 

till after the election. 

 

And it's interesting to note that the government likes to forget 

about the fact that they actually were in negotiations as well, 

long before the Conservative government led by the member 

from Estevan came to power in 1982. 

 

And it's also interesting to note that these discussions that were 

taking place over the period of time . . . and we would have to 

admit that there was a long and strenuous time negotiation that 

had taken place on the whole debate regarding NewGrade.  

And one would also have to argue that when we look at our 

province and we look at the vastness of the heavy oil in this 

province, and we have talked . . . The member from Estevan, 

when he was premier of the province and prior to, talked about 

processing in this province rather than shipping out the raw 

products.  And it seems to me I've heard a few of the members 

on the government side are now starting to talk a little bit about 

value added as well.  When we look at heavy oil, one has to ask 

themselves, yes, why wouldn't we upgrade our heavy oil into 

synthetic crude and market it in our own province so that the 

royalties stay here, so that the jobs stay here. 

 

When you look at what can be done with businesses I think we 

just . . . It wasn't all that long ago when the Minister of 

Economic Development stood in this Assembly and quite 

proudly praised the group from the Norquay area -- Norquay 

alfalfa processing -- a group of individuals who a number of 

years back decided they needed to offer more.  They needed to 

do more to build something, build for themselves, and then to 

get into the processing business to create employment in their 

community. 

 

And the Premier says, what does this have to do with the 

upgrader?  Well it has a lot to do with the upgrader.  Because 

what the upgrader did was created jobs in the city of Regina.  It 

created value added industry in the province of Saskatchewan 

and, Mr. Speaker, it not only put people to work but it's 

bringing funds and money into the province of Saskatchewan 

through royalties and through taxes, taxes paid by the FCL and 

the NewGrade upgrader, by all its employees.  The 

same thing as the alfalfa processing in Norquay. 

 

And when I talk about alfalfa processing, I believe it was the 

Minister of Economic Development stood in this Assembly and 

praised the group from Norquay for having paid off the loan 

they had received through Saskatchewan Economic 

Development, and we want to offer our congratulations too for 

a very worthwhile and worthy project. 

 

But what it has done is brought employment to the area.  It's 

brought economic activity and spin-off to the area, the same 

thing as NewGrade is doing to Regina.  And not only is it 

bringing it just to their area, but it becomes an avenue by which 

people across the province of Saskatchewan can realize that, 

you know, there's more that can be done.  We don't necessarily 

just have to put a kernel of wheat in the ground and watch it 

grow and pray for the rain and the good warm weather and 

harvest it in the fall and take it off and put it in the bin and then 

put it on a hopper car and ship it out of this province, either the 

east coast or the west coast, and try to market it.  There's more 

to the province. 

 

But we begin to wonder, are there individuals who are going to 

be willing to take the gamble in light of what the government is 

doing, in light of their actions even on NewGrade, the fact that 

they would decide to change a contract. 

 

And it would appear to me and I would suggest that anyone 

that's looking at building in the province of Saskatchewan 

better not enter into contracts with the government because 

they might not mean anything.  In fact if they can find their 

own revenue and avenue of the resources they need and the 

financing, they would be much better off.  But if they're going 

to do that, they might also want to look at a province that isn't 

bringing in the types of legislation that binds them so tightly 

and has such a stranglehold on them, that they haven't got the 

ability to get out of its grasp and even become productive and 

productive citizens and productive businesses.  So it would 

seem to me that what they would do is look at other areas like 

maybe the Albertas of this world or maybe the British 

Columbias of this world or the Ontarios, wherever. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it is very imperative that the 

government reconsider, as I indicated last night -- the 

government take the time to reconsider the legislation before 

us.  And the government has the ability. 

 

And if it's not the minister, the Associate Minister of Finance, 

if the Associate Minister of Finance has come to a point of 

reaching an impasse where he really isn't able to sit down with 

Federated; if the government has dug its heels in, or that's one 

or two members, maybe it's time the government looked at 

another individual.  Not through legislation, but authorize 

another individual while this debate takes place in this 

Assembly and while we have other Bills to debate in the 

Assembly, and while debate takes place on estimates -- allow 

maybe a third party to come in and just take the time, and 

maybe they would be able to break the impasse.  And at the 

end of the day this Bill 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2213 

could be pulled from the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would be fair, and it would be 

reasonable, and it would be right.  And it would send a 

message to businessmen, individuals across the province of 

Saskatchewan, that Saskatchewan is certainly a good place to 

come and invest in, and to make your home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at the debate that's taken place, and 

certainly we've seen a number of headlines; and many articles 

have been written.  And as I've been just discussing for the last 

few minutes, another headline comes to my attention that says:  

Government rewrite of upgrader deal could be the last straw. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, when you look at that, one has to 

ask themselves what do they really mean by the last straw?  

And I've just gone through a process of indicating why it could 

be the last straw. 

 

Why would business want to come to the province of 

Saskatchewan in light of the fact that we're having legislation 

brought forward through The Occupational Health and Safety 

and The Workers' Compensation Act, of Bills 55 and 56 -- 

pieces of legislation which have a place.  But what they're 

doing, Mr. Speaker, is going way beyond the real need that's 

out there.  And the Minister of Labour argued yesterday that 

those Bills are necessary to save people's lives.  And yes, Mr. 

Speaker, we want -- or Deputy Speaker -- we want people's 

lives to be saved.  We wanted people to be treated fairly by 

Workers' Compensation.  But in the whole process, as with the 

urgrader Bill before us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also want 

people to know we want employers, employees to work 

together rather than against each other. 

 

And all we're doing today is basically creating an atmosphere 

where the cooperation isn't there.  And Federated 

Co-operatives, what were they built on?  They were built by 

individuals who wanted to work together to build themselves 

an enterprise and a little store, a country store where they could 

buy goods in larger volume, and they could offer services to 

their people, and they could be competitive and bring prices 

down closer to the level of what people could afford.  And that 

took a lot of cooperation, a lot of hard work. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is it wrong to ask the government to think 

of working in a cooperative manner, rather than a dictatorial 

manner?  It's certainly interesting to see the debate taking place 

in light of the fact that it is taking place with a group of 

individuals who, through the process of political evolution in 

this province, were quite instrumental in the implementation of 

the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) Party a 

number of years ago and Tommy Douglas coming to power.  

And that co-op movement has always been quite involved.  In 

fact co-op members over the years have been very involved in 

the co-op process and in the political process. 

Another question has arisen.  The NDP and the upgrader 

deal-making -- there's another headline: 

 

 There is an element of justice in seeing members of the Roy 

Romanow government struggle with the political and fiscal 

consequences of the NewGrade upgrader fiasco.  In a way 

they're reaping what they sowed.  This is basically the same 

group of people who wanted to sabotage the deal in the midst 

of the 1986 provincial election campaign. But in those days 

the reason the New Democrats wanted to kill the upgrader 

had nothing to do with fiscal responsibility or protection of 

Saskatchewan taxpayers.  The motivation was purely and 

explicitly self-serving electoral politics. 

 

(2115) 

 

And we know the process that took place.  In fact those of us 

who were involved in the 1986 election know of all the 

accusations that went back and forth between parties, between 

Federated and between the cooperative movement on the basis 

of the negotiations that were taking place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I look at the Bill before us and I look at the 

government's refusal to really sit down and actually the 

government's demand that Federated renegotiate the deal, and 

the fact that Federated gives something, I also ask myself, well 

if it's right for the government to demand a renegotiation of the 

contract with FCL in the NewGrade upgrader, then why is it 

right for the Government of Saskatchewan not to join with the 

other partners in the Lloydminster . . . in the Bi-Provincial 

upgrader at Lloydminster. 

 

In a Leader-Post article May 28, 1993, "Upgrader needs 

money".  And this article talks about the fact that the 

Bi-Provincial upgrader being built at Lloydminster needs a 

little more money for its start-up costs, and we're all aware of 

all the partners.  Saskatchewan became one of the partners 

along with the federal government, along with Shell Canada 

and the Alberta government.  And it says: 

 

 When there was a call last year for $190 million to finish 

construction, Saskatchewan alone among the four partners 

refused to put up its share based on ownership split. 

 

 Peterson said Saskatchewan made it clear at the time it wasn't 

interested in putting in any more money.  And he 

acknowledged there was no legal obligation for it to 

contribute -- even if its partners wanted it to. 

 

No legal obligation.  Well it would seem to me, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that even if it wasn't a legal obligation, if indeed the 

Bi-Provincial upgrader would follow the same example being 

presented by the NDP government, the province of 

Saskatchewan in the NewGrade upgrader deal, they would just 

go to the federal government and bring forward legislation 

forcing the provincial government to carry its part of 



2214 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

the debt.  And they would have the legal and the legislative 

authority to do that.  So if it is right for the Saskatchewan 

government to say no, our deal was we would put so much into 

this Bi-Provincial upgrader and that's as far as we go, and if it's 

right for the government now to say no, we're not going to go 

any further, then isn't it right or isn't it fair to expect the deal 

with Federated is fair . . . But to ask if the government feels so 

hell-bent to change the rules that they would at least take the 

time to listen and come to a fair and workable agreement. 

 

I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that we're debating a Bill that 

brings in legislation giving the government the ability to do as 

it chooses rather than sitting down as the democratic process 

would call for and negotiating fairly.  In fact, I can see why 

Federated and many of its co-op members are wondering where 

the fairness has gone or what has happened in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This party that went to the people in October 1991 had talked 

about a new day and talked about a new way of working with 

people, a new relationship that they were going to build, and 

many people across . . . In fact I believe it was in the 

neighbourhood of 50 per cent of the population of the day 

voted for this party, and I'm sure many are beginning to 

wonder, why did we cast our vote in that way? 

 

When we voted, we didn't believe that the government was 

going to be as dictatorial or heavy-handed as they've turned out 

to be.  In fact we really believed that this group of individuals 

was going to be fair.  And I would even submit, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that many of the present members in the House here, 

present MLAs representing the government, must find it 

difficult and at times have a difficult time in their constituency 

trying to explain what's going on and at times must have a hard 

time holding . . . biting their tongue or biting their lip when 

they see what's happening, what's being led by Executive 

Council and by the member from Riversdale and the few 

individual hacks he has around him running the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As Federated has also said, we see a government acting as a 

dictator, not a government reaching out to work with the 

people. 

 

I just want to read a few comments made by Mr. Vern Leland, 

president of the FCL.  In an article in the Saskatoon Star-

Phoenix, Saturday, May 29. 

 

 The government is proving itself to be little more than an 

"absolute dictatorship" in the way it is granting itself powers 

over the Regina heavy oil upgrader, says Vern Leland, 

president of Federated Co-operatives Ltd. 

 

 "Absolute dictatorship.  That (a Bill to be introduced 

Monday) gives the power to a minister to do whatever he 

wants to do and that is really scary.  It's even worse than what 

I thought." 

 That provision may prevent FCL from launching legal action 

against the government for rewriting the deal it made in 

1986, but the co-op still intends to fight in the court of public 

opinion . . . 

 

 Leland said FCL is still ready to talk about how to reduce the 

project's debt but is not prepared to assume the risk for any 

cash shortfalls. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, after listening to Mr. Leland on radio this 

morning, he raised a number of those questions.  And in a 

number of ways he didn't disagree with a number of the points 

in Mr. Estey's report as well.  And he also acknowledged that 

yes, that the government wants, it does have the right, to ask 

the FCL to redo the deal. 

 

But you have to ask yourself, what are people really thinking?  

A meeting in Prince Albert, and this is in the Saskatoon Star-

Phoenix, Saturday, May 29, "Gov't blasted for upgrader 

flip-flop" 

 

 Premier Roy Romanow is going back on a promise he made 

five years ago by changing the upgrader deal the 

Conservatives struck with Federated Co-operatives, charges 

Prince Albert co-op president Bert Folmer. 

 

 At an "area consensus meeting" held on April 8, 1988, 

Folmer recalls asking Romanow what he would do about the 

upgrader deal if the NDP formed government. 

 

Guess what he said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Folmer says: 

 

 The answer Folmer recorded in his diary was that the NDP 

"would honor any commitment made by the previous 

government." 

 

And in fact, even in debate in this Assembly we had many of 

the members, while in opposition, complimented the 

government for coming to a deal that brought jobs and job 

creation and value added industry into the city of Regina and 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, when you look at it and when you 

look at . . . and I believe Mr. Estey also pointed out that in light 

of the fact this is a start-up, this is a new phase, this is 

something that's never really been worked at that strenuously in 

Canada before, the upgrader is performing up to its original 

expectations. 

 

And I don't believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that anyone believed 

that the upgrader would pay for itself in its first 1, 2, 3 or even 

5 years of operation.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you're 

building a project such as this, when a person is entering into a 

farming enterprise or building a business or establishing a 

business, Mr. Speaker, what we find is it takes years and many 

years of hard work and dedication, and people usually plan for 

a long payback period.  They usually plan, if they're good 

businessmen and women, looking at at least 15 years, if not 20 

to 30 years, when they get into a major capital . . . and make a 

major capital investment so 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2215 

that they don't put themselves in a financial crunch. 

 

And it would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that it would be only 

fair that the NewGrade deal be looked at in the long term and 

the long-term benefits that it can provide to the province of 

Saskatchewan, and allowing it the ability in the long term to 

pay down the debt.  And if it's taken over the long term, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we all know that it doesn't look all that large.  

In fact the mountain doesn't become that large; it's a lot easier 

to climb and to get over and to cross it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on one hand the Minister of Finance 

yesterday talked about the deficit, and I believe it was the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone had raised a question and 

suggested that it was very unethical for her to suggest that we 

should be looking at the deficit in the short term.  We need to 

look at addressing our deficit problems in Saskatchewan over 

the long term.  And I've said that and many others have said 

that. 

 

And yet a few minutes later the Minister of Justice suggested 

that we need to look at the upgrader and the deficit of the 

upgrader, the shortfall, in the short term.  Why not look at that 

in the long term as well?  If it's fine to address the deficit of the 

province in the long term, why not look at the long-term 

projections on the upgrader as well?  I believe that's fair, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and I believe many members would also 

indicate it. 

 

We've also seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the one thing that 

Federated has going for it that the farmers of Saskatchewan 

didn't have, they're probably in a better position to go to the 

courts of this land, to go to the Saskatchewan Appeal Court, to 

possibly go to the Supreme Court of Canada, to challenge the 

actions by the government.  However the legislation will take 

away that ability.  But it would seem to me that whether the 

legislation removes the ability, I believe Federated at the end of 

the day will still accept the challenge -- to challenge the 

legislation per se and then to go after the deal. 

 

And let me just give a warning.  Should this legislation be 

forced to be brought forward, should a forced agreement be 

brought on FCL, there is a very good chance -- mind you it'll 

may be 3, 4, 5 years down the road before we really get a 

decision brought on this -- but there's a very good chance that 

this legislation will be challenged in the high court of Canada.  

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if that legislation is challenged, and 

if Federated is vindicated and indeed awarded, the fact that 

they have . . . the government was at fault and was wrong, then, 

Mr. Speaker, what I believe will happen, it gives the farmers, 

even if it's five years down the road, the opportunity to go back 

and challenge the government . . . of the court . . . on the GRIP 

Bill as well. 

 

So it would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that it would be only fair 

that we forget about the legislation and get on with the fact of 

negotiating -- negotiating a fair and equitable settlement. 

 

You know one other thing that is interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, when we look at this debate taking place, and a lot of 

the questions that are arising out of the debate and the fact that 

consensus can't be reached, and one article that says the answer 

may lie . . . "The war over NewGrade Upgrader escalating", the 

headline. 

 

 The answer (it says) may lie in an old long-forgotten dispute 

between Federated and the Saskatoon Co-operative 

Association.  In the early 1980s (and certainly members from 

Saskatoon are probably well aware of the debate that took 

place in the 1980s) the Saskatoon co-op like many retail 

co-operatives was on the brink of bankruptcy. 

 

And who entered in?  Federated entered in and bailed them out.  

But it's also interesting to note that even though Federated, 

FCL, came in and bailed them out and got them on their feet 

again, that: 

 

 Federated stepped in and bailed out the faltering co-op with 

millions of dollars of assistance.  In return, Federated took 

virtual control of the co-op's management, over the strenuous 

objections of the board of directors. 

 

 "They became extremely unhappy with FCL because they 

wanted to do things that FCL wouldn't let them do," said one 

co-op insider.  "There was a lot of animosity that developed." 

 

And one has to wonder, is that part of the argument that's still 

taking place here that's come to fruition? 

 

And it's also interesting to note who was on the board of 

directors at that time.  The question is: 

 

 And who was on the board of directors of the Saskatoon 

Co-op?  None other than Finance Minister Janice 

MacKinnon, former minister responsible for Crown 

Investments Corp., and Don Ching, president of CIC. 

 

 It may be coincidence that two members of that co-op board 

now hold high offices in the Romanow government and are 

directly involved in the dispute with Federated over 

NewGrade. 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that almost becomes . . . is 

close to if not being on the verge of a conflict of interest, 

having been involved and then possibly raising old wounds or 

allowing them to come to the surface. 

 

And it's interesting to note the reaction of a number of the 

members in the Assembly tonight.  Anytime you would suggest 

that there might be implications of any one of their members, 

they become very indignant.  But boy, they sure pride in trying 

to run down anyone else from any other political persuasion, be 

they Conservative or Liberal or Reform or whatever. 

 

(2130) 



2216 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

Mr. Speaker, over the past while I have taken the time to raise a 

number of questions.  I have suggested that it's time that we got 

down to serious negotiations rather than legislation.  My 

colleagues and I and people across this province certainly feel 

that the government has the ability, and certainly there are 

many people who would not disagree if the government went 

to Federated and renegotiated a deal.  And I don't think a lot of 

the co-op members would be unhappy in sitting down and 

reviewing the deal and maybe coming up with something that 

would be favourable and equitable. 

 

And certainly we've heard it from the president.  We've heard it 

from the chairman of the board of NewGrade.  We've heard it 

from co-op members across the province.  I've had co-op 

members call me, Mr. Speaker, and it would be fair, Mr. 

Speaker, in the face of our democratic principles that the 

Premier of this province and that his cabinet put this legislation 

on the back burner and ask and call for and ask an individual to 

come in and sit down as a third party, if that's what it needs, if 

that's what it takes, so that the government negotiators and the 

minister responsible can save face, if that's what it takes, and 

give Federated the ability to get out of their quarter because I 

believe what I see in front of us is two groups that are hunkered 

in each of their corners because everyone's made statements, 

and no one really wants to give any more.  They want to 

protect their integrity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it would be appropriate for us to allow for the 

debate to take place rather than legislation.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would suggest and I would ask the minister responsible, the 

Minister of Justice, if that's what it takes, to pull the legislation. 

 

And I would think, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Justice 

would even pull the legislation today, Federated would know 

that the legislation is still there, available for the government to 

bring forward.  But if the Minister of Justice pulled the 

legislation, I wonder if it wouldn't open the door for some 

serious negotiations to take place. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, and I believe that it would also be a 

lot easier for FCL to come to the table to negotiate, and even 

easier for the government because they wouldn't have that 

heavy-handed piece of legislation over top of them.  They 

wouldn't have the hammer hanging over their heads, forcing 

them to vote and forcing them to come to an agreement.  They 

would be able to sit down and negotiate in fairness. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, as I close today and allow my colleague 

to enter into the debate, I just ask the government again to take 

a moment, to give this some thought.  Pull the Bill and allow 

proper and reasonable negotiations to take place.  Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move that debate 

on this particular Bill be now adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

Bill No. 55 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that  Bill No. 55 -- An Act 

to amend The Workers' Compensation Act, 1979  be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, at the outset of discussing Bill 55 that -- as Bill 38 

was important to the society from a moral point of view, and 

was very critical to many people, and very important to society 

in the realm of that discussion, within their lives and their life 

structure -- this Bill too is extremely important because it will 

affect a lot of people and almost all people in our province.  

And will affect them in such a way, Mr. Speaker, that in 

business terms it is as important to them as the other Bill was to 

people with moral convictions. 

 

The changing of this Bill, along with Bill 56 which will come 

along next I guess, or shortly, reality being that these two Bills, 

collectively, are going to change the entire direction of our 

province in terms of how business will operate and how a 

business will be allowed to operate in the province.  Business 

will, by the very nature of the changes in these Acts, be more 

expensive in pure, simple dollars. 

 

That's the whole message here, as far as the business 

community is concerned.  There has been a lot of talk about 

this -- both inside this Assembly and out -- and most folks are 

aware of this part of the argument.  But the reality, Mr. 

Speaker, is that there is an argument on behalf of the working 

people of our province, that has not been well addressed, and 

has not been emphasized nearly enough, or perhaps not at all. 

 

I think it is incumbent as the critic for Labour for this side of 

the House that I take a position of explaining the way in which 

labour, the employees, will be adversely affected by this Bill, 

and how in fact many of them are seeing a need now to ask for 

changes. 

 

The people who work in this province are the backbone of our 

province.  There can be no business without workers, just as 

people pointed out a short time ago to this government that 

there can be no health plan without health workers.  Just as 

workers have always worked and strived to get recognition for 

the work that they do, they have become a very highly 

educated, sophisticated group of people, especially in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  It is a credit to our educational 

system and to the development of our society. 

 

In that credit goes an understanding by the people who do the 

work in our province, the employees in our province, an 

understanding, Mr. Speaker, that if there are no jobs then they 

can have no life.  Somebody has to provide a job in order for a 

person to become an employee. 

 

In our society the government provides some jobs.  But we are 

a democratic society.  We are not a police state, 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2217 

or a communist state, and so government does not provide all 

of the jobs necessary to keep all of society working.  We 

therefore have to depend on business -- business people, people 

who are manufacturers, people who are retailers, people who 

are distributors, people who organize and plan. 

 

It is a fact of life, Mr. Speaker, that in Saskatchewan we have 

many small businesses because of the very diverse nature of 

our province, and because of our geographic location and the 

reality that we are a province of many, many miles, of many, 

many miles going many, many miles to everywhere.  We are a 

province that Switzerland can be fit into many times over. 

Entire countries can be fit into the size of our province quite 

easily with populations that are 12 and 15 times bigger than 

ours. 

 

The country of Switzerland for example, Mr. Speaker, 12 

million people with 12 million annual tourists going through 

their country -- total of 24 million a year -- could be fit quite 

easily in the south-west corner of Saskatchewan. 

 

That gives you some idea of the size and the scope of our 

province and the way that 1 million people are spread out over 

a large area. And that has to be recognized when you talk about 

how businesses set up their structure to deliver goods and 

services to the people of our province. 

 

What it means is that big companies that do come into the 

province rarely make a very big profit compared to the kinds of 

profits that they're able to make in other jurisdictions where 

populations are heavier.  Therefore they are often very 

reluctant to set up business in our province. 

 

So what happens is that we have evolved into a province of 

many small businesses, small operations, often times family 

oriented and family operated, with a handful of employees that 

assist with the work that needs to be done in that particular 

business. 

 

Farms in Saskatchewan are a good example of family 

operations that are operated in today's society as businesses 

who have one or two employees as a rule -- some a few more, 

and many without any.  These small businesses of grocery 

stores in our small town are often family operations where a 

son will take over from a father who probably had a 

grandfather as well that started the business many years ago, 

and they will employ two or three or four people.  And as a 

result, we have a network throughout our province of small 

businesses with small numbers of employees. 

 

In that context, Mr. Speaker, our business-employee 

relationship has grown to be more or less a family relationship 

rather than a worker-employer relationship as is recognized in 

other areas, for example, in a GM (General Motors) plant down 

East where thousands of workers may never, ever even see the 

person or persons that own the establishment. 

 

So we are distinctly different, Mr. Speaker, in that context.  

And yes, there are exceptions.  They are some 

bigger operations.  We have IPSCO, for example, where many 

workers work under the employment of a bigger company.  But 

even there, in comparison to the size of operations in the rest of 

the world, this is not what you would consider a very big 

operation.  And so people do get to know one another on a 

personal basis.  Most of the workers will speak to one another 

on a first-name basis. 

 

So the reality, Mr. Speaker, is that when you change the rules 

of how business has to operate, change the cost of business, 

you are in fact threatening the jobs of the people that work 

within our province. 

 

Let me expand just a little on that.  What the workers of our 

province fear is that if the cost to their employers gets so high 

that they can no longer break even . . . and in Saskatchewan 

breaking even is an acceptable business proposition.  An awful 

lot of people are quite happy just to break even, as long as they 

don't go in the hole.  Obviously they have to make some profit 

some years in order to continue.  But they will continue to 

operate in the province . . . And the member for Moose Jaw 

makes it really hard to keep one's concentration.  I will 

continue for his benefit though, because I know he's very 

interested in why the workers of this province are concerned 

with this Bill as much as the business people are. 

 

To get back to the line of thought, Mr. Speaker, the differences 

between the way we run business in Saskatchewan have to 

particularly be noted because this legislation, in fairness, I 

believe is modelled after legislation from Ontario.  And our 

businesses are not the same as the businesses in Ontario by any 

means at all.  I know they have some small businesses there, 

but for the large part my observation has been that businesses 

in Ontario are very much bigger and very much different. 

 

In Saskatchewan, as I was pointing out, if you can break even, 

you will stay in business because we have this small-business 

dedication to our province, dedication to a way of life, a 

dedication that people must recognize as being the essence of 

our culture in the province of Saskatchewan.  Big companies, 

multinational companies, often will not stay here if they are in 

that atmosphere. 

 

I give you the example of Mobil Oil who worked in our area; a 

very good corporate citizen, but immediately that they fell into 

this depression where the oil industry was no longer producing 

very big profits, they simply said, we'll sell our operation to 

anybody who will buy it -- which they did as much as they 

could -- and told me through one of their representatives that in 

fact they could make a lot more money through drilling in other 

areas of the world and turn over a lot bigger bucks of profit if 

they invested in other places.  So that's what they did. 

 

But the small business that took over did in fact . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I'm sure the members opposite want to get into 

this debate, but it's my turn now. 



2218 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

(2145) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Bill 55, as I've said, has produced some 

serious concerns for the working people in our province.  And 

they don't want their jobs threatened because, even though we 

have this determination to stay in Saskatchewan by most small 

businesses, the reality is that if they can't break even they can't 

stay here either.  And if they have to close their doors and 

move away, if they have to move to Alberta or British 

Columbia, then obviously the jobs are no longer going to be 

here for our workers. 

 

It's almost a penalty sometimes to be a critic, Mr. Speaker, 

because you miss out on all of the humour.  I find the 

government finally agreeing with me.  Well it's good to see the 

members in such a good mood.  That way they will probably be 

receptive to some new ideas. 

 

I met earlier tonight with some people from my constituency.  

And they introduced me to their son-in-law who's from Regina, 

who told me that he's very much worried about Bill 55.  It was 

nice that I was able to meet him and get his opinions because, 

as I was there, I also got to meet Winston and Lorraine Knoll 

who are residents of the city of Regina, and he along with 

George and Dolores Hudick were being honoured with life 

memberships tonight in the Association of School Business 

Officials of Saskatchewan, and just in passing while we were 

discussing Bill 55, I would like to congratulate them on the 

honour that they received over there tonight. 

 

It was rather disappointing that no members of the government 

found it within the scope of their agendas to be able to attend, 

but I represented the government as I was the only MLA there 

and took great, great pride in saying to the folks there that I 

brought greetings from the government as well as from myself 

on their behalf. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Now while I was going to make the point, 

Mr. Speaker, that the workers are very concerned about Bill 55 

destroying the base of jobs in our province, nothing would do 

but of course in the course of our conversations about those 

problems, that we also got to talking about the previous Bill, 

which was the upgrader Bill, and how in fact the government's 

direction there might in fact as well jeopardize many jobs.  And 

that too is a big concern. 

 

So workers in general, Mr. Speaker, are very concerned in 

Saskatchewan that we don't have enough job base left in order 

to provide any real opportunity.  And I want to say that as a 

parent I'm worried about that as I think all parents are.  The 

reality is that every time we bring about legislation that forces 

business of the province . . . that reduces the job base, we as 

parents have to recognize that our children will have to leave 

the province in order to fulfil their life's ambitions and life's 

dreams. 

 

And that worries me considerably, Mr. Speaker.  It 

seems to me that with the highest level of education, probably 

in all of North America, we have determined now to do only 

one thing and that is to educate our children to serve the world 

somewhere else.  There's nothing wrong with helping the rest 

of the world and obviously there's many arguments to be made 

that they certainly do need the help.  But it would certainly be 

nice as well to keep our children at home and provide them 

with the kind of lifestyle that they need and deserve, and have 

them close enough to home so that we could actually visit them 

occasionally. 

 

I think that I should also though take a few minutes, Mr. 

Speaker, this evening to express some of the concerns of the 

business community.  And in doing that, I want to point out to 

you that this is a double-edged sword again for the government 

because nobody is happy with this legislation. 

 

As I've tried to point out, the workers, the employees of this 

province are very unhappy about the prospect of losing their 

jobs and not having places to go to work.  The business people 

are very concerned that the extra costs that this Bill will incur 

to their businesses will put them out of business; that they will 

not be able to continue to be competitive in Saskatchewan.  

Therefore with everybody unhappy, we have no option but to 

ask the government to seriously consider pulling this Bill and 

redrawing it. 

 

There is need for Workers' Compensation to be corrected.  

There are problems.  I don't want anybody to get the idea that 

we are saying that the world around us is perfect.  The 

Workers' Compensation is an Act that assists workers in being 

treated fairly and properly when they are injured on the job.  

And that's necessary.  And naturally evolution of time will 

change some things that will require these kinds of Bills to be 

updated, especially in the technological type of world that we 

live in. 

 

And so it is necessary, Mr. Speaker, that we correct some of the 

problems.  I identify these problems to be though, not as great 

as some people would lead us to believe.  Statistics tell us that 

about 1 per cent of the people who are injured and collect 

workers' compensation.  About 1 per cent of the people who 

are actually in a position of collecting workers' compensation, 

that 1 per cent of people, are having problems with the 

Workers' Compensation in a very direct, very human, very 

personal way.  That's extremely important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Extremely important because that needs to be addressed.  

When there are even a few people who are finding themselves 

not well treated by our system, then there must be a way that 

we can address their needs.  I suggest that we could do it under 

the framework of amendments to this legislation, to be done in 

such a way as to provide a vehicle where those individuals 

could get immediate attention by a tribunal, some kind of an 

appeal process, that would be much, much faster than the 

process that we presently have. 

 

This is where the system is falling down, as I see it at 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2219 

the moment.  The system has evolved so that everything in our 

judicial system seems to take for ever to get resolved.  

Someone who is seriously hurt or minorly hurt, and looking to 

get back to work, they just can't wait for ever for the system to 

correct itself in this evolution that we've created in our legal 

system. 

 

And people who are . . . have injury problems and who have 

questions of issue with the Workers' Compensation Board and 

the workers' compensation legislation, are good people who 

have worked hard but who have most often been hurt as no real 

fault of their own. 

 

I'll give you an example of the fellow from Davidson, who the 

other day called and told me how a piece of iron had fallen 120 

feet from above the scaffolding on the elevator that's being 

built there.  It struck him on the head; and of course, his helmet 

is going to be traded in for a gold helmet because it saved his 

life and he will be presented with all that. 

 

Surprisingly, this gentleman is still alive and able to talk to me 

on the phone and is well enough, with a little more care and 

therapy, to be going back to work. 

 

Now this tells you something about the type of thing that can 

happen to you on the job.  Someone from above him dropped 

something.  This person working down there has no idea it's 

going to come and it hits him.  It's not his fault.  He's there 

doing his job because his boss wants him to do that job and this 

thing strikes him on the head.  Why should he be penalized 

with a system that takes for ever to resolve?  And so we 

recognize that.  We recognize that need to try to correct the 

length of time it takes for people to resolve their personal 

problems with this board and through this Act. 

 

However, we must caution, Mr. Speaker, that the government 

shouldn't overkill the thing in order to try to alleviate the 

problems.  We shouldn't create a massive bureaucratic 

nightmare that will destroy business itself.  And here's where 

we find fault with the Bill.  The Bill has gone so far in some 

directions so as to cost too much money for business to be able 

to survive while at the same time I really have not identified 

clearly in my mind where the workers' needs are being 

addressed. 

 

As a result of that we ourselves, in the opposition, have asked 

for help from the law clerks and from our researchers to draft 

amendments for this legislation and we will be presenting 

about 15 amendments.  Those amendments, Mr. Speaker, are 

based not on my knowledge of the workforce or of the 

Workers' Compensation although I've been doing a lot of 

homework on it.  I'm not an expert, but I'm going to be one if I 

keep at it.  But the reality is that you have to study it; it's a very 

complex issue. 

 

So we must take the advice, sir, of people who do know.  And 

so we've gone to the business community.  We've gone to 

people like Dale Botting and Jim Chase and Del Robertson and 

all those folks that are involved in the business sector that have 

knowledge 

from that side and we said, what do we need in order to clean 

up this Bill?  And they've given us this advice and as a result 

these amendments have been put into place on words and we 

will be presenting them as we go along. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, having said that, having said that we have two 

problems here and are ready and willing to work on the things 

that need to be done, we do suggest that the government pull 

this Bill, that they send it back to the drawing board where it 

belongs, and let's do it right if we're going to do it at all. 

 

And with that, I think I'll carry on another day and I will move 

to adjourn debate for tonight. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I wish to draw to the attention of the 

House that the member already has adjourned debate once and 

he cannot adjourn it again.  Therefore, he's out of order. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- My apologies, Mr. Speaker.  Apparently I 

missed one page. I have a few things that I would like to add. 

 

I'm really happy, Mr. Speaker, to see the government members 

in such a good mood tonight.  I'm sure there are people in the 

world around us who wonder what happens here some days.  

There we go.  I may apply for comedian of the Assembly. 

 

I'll have to talk though a little further, Mr. Speaker, about the 

need for these amendments.  It would seem that this legislation 

-- not very big in fact, just take a look, here it is -- it's 14 pages 

long and that includes the one with nothing on it.  And reality 

being what it is, Mr. Speaker, we've got 15 amendments to this 

very short piece of legislation; 15 tells me that there must be a 

lot wrong with this piece of legislation.  The business 

community has told us so.  Everyone has said so.  I'm even 

getting calls now from workers who are worried that this 

legislation will in fact double the cost of Workers' 

Compensation premiums, that in fact it could go up to 300 per 

cent more in some specific cases. 

 

So the reality is that if everybody is against this, everybody is 

worried about it -- everybody recognizes I think, in fairness to 

the government, that we do have some problem areas that need 

to be fixed -- then, Mr. Speaker, why don't we take it off the 

Table?  Why don't we send it back to the people that know 

about these things? 

 

Get the business community, get the labour union officials, get 

the non-unionized people together.  Let's get them all together 

in this room this summer after we've adjourned -- it's big 

enough.  We'll throw the desks back, throw in some tables and 

chairs, have all the folks get together and let's beat this thing 

out like men should and women should and let's talk about it. 

The women will get in here and straighten out some of the 

language problems we have and they'll tell us how to do this 

thing. 



2220 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation can be done a lot 

better than it's been done here.  I am absolutely convinced that 

if people sit down and spend the time, that they can draw up a 

piece of legislation that will serve the needs of all of the people 

of this province that need to be served in this kind of 

legislation.  We don't need to hurt the working people.  We 

don't need to hurt the business people.  We can cooperate and 

get along in this province.  I am absolutely convinced of that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- And we have to do is tear this thing up, throw 

it in the garbage where it belongs for now, get back to the 

drawing table.  Let's work on it.  Let's do it better.  Let's get it 

done right.  Let's take the advice of people who have written all 

of these pages of problems.  I've got things here about Bill 55 

and how the Workers' Compensation Board changes will 

increase rates.  Look at the length of all this fine print of how 

these rates will be up.  Ten and a half per cent is the lowest 

figure predicted by anybody as an increase in the costs.  Mr. 

Speaker, that can't be tolerated.  The highest was 300.  I suspect 

it's some place in between. 

 

But imagine a province with an economy as depressed as ours 

where we would demand any segment of society to pay 

premiums that would be something between ten and a half and 

300 per cent more than they're paying now.  If anything, we've 

got to work on something that brings us stability rather than the 

instability that comes with this kind of a Bill. 

 

We need to have some hope and some optimism in this 

province, and this Bill is not going to help to do that.  We've 

got to have an atmosphere where people get treated fair.  

People who are hurt deserve that.  We've got to have an 

atmosphere though where you can stimulate jobs and job 

development. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- It now being 10 o'clock this House stands 

adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 

 


