




















































Hansard: May 31, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2061 

 May 31, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 42 -- An Act respecting the Creation and 

Supervision of certain Crown Corporations 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the Associate Minister of Finance to 

please introduce his official. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The official I 

have with me this evening is Scott Banda, the associate general 

counsel for CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan). 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Chairman, by leave I would like to 

introduce some guests before I begin. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I 

am happy to introduce to you and through you to the members 

of the Assembly, my two daughters who are in the Speaker's 

gallery.  Alice has just graduated from Minot State University 

where she came through the honours program in speech 

pathology, and Kathy is a pharmacist over in Moose Jaw. 

 

They found the night life so boring in Moose Jaw, they decided 

to come over to Regina to find out what a real wild place this 

is, and of course, they picked the Legislative Assembly to find 

the most excitement in town. 

 

And so with that, I would ask you to please welcome them to 

the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 42 

(continued) 

 

The Chair: -- If I might, from the Chair, I hope it doesn't get 

that exciting tonight. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I guess now we 

have to go to work and try to prove to the people in the 

galleries that there is something useful goes on here.  I'm not 

too sure if that's going to be accomplished or not, but we'll give 

it a whirl. 

 

Mr. Minister, as we all will recall that the folks who are 

watching these proceedings tonight, from the outside part of the 

world, you will know that we did go through this Bill 

extensively, as we do, in the Crown Corporations Committee.  

Unfortunately, for the rest of the world around us, folks are not 

as likely to have been able to follow the process and to  

work was done.  And just to compliment the process a little bit, 

I will say that a lot of work was done and the public should 

recognize that an awful lot of time and effort went into the 

process to try to make this a better Bill. 

 

Unfortunately though, from a point of view as an opposition 

person, we were disappointed that the amendments in the large 

part that were presented by the opposition were voted down by 

the members of the government who have of course the 

majority of people in the Crown Corporations Standing 

Committee. 

 

I think though that the question has to be raised, Mr. Minister, 

why in the process of going through the committee where the 

public would not become aware of the natural confrontation 

that we as opposition have with you the government and back 

and forth and that sort of spirit of adversarial approach I guess 

that we accept, in the committee there should have been -- and 

the member has said it -- there should have been cooperation 

because the general public wouldn't of course see what went 

on. 

 

You wouldn't necessarily have been capitulating to giving us 

credit for anything.  You simply would have had to accept the 

fact that we might have helped the process to give you a better 

Bill.  And considering that most of our recommendations were 

based on advice by the auditors, it seems odd to me that you 

wouldn't have encouraged your members who held the majority 

in the government side of that committee to go along with 

trying to make this into a better quality of Bill for the general 

public to be able to accept and to serve society in general in a 

better way. 

 

I'm going to read one of these out just to give an example, and 

I'm going to just pick one at random.  I'm going to pick no. 11, 

and I'm going to read it into the record.  I hope I pick a good 

one, but it's just the luck of the draw here, Minister.  And then 

I'd like you to comment on the thing, and this one in particular 

as well as the rest all together, why you would see fit not to 

support putting some of these kinds of amendments into the 

Act to make it better. 

 

No. 11 reads: 

 

 Resuming consideration of section 34, it was moved by (the 

member from, I won't say his name -- it was our other 

member): 

 

  Amend clause 34 of the printed Bill by adding 

immediately after the words "every designated 

subsidiary Crown corporation" where they appear in 

subsection (1) thereof the words: 

 

  "and every subsidiary body corporate". 

 

 A debate arising and the question being put, the motion was 

negatived. 

 

Okay, now I'll let you respond to that and explain to 



2062 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

the general public why you wouldn't allow a simple little 

amendment like that to be put in to try to alleviate the worries 

and the concerns of the auditor, as of course he was doing in 

the . . . I think there's something like 13 or so amendments.  I 

didn't count them exactly today, but there were several of them 

that were presented.  All of them were voted down by 

government members except for one.  Would you please 

respond, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could ask the 

member from Maple Creek to clarify which amendment?  I 

thought he was talking about amendment no. 11?  That is the 

amendment? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We'll just check 

that. 

 

I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman, but I would ask the member to clarify 

it because we have some difficulty relating section 34 to the 

amendment that he was reading.  So I wonder if he would mind 

clarifying that for us so we could give an answer. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay, I guess if you have your Act in your 

hand, if you don't have the Hansard, then if you look under 

number 34 of the Act and consider that we would: 

 

 Amend clause 34 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after the words "every designated subsidiary Crown 

corporation" where they appear in subsection (1) thereof 

the words: 

 

Okay?  And here's the words that we wanted to substitute: 

 

 "and every subsidiary body corporate". 

 

Have you found it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think we 

now understand what the member was referring to.  The answer 

to the question is that, first of all, we do not control all the body 

corporates that the member is talking about, and I'll give you an 

example.  For instance, SaskTel International is one that we do 

not control; it's a subsidiary of SaskTel.  And in order for them 

to disclose their financial interests and their financial business 

which sometimes is of a very confidential, commercial nature, 

could jeopardize the company, and that's why we're not adding 

that particular amendment to that section. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I want to do 

another one if I can find that they are the same ones -- here we 

are -- just to get the public an idea of the kind of things that you 

are considering to be unfair or not acceptable to be included in 

the Act so that people will know the kind of things that the 

auditor is recommending that you are of course turning down 

because we of course in opposition became the tools both of 

our own requirements as well as a tool of the auditor.  So 

moved by the member from Moosomin again here: 

 

 Amend clause 34 of the printed Bill by deleting subsection 

(2) thereof and substituting the 

following therefore: 

 

Now it's on the same part so you should be able to just follow 

down through the Bill. 

 

  "(2) Notwithstanding The Tabling of Documents Act, 

1991, CIC shall submit to the Minister, and the 

Minister shall lay before the Assembly on or before 

the April 30 following its fiscal year end: 

 

  (a) the report and financial statement required pursuant to 

subsection (1); 

 

  (b) a summary of its operating and capital budgets; and 

 

  c) its non-consolidated financial statements." 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, that was voted down in committee by your 

government members.  We felt that it was a fair and reasonable 

request by the auditor to have these kinds of things done.  And 

we would like an explanation to the public why you would 

refuse to go along with the auditor's recommendation that these 

kind of points should be followed.  I think you owe it to the 

general public to explain to them why you wouldn't want to 

have this kind of openness for the general public, especially 

when you consider that you have gone for a year and a half in 

your mandate saying that you are going to be an open and 

accountable government. 

 

And this certainly would have opened the door for the auditor 

to give the impression and the perception that the government 

is open and honest.  Even though they might be open or be 

doing everything right, the perception that there could be 

something wrong might be misconstrued in the way that the 

Act is presently going to be passed. 

 

And with these points in it, all of that could have been 

removed.  It was sort of like making sure that the perception 

was correct rather than being false. 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

member's question, as we did in 1991 and in 1992 in our CIC 

annual report, financial report.  We did table the 

non-consolidated statements and we set the precedent and we 

will continue to do that.  We see no need to put that into the 

Act.  Once the precedent is set it'd be pretty difficult to change. 

 

But I think the fundamental question that the member is 

referring to here is whether we should be treating the Crowns 

as line departments.  The Provincial Auditor obviously feels 

that there is some need for the Crowns to be treated like line 

departments.  We, however, disagree with that.  The Crowns 

have always been different from line departments, right from 

the time of their inception back as early as 1944, whenever the 

Crowns were first established. 



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2063 

They've always been treated differently than line departments 

and they've reported differently.  They have not had to table all 

those documents in the legislature as the line departments are.  

And we maintain that the Crowns should be treated differently 

than line departments because they are in a more . . . well they 

are a commercial venture in most cases and for them to have to 

do the same thing as a line department may sometimes 

jeopardize the business that they do. 

 

So our decision has clearly been that we will not treat the 

Crowns as line departments.  We will treat them differently as 

Crown departments . . . as Crowns have always been treated. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Minister.  I appreciate the 

fact that you made that explanation.  I'm not so sure that the 

general public will accept that explanation as being the one that 

they would expect to hear.  It seems to me that most folks in 

our society have grown to a point where they simply don't trust 

governments any more.  They outright say in every survey, 

they don't trust politicians any more.  And I'm afraid that the 

record has to reflect that there are more than a few things that 

have happened that would indicate that people are less than 

trustworthy of the administration that we're dealing with here. 

 

The truth of the matter is, Mr. Minister, that folks are not 

willing to take you at your word.  And when you say, we did it 

before so we're always going to do it good now, that might be 

okay for you because everybody understands that you are a 

fine, Christian gentleman whose word is his bond, and you are 

without question going to live up to that.  But we see how 

quickly cabinet ministers turn over for some unexpected 

reason, in the past, and as has happened in your government in 

the past few days. 

 

There's no reason to expect that you or I might not possibly 

have a heart attack and die, or something could run over us, 

whoever.  Maybe one of your colleagues would get you with a 

bicycle.  But the real truth of the matter being that the next -- 

and this is the bottom line -- the next person to take your 

position might not be so honest and so conciliatory towards the 

process. 

 

So why, Minister, would you leave it up to the doubt?  Why not 

put it in fact into the legislation so that it is absolutely bound in 

the sacred enshrinement of the document itself, making sure 

that nobody can play games with the process.  It would be 

written down that what we have done we intend to do, and we 

shall do it -- not we will do it because we have a precedent.  Put 

it in the legislation; let people know that you're open and 

honest. Absolutely no reason why you should get hurt by this 

politically.  I can't see where it would do any harm to you. 

 

You're building a process here where people will doubt the 

accountability of CIC and they will doubt the accountability of 

the Crown corporations to the general public.  And that's 

important, because even though you say they have a different 

role than the line 

departments, is it not true that it is your philosophy that Crown 

corporations are owned and controlled by the government and 

that business should be run that way, and therefore it becomes 

the property of the taxpayer and should be accountable to the 

taxpayer. 

 

Now that's your very philosophy.  Personally I see a lot of 

things in the Crown corporations that the private sector could 

probably run better.  But you don't say that.  Your government 

says you can do it better through this process.  You say that that 

process is better because it's accountable to the people because 

the people own it and control it, but yet there is no 

accountability.  You're creating a super-Crown here where one 

Don Ching will be one man in this province who will control 

40 per cent of the entire budget of this province -- 40 per cent 

of the entire working of this province under one man's thumb. 

 

Now if that isn't ultimate control by one person that requires 

accountability, especially when you hear who the person is and 

all the things that he's been involved with in the last few days 

and all of the problems that he has caused for Federated Co-op, 

now there is reason enough for the general public to demand 

that this individual be put in control of a department that is 

absolutely airtight in the legislation towards the direction and 

the goal of accountability. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I'm sure that you see that.  And the minute 

you're no longer the minister you will say, I wish we'd have put 

that in there because your one-term government is going to 

regret when somebody else like the independent member 

appoints somebody else to take control of your Act and 

appoints somebody else -- a friend of hers or somebody else's -- 

to be in control of 40 per cent of the province's wealth. 

 

And you're going to say, what did I do? We should have 

controlled that when we wrote the legislation.  Because they 

won't treat it the same way you are.  And it's a problem, a big 

problem. 

 

We put in 12 amendments based on the auditor's 

recommendations and you turned them all down for politically 

partisan reasons.  You were afraid that somebody in the general 

public might find out that we suggested it and you'd have to 

give somebody else credit besides yourself.  And that wouldn't 

have had to happen.  But you are destroying the credibility of 

your own government for partisan political reasons by not 

incorporating a lot of these amendments into the Act and 

appeasing the requirements of the auditor. 

 

I want you, Minister, to explain to the general public how it is 

that you think that this province will benefit by having one Don 

Ching in control of 40 per cent of the wealth of this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure I'm 

going to answer that question because I don't think that the 

legislature and the Committee of the Whole here is designed so 

that they can take shots at someone who is not here to defend 

himself.  And I have confidence in my president of the Crown 



2064 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

Investments Corporation.  He's a competent individual and will 

be able to manage the affairs of the Crown corporations very, 

very adequately.  And if the member has something specifically 

that he wants to charge the president with, then I think he 

should come clean and say that, rather than make general 

statements and insinuations. 

 

I would like to make a statement however that I think the 

members opposite should pay attention to, and that is what the 

Provincial Auditor says about the accountability of Crown 

Investments Corporation and the Crowns.  The auditor says that 

the CIC report, financial report, is the most open and complete 

report that he has ever seen, that we have instituted a lot of 

things which make this report open and accountable to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And we will continue to do that whether the minister changes 

or not.  This government has a commitment to openness and 

accountability, and we will continue to do that. 

 

The other point I want to make to the member is that he seems 

to indicate tat the members on the Crown Corporations 

Committee on the government side are not competent and 

credible people.  He seems to indicate that the only two 

credible people there were the two members from the 

opposition.  Well I happen to disagree with that, that the 

members on the government side listened very carefully to the 

amendments that were proposed.  They debated them, they 

discussed them, and they decided in their wisdom that these 

amendments were not necessary to enhance this Act and to 

increase the accountability of the Crowns. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Minister, Mr. Chairman.  The 

answer leads to another question.  If the members were so 

independently able to make up their own minds, how come 

they looked at you every time they voted and how come half of 

them were replacements at every meeting and not the same 

people showed up for the meetings? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Well I guess, Mr. Chairman, it's pretty 

tough for me to say why they looked at me, you know maybe 

I'm just an interesting person and they want to look at me.  I 

don't really understand that.  But I want to say to the member 

that just because it wasn't the same group of people there every 

time doesn't diminish the credibility or the accountability of 

those people.  These people are flexible and can sit on this 

committee and understand what's going on and vote 

intelligently on the amendments that were being proposed. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you can fool some of the 

people some of the time but you can't fool all of the people all 

of the time.  And there isn't anybody in this province that is so 

naive as to expect that one government member would dare go 

against you and your thoughts in that committee room and vote 

anything but what you told them or they'd be out of their seat 

so fast their heads would spin and they wouldn't be in the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) any 

more and they wouldn't be in this Assembly unless they moved 

to an independent spot with their chair. 

 

Nobody is going to pay that price to come up against you and 

your will and so the reality is, sir, that you decided for partisan 

political reasons that you would not accept good advice from 

the auditor, channelled through opposition amendments to this 

legislation that could have never made it good legislation but at 

least could have made it accountable.  And it will never be 

good legislation because having a single Crown corporation 

that can control 40 per cent of the wealth of this province is 

absolutely a disgrace.  It is a disgrace to democracy and it's a 

disgrace to this province.  And it will come to haunt you, sir, 

because this man, Don Ching, is not going to be able to handle 

this in the way that you hope and he will be covering his tracks 

before very long and I guarantee it.  You watch and see.  Mark 

my words.  Repeat me next year or the year after if I'm wrong. 

 

You repeat me if something doesn't happen that he decides that 

there are things here that the general public would be better off 

not knowing because he was involved in something that may 

not appear to be as good as it really was in reality.  So he will 

choose not to report it.  It will happen as sure as the sun comes 

up in the East. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, a couple of questions here.  First 

of all I'd like to make a few comments.  Number one, we had a 

fair discussion in the . . . down in Crown Corporations 

Committee as to whether the Bill should have actually left this 

Assembly and gone to Crown Corporations. 

 

And Mr. . . . the minister was in the committee.  I'm not exactly 

sure what all the details were but the minister talked about the 

support the Provincial Auditor gave to CIC, and yet in 

consultation with the auditor, the auditor recommended that 

Bill 41 be referred to the Public Accounts Committee.  The 

Public Accounts should have opportunity to discuss the effect 

the new Act will have on the ability of the Legislative 

Assembly to hold the government accountable. 

 

And then he also recommended Bill No. 42, The Crown 

Corporations Act, be referred to Public Accounts.  This Bill 

proposes changes that may also affect the ability of the 

Assembly to hold the government accountable.  And for an 

auditor to suggest that what Bill 42 is going to do is going to 

take away . . . or take away the ability of his office or the public 

to really . . . or the government to really be accountable for 

CIC, I think there was some major questions there. 

 

And I'm partially concerned . . . or: 

 

  . . . particularly concerned this Bill proposes changes that 

override The Provincial Auditor Act.  These changes may 

affect the ability of my office to serve the Assembly. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, a number of questions were raised in 

committee.  Number one, the first question 



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2065 

which was . . . we weren't exactly sure and I wasn't privy to the 

consultation that took place, but why the Bill was sent down to 

Crown Corporations Committee.  And we had discussions in 

our own caucus where the fact that we believe that it would 

have been more appropriate to send the Bill to the Public 

Accounts Committee. 

 

And that's the very point the Provincial Auditor was bringing 

out too, because of the fact that the Provincial Auditor is an 

active participant in Public Accounts whereas in Crown 

Corporations the auditor was invited in as a witness for a period 

of time. 

 

Now the minister would argue that his colleagues indeed took 

the time to aggressively look into the details of the Bill.  And I 

would suggest to you that there was no participation of any of 

the government members on the details other than to support 

the minister on every one of the amendments they brought 

forward. 

 

And when you look at the Bill and some of the discussion that 

took place between my colleague and the Minister of Finance, 

the Minister of Finance in response . . . or my colleague, the 

member from Morse, wrote the Minister of Finance and 

suggested that Bills 41 and 42, on recommendation from the 

Provincial Auditor, go to the Public Accounts Committee if 

indeed they are moved out of this Assembly. 

 

(1930) 

 

Now it would seem to me, Mr. Chairman, that it would have 

been more appropriate to address all the details of Bill 42 in the 

Assembly because of a greater accountability and greater 

public access to all the discussion that was taking place.  And 

in regards to the response my colleague received from the 

Minister of Finance, the Minister of Finance did agree and the 

government agreed to send Bill 41 to Public Accounts, but sent 

42, Bill 42, to the Crown Corporations Committee. 

 

And the reason we had a problem with that, Mr. Chairman, is 

because of the fact that the Crown Corporations Committee is 

actually chaired by a government member.  Basically that 

committee can be manipulated and controlled by the 

government members more so than the Public Accounts 

Committee where the chairman is an opposition member and 

has the ability to question and quiz the government a little more 

effectively, especially on a Bill with this . . . the intensity that 

this Bill created, and in light of the number of the concerns the 

auditor brought forward and the fact that the auditor is an active 

participant in the Public Accounts Committee. 

 

Now one has to wonder what the purpose of Bill 42 really is.  

That was one of the questions that the Provincial Auditor 

raised.  And I would like the minister to explain exactly what 

Bill 42 really is. 

 

Now I expect that after he's finished explaining it, he'll be just 

letting us know again it gives the . . . he'll be 

giving his interpretation of what he really means by Bill 42.  

But I think if we'd have had the ability to sit here in the House 

and address all the questions that the auditor . . . and if it would 

have gone to Public Accounts, we would have received a great 

openness because the auditor would have been a more active 

participant. 

 

Now I wonder if the minister would at least take a moment to 

explain what -- and I guess I may as well phrase it -- what he 

sees as the real purpose of Bill 42. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, let me first of all 

comment that the Provincial Auditor was at the Crown 

Corporations Committee during the entire hearings. At least all 

the time that I was here, he was there.  And some instances he 

was asked for input and other instances he was simply there as 

an observer. 

 

When it was all finished, I had the impression that the 

Provincial Auditor was satisfied with the outcome of the Crown 

Corporations Committee meetings in dealing with Bill 42.  I 

think we're hearing some objections here now simply because 

they didn't get their way in Crown Corporations, so now they're 

proceeding with some objections. 

 

Let me point out the purpose of The Crown Corporations Act, 

and I will be very brief on this because we could spend a lot of 

time.  I could do the whole second-reading speech again and 

that would give you the purpose of The Crown Corporations 

Act, but I'll do it in very short, summary form. 

 

The Act is prepared to do the following.  First of all it's to 

define a Crown corporation.  And I think this is important that 

we understand what the definition of a Crown corporation is.  It 

clearly sets out the function of CIC, the Crown Investments 

Corporation, as the holding company of the Crown 

corporations that exist in Saskatchewan. 

 

Thirdly, it places a duty of care on the directors and officers of 

the Crown and makes them liable for the Crown's actions.  It 

establishes conflict of interest guidelines for directors and 

officers. It creates a clear reporting structure for the Crowns 

sector. 

 

The Crowns report to CIC, to the CIC board, and to cabinet. 

And that's the route that the reporting goes.  First the Crowns to 

the CIC, then to the CIC board, and then ultimately to the 

cabinet. 

 

It increases the accountability of the Crown sector as suggested 

by the Provincial Auditor and as evidenced by this dismal 

situation that we had in some of the Crowns before.  It requires 

timely filing of annual reports within 90 days of year end. 

 

And finally, it prevents the establishment of secret Crown 

corporations by requiring that all new Crowns be created by 

order in council, and consequently reported . . . subsequently 

reported to the legislature. 

 

That in summary, Mr. Chairman, is what the Act is designed to 

do. 



2066 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

Mr. Toth: -- Another major question that was raised by the 

auditor, and I'm not sure if he really specifically raised it in 

committee, but, Mr. Minister, what are the changes from the 

current Crown Corporations Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I will attempt to answer 

this question.  However this is going to be very, very sketchy, 

for the simple reason that this is basically a new Act, so that it's 

difficult to outline the changes that are there from the old Act. 

 

But let me just go through these as we have tabulated them 

here.  I think a lot of them were in the explanation that I gave 

earlier but I'll give it again. 

 

This Act now defines the Crown Investments Corporation and 

its responsibilities.  It sets up a clear reporting structure.  And I 

outlined the reporting structure before.  It's from a Crown to 

CIC; CIC to its board; and from the board to the cabinet. 

 

There's a whole new part in this Act that deals with directors 

and officials.  It distinguishes clearly between a Treasury Board 

Crown and a CIC Crown.  It provides greater accountability, as 

I mentioned before, in at least three different areas.  One of 

them is in the timeliness of the annual reports; one is the 

purpose and objectives of the Crown have to be tabled in the 

legislature if a new Crown is being established; and all major 

investments that are being made require an order in council.  

The investments cannot be made or purchases cannot be made 

without an order in council if they are major.  If they're smaller 

ones they can, but if they're major ones they cannot. 

 

That in very brief, summary form outlines the differences in 

this Act and the old Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, as well, and I'll give just a couple 

questions here probably somewhat similar that were brought to 

our attention as well.  How do the changes improve the 

government's ability to manage; and number two, how do the 

changes improve the Assembly's ability to hold the government 

accountable for its management of these important public 

enterprises? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, again the questions 

are fairly broad and I'll just try and give a brief answer to each 

one of them. 

 

The member asked about how this would provide better 

management of the Crowns.  Well we think it'll provide better 

management because since CIC is the holding company for all 

of the other Crowns, we will have a coordinated approach to 

the other Crowns.  And the Crowns will report to CIC with 

their budgets, their plans, and so on, and the rates that they 

want to charge. And CIC will coordinate these so that there will 

be a more effective reporting method back to the legislature. 

 

How to report back to the legislature.  Well Crown corporations 

report to the legislature through their annual reports.  And the 

Crown Corporations 

Committee can take as much time as they want to talk to the 

different Crowns and to the heads of different Crowns and the 

ministers in charge of those Crowns so that they are fully 

satisfied that they have the information that they need. 

 

The legislature also will be served with annual reports on a 

timely basis and with CIC being the holding company and 

responsible for the other Crowns, when CIC reports to the 

legislature you will find that there'll be a more coordinated and 

comprehensive method of reporting to the legislature. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, the minister talks 

about CIC reporting in a timely fashion.  And as my colleague 

indicated, there were a number of amendments raised and 

brought forward addressing the accountability of this 

corporation being formed by Bill 42. 

 

A number of the amendments were brought forward based on 

suggestions from the Provincial Auditor who was looking for 

greater . . . calling for strengthening of the accountability 

factors.  And he raised a number of areas. 

 

And yes, there was one amendment brought forward that the 

government members agreed on, and that was putting a time 

period to have the reports tabled before the Assembly.  I 

believe that was a 90-day time frame, and an area that certainly 

a lot of government members have talked about over the past 

number of years and suggested we should have. 

 

Minister referred to as well the fact that the auditor was at all 

the committee meetings.  And that's true.  And I didn't say that 

he wasn't.  The fact is though, the auditor was there as a 

witness, not to be a participant, a full participant as he would 

have been in Public Accounts. 

 

And I think it would have been . . . The reason we raised the 

points earlier was if the auditor would have been able to be a 

full participant, he could have explained some of the rationale 

for his reasons why he was asking the opposition to bring 

forward a number of amendments -- amendments that would 

require CIC to table its summary of operating and capital 

budgets in the Assembly or require CIC to table its 

non-consolidated financial statements, or amendments to 

require the government to provide information about the 

reasons for making significant investments in corporations, for 

investing public money, amendments to require the government 

to provide information about the reasons for keeping significant 

investments in corporations on an annual basis, and to require 

financial statements for each and every subsidiary be provided 

in the Assembly on a timely basis.  And there were a number of 

amendments that the auditor brought forward that certainly my 

colleague and I raised in Crown Corporations Committee. 

 

A question I would like to ask, Mr. Minister: do the Crown 

corporations pay all their dividends into CIC and then from 

CIC into the Consolidated Fund? 



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2067 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- The answer to your question is correct, is 

yes, that they do pay them to CIC and then CIC pays to the 

general fund. 

 

I'd just like to make a comment or two regarding the member's 

comments.  The Provincial Auditor and Crown Investments 

Corporation are not in conflict, as the member seems to 

suggest.  We both want the same thing.  And I trust that the 

members opposite also want the same thing, and that is 

accountability to the legislature and consequently to the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

We disagree however on the process, and we will probably 

always disagree on the process.  In this case the Provincial 

Auditor made some recommendations that we did not agree 

with.  This does not mean to say that we're not interested in 

accountability.  We think that we have provided accountability 

through the Act, and the Provincial Auditor has some other 

ideas.  And I respect him for his other ideas, and he's obviously 

at liberty to bring those forward. 

 

We, however, chose not to incorporate his ideas into the Act.  

At some subsequent, future date, these may be incorporated 

into the Act but right now we chose not to do this. 

 

The member also mentioned the timeliness of the tabling of 

reports.  We don't think that those dates need to be written in 

this Act because there's a tabling of documents Act which 

already states that the reports have to be tabled on a timely 

basis, which is 90 days after their year end.  So it would simply 

be duplication.  We could write them in here, but it would serve 

no useful purpose because it's already in a different Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, it seems 

to me that one of the recommendations the auditor made in his 

auditor's report was that all Crown corporation dividends 

should have been paid to the Consolidated Fund, and then the 

Consolidated Fund would then pay out to CIC based on the 

demand or the need from CIC for any funding.  And by doing 

that, Mr. Minister, you would have then been more accountable 

to the public and to this Assembly and also to the Provincial 

Auditor. 

 

Now the fact that you've chosen just to pay them all into the 

CIC, it basically puts dividends from the Crowns, a large 

portion of the provincial Crown corporation funding, in the 

hands of a few people, as my colleague, the member from 

Maple Creek, had indicated.  And so I find it interesting, Mr. 

Minister, that you would argue today that you found it 

convenient not to adhere to a number of the recommendations 

the Provincial Auditor brought forward. 

 

And yet it wasn't that many years ago that many of your 

colleagues here in opposition were in support of everything the 

Provincial Auditor was bringing forward and recommending.  

So I find it interesting 

that today you would find it convenient now not to accept all or 

a number of his recommendations, and I wonder if you have a 

response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- I think the member, Mr. Chairman, will 

recall when I was reporting to the Crown Corporations 

Committee, I indicated very clearly that this government was 

anxious to work with the Provincial Auditor, not against the 

Provincial Auditor.  But that doesn't mean to say that you will 

agree with the . . . that these two parties will agree with each 

other all the time. 

 

I think that there's one fundamental difference between the way 

we see the Crowns and the Provincial Auditor sees the Crowns.  

And subsequently now the members opposite see the Crowns 

that way too, although when they were in government they saw 

it differently. 

 

We do not see the Crowns as being line departments.  They do 

not report in the same way that a government department 

would, for a lot of obvious reasons which we discussed in 

Crown Corporations Committee.  And probably the most 

fundamental reason why they do not report as line departments 

and disclose their budgets and their investments and their plans 

in as much detail as a line department is because they are 

commercial Crowns.  And by disclosing this information 

they're simply giving their competitors an edge that they should 

not have. 

 

Now in a case of SaskTel where we have very, very fierce 

competition from outside of the Crown corporation now, we 

have to be careful that we do not disclose information that will 

give the competitors an edge on SaskTel. 

 

So the fundamental difference here is simply that we do not see 

the Crowns as line departments and they aren't going to be 

treated that way.  And we've said to the Provincial Auditor that 

that's the way we're going to . . . that's the way we're going to 

operate.  And I think he is ready to accept the fact that that's the 

way we're going operate. 

 

We're going to be accountable.  We're going to be open.  We 

will table our reports to the legislature on a timely basis, full 

disclosure of everything that goes on in the Crown through the 

annual report.  And we've got nothing to hide.  It's just that 

there's a difference in which way we're going to report to the 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, and one of the minister's 

colleagues talks about a new concept.  Well I guess time will 

tell.  The minister also indicated a little earlier that yes, we're 

going to disagree on the fundamental ideological differences, 

and there's no . . . we all are aware of that as well. 

 

But regarding Bill No. 42, and this major Crown Investments 

Corporation, Bill 42 creating this CIC. 

 

There are a lot of people that . . . and the media were . . . the 

question that's being asked is who's keeping tabs on the 

Crowns?  And time will really tell if indeed this 



2068 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

is a more open way of running government. 

 

Now I think when you look at the  . . . according to the article 

here, we see the fact that the CIC is going to be in the hands of 

a number of the Premier's former cronies.  Mr. Ching is going 

to be the president.  Mr. Dombowsky -- and we all know where 

he came from.  He came from the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan.  I also see the firm's general counsel is Scott 

Banda, son of former NDP MLA (Member of Legislative 

Assembly) Dennis Banda, and it's also nice to know that there 

are some lawyers still willing to pick stones. 

 

But when you look at the whole process and the format, Mr. 

Minister, I don't think there's anyone -- as the media have even 

brought out -- will argue the fact that there's still a number of 

questions. And those questions will always be there.  At the 

end of the day, time will tell if indeed this is a more 

accountable . . . and there's greater answerability to this 

Assembly; or if, as the last statement basically brings out here, 

we're going to see that in the end all this has been is a holding 

company for funds to run the 1995 general election on. 

 

And at the end of the day, we will see.  We will know whether 

or not this has been accountable.  But it would seem to me, Mr. 

Minister, what we've created is just another area whereby the 

government can upfront and in the open and to the public say 

they've got a more accountable process in place.  But in reality, 

it is another way for the government to manipulate and to hide 

the funds or to maintain control over the funds without the 

public really having access to it. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, those were a number of the concerns that we 

raise.  We raise them in committee.  We raise them tonight just 

to make sure that they're out for the public to be aware of them.  

And I guess, Mr. Chairman, with the number of members in the 

Assembly that the government has, there isn't really a lot that 

we can do to stop the Bill. However we just wanted to make 

sure these points had been brought forward in a public way.  So 

we'll move on. 

 

The Chair: -- Just before we proceed, the members will know 

that there were a number of amendments made in committee.  

Those amendments were agreed to by the House.  When we 

come to a clause where there has been an amendment made, I 

will simply ask for agreement on the clause as amended. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clauses 5 to 7 inclusive as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 8 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 22 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 23 to 28 inclusive agreed to. 

Clause 29 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 30 to 32 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clauses 33 to 36 inclusive as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 37 agreed to. 

 

Clause 38 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 39 to 44 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clauses 45 and 46 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 47 to 59 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to thank the 

official, Scott Banda, for coming over this evening and thank 

the members of the opposition for their questions. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, we 

would add to your sentiments at thanking the officials for 

coming in.  We know they didn't have to work too hard tonight, 

but they certainly did have a lot of work during the whole 

process of this Bill going though the standing committee.  And 

we do thank them for their input and for their candour, and we 

thank you all. 

 

(2000) 

 

Bill No. 85 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 

Care Insurance Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the Minister of Health to please 

introduce her officials to the committee. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  To my left is Ms. 

Glenda Yeates.  Glenda is an associate deputy minister 

responsible for insured services.  And to my right is Mr. Gerald 

Tegart, a lawyer with Justice. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and 

Madam Minister.  I think there is certainly a consistency 

running through your government's Acts and your direction in 

which you are heading in many areas. 

 

And the member from Rosetown says thank you.  

Unfortunately my comment was not necessarily intended as a 

compliment but rather to the detriment to the people of 

Saskatchewan.  And I think this medical care insurance 

amendment Act or to amend that Act is an indication of what 

I'm speaking about. 

 

Madam Minister, the way I understand this Bill and according 

to some of the explanations that we have received, is that a 

purpose for this Bill is to de-insure lab services provided by 

pathologist-supervised, privately owned -- in other words 

commercial -- laboratories under the medical care insurance 

Act. 



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2069 

And then you say, these services will still continue to be 

provided but paid for under a different authority. 

 

My question to you is, who is going to and what is this 

different authority that you are referring to?  And furthermore, 

that there is a clause that de-insures laboratory services 

provided in the province by pathologists and 

pathologist-supervised private labs, and it eliminates the 

fee-for-service payment mechanism for those services. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, my subsequent supplementary question 

that I would like to tag on as you answer my previous question 

is what are specifically the services that are being de-insured?  

Could you list them for me in . . . some of the more prominent 

ones.  And if the list is too long, I would also prefer if I could 

get a copy of that list. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, first of all I want to make a 

point that services are not being de-insured.  Fee for service is 

being de-insured.  In other words we will not pay for lab 

services on a fee-for-service basis.  The services however, will 

continue to be provided through some other arrangement, other 

than fee for service. 

 

The services that are not going to be provided for by fee for 

service are essentially all those services that are provided by 

pathologists in labs for the . . . in labs in other words, in the 

lab-testing area.  Now as to the details of that, there may be 

further details on that in regulations but it's essentially all the 

services that are provided by pathologists in labs. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, when you say labs, what 

type of labs are you referring to in terms of privately owned 

and privately operated labs or public labs? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The only ones . . . in other words, all lab 

testing done in large commercial labs.  Testing that's done in 

small, doctors' offices that have a very limited range of tests 

actually that are done in those offices are not de-insured on a 

fee-for-service basis.  It's testing done in large commercial labs 

and also the testing done in hospitals and through the public 

sector will all be handled by district boards and they will be 

looking at contractual arrangements with public facilities and 

private facilities. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You mentioned that there would be some 

other . . . in lieu of fee for service being paid that these would 

now be paid through other arrangements.  Could you elaborate 

on that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We will be funding the district boards to 

provide lab services and the district boards will then make 

arrangements with people in the lab sector to provide the 

services.  What sort of arrangements they make, it will 

probably be done through contract but it will depend on the 

various circumstances and it will be up to the district boards to 

make these arrangements with the individuals in the lab sector. 

What will not occur is that we will not pay large commercial 

labs on a fee-for-service basis. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Will you pay for small commercial labs? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We will pay for small, physician office 

labs. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Okay, now just in your own words then, 

Madam Minister, distinguish for me, please, the difference -- or 

differentiate between a small, doctor's lab and a commercial 

lab.  I fail to see that significance.  Does it take two doctors and 

having a pathologist doing their testing for them?  Is that when 

it becomes a commercial lab?  What is your definition of that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The difference is that in a small lab, a 

general practitioner's lab, there's a limited range of services that 

they do and they do it in association with the patients that we 

see.  The other arrangement that exists in the province are 

pathologist-supervised, large labs.  And the fact that it's 

supervised by a pathologist means that that is essentially all 

that that specialist does, is lab testing.  And these labs tend to 

be large in the province. 

 

So general practitioner labs, in other words labs within a 

doctor's office, will continue to be paid for on a fee-for-service 

basis, but then there's a limited range of testing there.  The 

large, pathologist-supervised labs we will no longer contract on 

a fee-for-service basis. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- But this limited service that's available in 

these labs, I asked you before, could you give me an indication 

as to what these services are that we're talking about, the ones 

that are covered and the ones that are de-insured?  I'd like a list 

of those. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We don't have the list 1 and 2 here, but 

we can undertake to get you the list of those services; it's list 1 

and 2 services as opposed to list 3. 

 

But I want to make it clear again that we are not de-insuring the 

services that are done in pathologist commercial labs.  What we 

are de-insuring is the fee for service.  Those lab services will 

continue to be provided to the public at public expense through 

the district boards contracting with the public sector, and in 

some instances with the private sector. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Is that a mandate that the boards are going to 

have to follow then?  You're saying that the district boards are 

going to make that contract with these labs.  Now is it within 

their parameter to make that decision?  Is it within their 

jurisdiction to negotiate the best price possible?  Is it going to 

be district by district by district or is going to be province 

wide?  What's the approach on this? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The mandate that has been given to 

district boards is that they provide cost-effective, efficient, 

quality lab services, and as well, they maximize the public 

sector investment in the public sector infrastructure that has 

already been paid for by  



2070 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

the taxpayers. 

 

What will happen is, is there will be some sort of mixed system 

that comes out of the process with a reduced role for large 

commercial labs.  But there will be still some role for them for 

play, and that will be worked out on a district-by-district basis 

with the mandate from these districts that they have to provide 

cost-effective, efficient services; and they also have to look at 

maximizing the public investment that is there and making the 

best use of it. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Why are you saying, Madam Minister, that 

there will be a reduced role for the so-called private labs? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Because we are asking the district boards 

to maximize the investment the taxpayers have already made.  

There are hospital labs that are not being used fully and could 

be used to a greater extent in the province, so we're asking our 

district boards to look at that and try to maximize the 

investment that's already been made there. 

 

So they will have to do an analysis of the lab system within 

their district and come up with an arrangement that will be the 

best from the point of view of cost efficient, but also looking at 

maximizing that public investment. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well we'll certainly pursue that in a little 

while, Madam Minister, that issue. 

 

You made a point earlier on, about three to four questions ago, 

that essentially it was going to be a decision on these district 

boards.  Now there's a common theme there that concerns me, 

and that is in response to my colleague from Wilkie, I believe, 

and the last time that you were up for estimates. 

 

The question was asked, what amount of money is this 

particular board spending?  And you said, I don't know; go ask 

the board.  Apparently now . . . you look quizzical on that, so 

let's just pursue that and I'll give you an opportunity to explain 

exactly what your stand on the district boards' accountability is 

concerned. 

 

And quite specifically, Madam Minister, I'd like you to address 

the larger picture, which is the district boards are going to be 

spending an awful lot of taxpayers' money.  And as all the 

boards come on stream, I would suggest to you that almost a 

third of the entire budget of this province is going to be spent 

directly or indirectly by these district boards. 

 

(2015) 

 

Now I want your assurance, Madam Minister, that I can get up 

in Committee of the Whole as we are doing right now, or in 

estimates when the Health estimates are up, and ask you any 

specific question about any of the health issues that arise in this 

province and any amount of money that is being expended on 

behalf of the taxpayer.  I want your assurance now that you will 

not give me that standard answer of oh, I don't know; you'll 

have to ask the district board.  Because, Madam 

Minister, I'm sure that you will agree that that is not in the best 

interests of accountability. 

 

So I would like your reaction at this time on that issue. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There's a distinction that has to made 

here.  Some of the questions I was being asked were things 

like, well how many people are there in communications on the 

Saskatoon Health Board?  How many people are working in 

this particular area? 

 

The government has never micro-managed every hospital in the 

province.  Never.  It's never happened.  And we're not going to 

do that either.  And the fact that we have one board instead of 

four, doesn't mean we're still going to micro . . . that we're 

going to start accepting responsibility for micro-managing 

those hospitals when that was never considered to be the 

government's responsibility but was the board of governors of 

hospitals' responsibility. 

 

That doesn't mean that the government isn't responsible for 

making sure generally that the taxpayers' dollars are being 

spent responsibly and for making sure that hospitals are 

fulfilling their mandate to the public which is to provide 

high-quality health care services. 

 

So obviously the government has to respond to questions of 

general policy direction and questions of quality of care and so 

on.  But it doesn't mean that the government is going to know 

all the details of all the personnel and all the little things that 

are going on at the district level, nor should it get involved at 

that point.  I think the district boards have the responsibility 

and the obligation to do that sort of micro-managing.  So there's 

a difference between policy decisions and operational decisions 

of that nature, and I want to make that point. 

 

Now with respect to the responsibility of district boards, district 

boards will be responsible to the government to ensure that all 

provincial standards are maintained.  It'll be responsible to the 

government to make sure that certain services are provided and 

they're provided at a certain level.  The Department of Health 

will be monitoring and evaluating that. 

 

And as well, the district boards have an obligation to the 

citizens in their district and has to put forward a budget every 

year, as well as a report on the health status of people, as well 

as any other information that the general public within the 

district wants which, as the member opposite fully well knows, 

is really a first for Saskatchewan because hospital boards have 

not had those open public meetings in the past.  So now we will 

have that sort of open public meeting at the district level but 

not just with respect to hospitals, with respect to special care 

homes, home care and all the other services that district boards 

will be paying for. 

 

So yes, the government is responsible for policy.  It's 

responsible for evaluation.  It's responsible for monitoring, and 

it will continue to answer questions in that regard.  But it is not 

going to take over the decision-making power of the district 

board and 



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2071 

micro-manage and make all the decisions for the district board.  

So there has to be a balance here between giving more 

community control, more power to district boards, and the 

government accepting responsibility for general direction. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Madam Minister, all I can say is that 

that's an awfully scary, scary answer if that is the role that 

you're prepared to supply and those are the kinds of answers 

that you're prepared to give us for questions that we have on 

how you're spending the taxpayers' money.  You say that all 

you're going to be interested in is general policy issues.  Those 

are your exact words.  You said all that you're going to be 

concerned about is general policy issue, and you're not going to 

get concerned about the operational aspects.  Those were your 

statements. 

 

You say you're not going to be concerned about 

micro-management.  Now I'm not quite sure, Madam Minister, 

what your definition of micro-management is.  Like are you 

talking that you're not going to care about a million dollars here 

or there?  Now could you explain what you mean by 

micro-management?  Because that concerns me. 

 

Madam Minister, we are responsible as legislators here to 

account for every penny of the taxpayers' dollar that is being 

spent.  And I think, and I just ask you again, I want your 

assurance that we will be able to ask you questions and that you 

will supply those answers. 

 

And I don't think that you would want to be there and say, well 

I don't know what's going on because it's a decision of the 

district board.  That is the complaint that we have had right 

from day one, that what you're doing now is you're offloading.  

You're offloading responsibility. You just simply shrug your 

shoulders and say, well that's not my responsibility; the district 

boards have been appointed to look after that and so therefore I 

don't know what they're doing and I'm not quite sure what 

money they're spending in which area.  That is my concern, 

Madam Minister. 

 

Now I guess what I would want from you is a delimitation or 

delineation of what do you mean by micro?  I mean can I ask 

you questions above a million dollars?  Anything less is too 

micro for you to be bothered about? 

 

The accountability process, Madam Minister, I want you to 

address that issue again because, well maybe I'm not following 

exactly what you propose to do here, but your terminology 

about general policy versus operational policy and micro 

_management system that you feel you're not responsible for -- 

I just want you to be a little bit more specific about what you 

are referring to. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I have mentioned to the member in my 

preceding answer that the government has never run each 

hospital in the province, and it will not do so in the future.  It's 

never run each hospital.  It has not micro-managed every 

hospital situation. 

However, if a problem arises in a hospital or if there's some 

expenditures that don't look appropriate, the government gets 

involved.  But it doesn't micro-manage every situation. 

 

The member opposite was asking me about how many 

communications officers in there. We can undertake to provide 

that information if somebody wants to know how many 

communications officers.  But we don't readily have access to 

it, because we don't micro-manage these . . . the Saskatoon 

Health Board, for example, and tell them they can have one 

communications officer, 400 nurses, two physicians. We don't 

do that.  Nor did you when you were in power.  So there is 

essentially no change, is the point we're making here. 

 

What communities are telling me is not that they're afraid the 

government is offloading the responsibility.  They're telling me 

that they're pleased to have more community control and input 

into the development of health care services.  That's what the 

health care policy is designed to do.  It's not to offload 

responsibility. 

 

The government will, and I said in my answer to you, the 

government will continue to be responsible for the expenditure 

of monies.  It will set policy; it'll set goals; it'll set guidelines; 

it'll do evaluation; it will do analysis.  It will enter into 

operating agreements with district boards to be sure that the 

right services are provided.  And it will monitor and evaluate 

and take responsibility for making sure there's quality 

assurance in our health care system. 

 

It's much broader than what you're attempting to paint it and 

what you're attempting to say that I said.  And if my comments 

earlier weren't clear, there is essentially no change.  We will be 

responsible for services provided in hospitals and all other 

health care areas; however, district boards will make the 

day-to-day operational decisions, as they've done in the past, 

without interference from you when you were in government. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Madam Minister, when you get up and 

say that essentially there are no changes, that's precisely what 

concerns people in Saskatchewan right now, that they cannot 

keep up to the changes that are occurring.  And we on this side 

of the House want to be as sure as possible that those changes 

that are occurring, albeit they may be good and albeit that 

maybe they are necessary, that we want to maintain a handle on 

them, that we want to be able to maintain accountability. 

 

Now don't just slough it off and use the district board as an 

excuse, Madam Minister, that you don't have to answer 

questions and give answers. 

 

I will take you up on one comment that you made, Madam 

Minister, that you do have the ability to access that information 

and supply it.  And I full well realize, and I don't expect you to 

have detailed information even on the current boards that have 

been established, and I would not expect that of you, but I 



2072 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

do want the assurance that we can ask those questions and we 

will be supplied with the answer, albeit next week or at least in 

due course.  That is the concern, Madam Minister, that we are 

having. 

 

Furthermore, what I would like you to do now, Madam 

Minister, is to follow up on a point that you were making.  

Precisely you want to maximize the taxpayers' dollar and you 

want the board -- that was one of the mandates of the board as I 

understood you to have said in one of your earlier answers -- to 

maximize the taxpayers' dollar.  And as a corollary it would 

seem to me you concluded that that would mean not having too 

much to do with commercial labs. 

 

Now that was the inference.  You carefully avoided and 

diplomatically avoided in saying that directly, but I'm putting 

words in your mouth right now which you can refute if you 

want to, and then we'll get on to that discussion. 

 

Precisely, Madam Minister, I would like you to detail how 

much then the government will save by de-insuring these 

services or whatever route you want to go.  You seem to take 

some exception to my terminology when I say that you're 

de-insuring services, and you say, well only fee for services, 

whatever. 

 

But your own Bill says it de-insures laboratory services.  Next 

clause it says, the clause de-insures laboratory services 

provided in the province.  So I mean these are the 

terminologies that your Bill itself is using.  So what I would 

like to know is how much money is the government going to be 

saving by de-insuring these services and if possible, Madam 

Minister, a breakdown on the particular services, per service as 

well. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The estimate that, in terms of cost 

savings -- but I'm not going to say it's from getting rid of the 

fee for service completely; it's from a total rationalization that's 

taking place in the lab system -- is approximately $10 million 

that we intend to save annually. 

 

I should also point out to the member opposite in case he's 

unaware of this, that in '91-92 budget which your government 

put together, you de-insured private list 3 labs to come into 

effect October 1, 1991 and then you never proceeded with 

implementation.  I guess you were waiting until after the 

election.  So this shouldn't be anything new to the member 

opposite. 

 

This was on your agenda.  It was built into your budget.  And it 

seems to me that what you said you'd save was 3.75 million for 

that portion of the fiscal year from October 1,'91 on to March 

31.  I'm sure the member opposite is very familiar and has 

participated in cabinet discussions about whether or not 

de-insure . . . list 3 labs should be de-insured and is quite 

familiar with what the government is doing. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you for that $10 million answer, 

Madam Minister.  Were all the services 

previously provided by both the private and the public 

laboratories? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Yes, all services were provided by private 

and public labs in the past. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well then, Madam Minister, how much does it 

cost per private lab per service? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I want some clarification on the member's 

question.  Are you asking, what is the cost per test in a private 

lab? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes.  Well, there isn't one 

cost per test in a private lab.  It varies from the beginning to the 

1,000th.  It depends on the whole range of things.  And the 

department indicates that the cost per test varies, and it depends 

on what kind of test it is and which number of that test it is. 

 

(2030) 

 

So what is important in the analysis is the overall cost to the 

system and how we can best rationalize services in an overall 

context. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Madam Minister, I guess the question 

that I have to pose now then is, so you have the overall cost of 

the system, and you have the overall number of services 

performed.  Surely there's an average figure that you can give 

me.  That's all I'm asking for. 

 

Because subsequent to that, and while I'm on my feet, I'll ask 

the next obvious question which is, then let's compare that to 

the public lab.  So what I'm asking for now is for you to do 

both of those. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Can't do a comparison directly.  And the 

point is, is that in the public sector we have already made a 

substantial investment in equipment and in infrastructure.  And 

this is why we want to maximize that investment that's already 

been paid for by the taxpayers.  And to make a direct analysis, 

from this is what we pay here and this is what we pay here, is 

totally erroneous because what it doesn't take into consideration 

is the money that the taxpayers have already paid and that has 

to be used and maximized to the fullest extent possible. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- No, no, no, no, Madam Minister, that's not 

how it works in the real world.  You've got the cart before the 

horse here.  I know I'm enough of a businessman to know that, 

yes, you may be accurate insofar as telling me that there is 

overhead cost.  You've had capital investment.  You've got the 

facilities, granted.  Now you say we want to maximize that.  

But, Madam Minister, any businessman will tell you that 

capital expenditure on any ongoing business is usually the 

lowest cost that you're going to have in conducting that 

business.  It's not your initial capital investment normally that 

determines the outcome of a business.  It's your operating costs, 

your daily, ongoing costs.  They don't jump up and grab you as 

immediately as a capital investment will, but certainly over a 

number of years, a period of time, it's the operating costs that 

eat up a business -- not just the 



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2073 

capital investment.  I think you would agree to that, Madam 

Minister. 

 

And that is why I wanted a comparative figure between the 

operating cost which is basically the per-service fee of a private 

lab as opposed to the public lab.  And you're quite right, and 

I'm glad for your candour in admitting that you cannot really 

compare apples to oranges.  But I submit to you that's exactly 

what has been done in your determination that you want to 

maximize the taxpayers' dollars in laboratory fees.  You have 

been comparing apples to oranges because you cannot, in all 

fairness, compare the cost per service in a private lab and say, 

oh but the public lab can do it more cheaply because one costs 

$2.60, and the other one costs $2, when you have to capitalize 

the costs on that particular service as well in the public service 

which is being paid for through other means.  That's the whole 

point, Madam Minister. 

 

So I'll ask you again, and I'm sure that you must have the figure 

for me.  What is the cost per service on an average?  Now I 

know what you're saying about . . . it depends on whether it's 

the first test done or the 500th test done because of economies 

of scale.  I think that was your point that you were trying to 

make.  But there must be a comparative figure that we can use, 

ignoring the capital costs then on the public laboratory side. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The Department of Health advises me 

that trying to get to an average cost per test and compare them 

would be comparing apples to oranges simply because these 

large commercial labs do many different tests than what 

hospitals are doing and you don't get, you don't get . . . well 

you can't come to an average cost per test.  That sort of 

comparison cannot be made accurately. 

 

Now we do know that there are tests . . . like there have been 

some examples, but there again it gets very difficult for me to 

bring them forward because it's difficult to make these kind of 

comparisons.  What I am advised by the Department of Health 

-- and that is clearly the advice you got when you were in 

government -- was that there is a $10 million operating cost 

saving as a result of the measures that we are proposing.  And 

in 1991-92 it was set at 3.750 million when you were in 

cabinet; that's what you envisaged the savings to be from 

October 1, '91, to March 31.  I'm assuming at that time that 

your government believed that this was the proper way to be 

proceeding. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, when the dispute over 

private and public labs was going on, I know that the public lab 

employees were going around the province boasting that they 

could do the same services as the private labs were doing and 

they could do it for 640 per cent less than the private labs could 

do. 

 

I'm just wondering, in your estimation, is that the case?  And I'd 

like to have you respond to that.  I think you know what studies 

I'm referring to. 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- In response to that question, I want to say 

once again to the minister that it is impossible for us to do 

those kind of comparisons.  And whether it's the public sector 

or the private sector that's attempting to do them, we do not 

believe that those kind of comparisons can be done accurately. 

 

What we do believe, however, is that we have an accurate, 

overall systems comparison that indicates to us that there are 

operating costs of some $10 million to be saved by moving in 

the direction that we're moving and by transferring the whole 

package to a non-fee-for-service basis and by maximizing the 

public sector. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You're talking about this $10 million saving 

all the time.  What are some of the pitfalls or the negative 

aspects of that type of saving?  Because surely a saving like 

that has to be achieved at some expense -- expense through 

service, expense through speed -- those kinds of things. 

 

Now you're refusing to give me any comparison.  And I think I 

know why you're doing that, Madam Minister, simply because 

if you were honest with me, if you were open with me, you 

would probably have to have indicate, yes indeed, on an 

operational aspect, of a fee-for-service aspect, the private labs 

would probably do very well, thank you. 

 

So what you're doing is you're rolling in the capital costs 

involved in the existing labs and so on, and saying well my 

goodness, if we didn't have these labs being busy doing this 

kind of things it would be a debt cost to the government, so 

therefore we can rationalize that and say by utilizing those 

facilities and the personnel and the wages that you're paying 

them, that we're actually going to be saving money. 

 

I don't think you're being quite upright on this one or forthright 

on it.  I think there's a lot of hidden things going on here and 

that's why you just continue to talk about apples and oranges 

instead of giving us precise comparison. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite has, in his 

question, answered it as well to a certain extent.  He has 

recognized that we will be making better use of staff and we 

will be doing that by moving in the direction that we're moving.  

He's recognized that we will be using more fully the equipment 

that has already been paid for and we will be doing that. 

 

There will be job loss as a result of taking $10 million and 

saving $10 million.  That's recognized and I pointed that out 

when the original policy statement was publicly filed.  There 

will also be some fewer bleeding stations.  However we will 

still have physician GP (general practitioner) labs for them to 

be able to take samples of blood if they feel it is necessary. 

 

So the member opposite made a statement that private labs do 

very well.  And I just am wondering where he was at in '91-92 

when his government decided to de-insure list 3 labs and wrote 

it into the budget. 



2074 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, how many private labs 

currently offer these services in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, there is one in Saskatoon.  

There's two firms in Regina, one in Prince Albert, and one in 

Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  And how many 

of these private labs provided this service before your 

government instituted and determined that there would be a 

public-lab-only policy in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The Department of Health does not know 

what the corporate take-over has been with respect to the lab 

sector.  I understand that it started back in the '80s some time 

and that there have been a number of smaller labs taken over.  

But as to the exact turnover, it's not something that the 

Department of Health has followed and monitored on an 

ongoing basis. 

 

I want to indicate the member said public-labs-only policy.  We 

have not said it's a public-labs-only policy.  We have said we 

want to maximize the investments that's there and we want 

district boards to look at cost efficiency, effectiveness, quality, 

and where possible, maximizing the facilities and staff that are 

already being paid for. 

 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Madam Minister, I don't think my 

terminology is going to be all that far out in the final analysis 

and you would very well know that.  How many employees, 

Madam Minister, are there in the public lab system currently? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, I've asked the official to get 

the details of that information.  And if the member opposite has 

another question while she's attending to that, I'd be pleased to 

try and answer it. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, I asked you how many 

employees there are in the public lab system and I also want to 

know how many employees there are in the private lab system 

currently and prior to the MDS shut-down.  I'll need that 

information for some subsequent questions. 

 

How many labs have been closed, Madam Minister, over the 

last few months in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite should know that 

none of the labs have been closed as a result of this policy.  

However, one of the companies has been rationalizing its 

bleeding stations as a result of the policy.  But the lab itself 

hasn't been closed. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Could you expound a little bit about the 

rationalization or the bleeding stations, exactly what we're 

talking about in terms of numbers of jobs, positions?  Are there 

some completely gone that were open at one time or are they 

all in conjunction with the lab itself or are they collection 

points?  Could you 

elaborate on that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We don't know just how many collection 

points have been shut down but there was some collection point 

shut-down in Saskatoon.  I'm advised that it may have been six 

but we don't have the exact figure, and we can undertake to get 

that for you. 

 

As to any of the decisions made in that regard, of course it's 

internal policy to the private lab.  By shutting down the 

collection sites, they would then pick up the volume in some of 

their other centres within the city. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What is the difference between, Madam 

Minister, the wage of a union lab technician and a private lab 

technician?  At the same time, could you equate to me their 

qualifications? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We don't know what private labs are 

paying.  That would be their pathologists.  That would be an 

arrangement that's made, the private labs make and we don't 

have access to that information. 

 

With respect to the public labs however, we can access that 

information.  We don't have it here right now, but we can 

undertake to get it for you. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I did ask you another section on that question 

which dealt with the qualifications of the technicians, be it in 

the private and/or in the public sector. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We'll undertake to get the qualifications 

of technicians in the public sector.  In the private sector, we 

don't manage their business.  We don't know what the 

qualifications of their technicians are.  However we can get you 

that information with respect to the public sector. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Madam Minister, don't you as a 

Department of Health have a concern about the qualifications 

of individuals who are going to be doing all these kinds of 

tests, where the patients come in?  Surely there's got to be some 

kind of quality assurance that the people who are going to take 

blood out of my fingers and assessing my health status are 

going to be totally qualified.  Surely there's got to be some 

standard. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We do have quality assurance guidelines 

and there are minimum standards that have to be met with 

respect to qualifications.  We can undertake to provide you 

with that.  But there's a range of qualifications that a person can 

have, and we don't know.  They have to meet the minimum 

standards, but we don't know what standards they actually meet 

in the private sector because we don't go in and check over all 

their employees. 

 

So there is quality assurance and there are minimum standards 

with respect to qualifications and we can undertake to get that 

for you. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I want to get back to the quality 



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2075 

control, Madam Minister.  You don't go in and check their 

qualifications.  You don't go in and check whether they have 

the qualifications necessary to tell me that I have a certain 

disease or don't have a certain disease.  And certainly the 

doctor is going to depend upon that. 

 

Now you're telling me that you don't know what those 

standards are?  And first of all, are they going to be the same?  

You seem to say that you know what the public is, the public 

sector, but you don't know what the private sector is. 

 

Well I would suggest to you, Madam Minister, there shouldn't 

be any difference.  I want to make sure that if I go to a public 

lab it's going to be as good as a private lab.  Can you give me 

that assurance? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The person in those operations that's 

responsible for the quality is the pathologist.  The pathologist is 

governed by the council of the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons and has to make sure that there is quality. 

 

We do not go in and monitor all their employees.  The 

pathologist is responsible for making sure that the quality of 

those tests are accurate and accepts responsibility for the firm 

that the quality of those tests are accurate and is responsible to 

the College of Medicine with respect to monitoring 

professional responsibility and with respect to his area which 

would be lab testing. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, can you assure me that the 

quality of the labs performed in the public . . . or the work of 

the lab technicians in the public sector is going to be as good as 

in the private sector?  You haven't addressed that. 

 

You haven't addressed the issue of, is there a constant across 

the province?  You indicated to me before you didn't have any 

idea of what the private sector was all about.  Now are they the 

same or are they not?  Are they answerable to the same 

pathologist and the same pathologist standards or not?  Just 

answer the question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite always has to 

extrapolate with a bottom line that is totally inaccurate and 

misrepresents everything that's being said.  Well it's very 

typical of the members opposite.  This is always the way they 

approach it -- make a general statement that's totally inaccurate 

based on a false assumption and then from there start to pose 

your question. 

 

We have never said we don't know what goes on in the private 

sector.  We've said that the quality assurance is there, that there 

are minimum qualifications for technicians, that pathologists 

are responsible.  He knows that.  He was in government before.  

You didn't do it any differently. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is is that publicly we have a very 

similar situation where pathologists are responsible to make 

sure that the lab testing meets the quality standards, and they're 

responsible to the 

College of Medicine . . . the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons rather, and responsible through The Medical 

Profession Act which is the way doctors are monitored and 

governed with respect to all services. 

 

In physician offices, we don't go in and monitor every 

physician and find out whether what they're doing is accurate.  

If the public is not satisfied with what's taking place or if there's 

problems, it can be referred to the council of the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons which is one of their quality assurance 

bodies and to make sure that quality services are being 

provided by physicians.  The same applies in the public sector. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Madam Minister, the point I was trying 

to get you to make and admit to is that yes indeed, the public 

sector lab technicians and the results are at least equivalent to 

that of the private sector.  And I think that what you have just 

done now is assured me that yes, there is a constant level of 

expertise and competency that is expected from either in the 

private or in the public sector.  So I will accept that assurance, 

Madam Minister. 

 

First of all, or subsequent to those questions, could you indicate 

to me how many job losses there have been in the public lab 

system and in the private lab system? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Our estimate is is that after the 

rationalization takes place in the lab sector that there will be 

approximately 100 to 112 jobs lost, but that's just a guess.  And 

it will depend on what sort of arrangements are made and what 

district boards, how they decide to deliver their services and 

how they rationalize the lab system within the context of a 

district.  So that's an estimate but it's only that at this time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You see, there you go again saying that it's 

going to be the board's decision.  You can't answer it because it 

would be up to the district board to make that decision.  You're 

not responsible, Madam Minister, yet in the very same decision 

you have said to the boards, turn your attention to the public 

labs because you're supposed to maximize the taxpayers' 

dollars to the fullest potential.  And that can only be done by 

using the public labs. 

 

So essentially recommending . . . and I don't know what other 

persuasive means that you have of making sure that the public 

sector labs get the business, as it were.  We're going to pursue 

that in a little more . . . in a moment as well yet, Madam 

Minister.  Now what I want you to do is to indicate to me what 

you intend to do, let's say a year from now. 

 

Are you willing, Madam Minister, to commit that there will be 

an independent review commission or an independent review 

committee that will sit down in one year's time and look back 

over the past year to see precisely what developments have 

been, what the trends have been, and that you will give an open 

and honest answer to the public about the results of this 

experiment that you are performing, and that you will commit 

to following the best deal for the taxpayer of 



2076 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

this province subsequent to that independent review.  Would 

you commit to that, Madam Minister? 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite should know that 

we are establishing a management unit of the department that is 

going to be doing this evaluation on an ongoing basis.  So it 

isn't a question of doing it . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who was doing it?  I didn't get the first 

part. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- What? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who was going to be doing that review? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- A management unit is being established 

provincially in order to monitor and evaluate lab services on an 

ongoing basis from the point of view of quality and efficiency.  

I want to remind the member opposite again, who seems to be 

opposing this policy, that he was a member of a cabinet that 

debated and discussed and determined to put in their budget the 

de-insurance of private list 3 labs. 

 

He was a member of a cabinet that debated and discussed that.  

And if he's saying he didn't debate it and discuss it, where was 

the cabinet when that budget was being put together? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, you're part of the Treasury 

Board and cabinet yourself.  And you full well know that you 

would not be doing your job as a cabinet minister if you didn't 

go out and look at all options possible and discuss and debate.  

Of course we did.  But did we take the action?  That's the other 

question. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You weren't around to answer. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You see, that's the whole problem here, 

Madam Minister.  Oh, we weren't around; you're right for that.  

And boy, do the people wish that that was not the case after 

what you're doing to the health system, I can assure you, 

Madam Minister. 

 

So yes, yes, I admit that, Madam Minister.  We debated a lot of 

things in cabinet just as you are doing.  And that's part of the 

role of a cabinet minister, is to view all options and then 

determine what the best course of action will be for the citizens 

of this province.  That's the name of the game, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Now I want to turn slightly to a different topic and that is the 

de-insuring of services outside of Saskatchewan, Madam 

Minister.  Does this Bill de-insure all services outside of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I want to remind the member once again 

that these services are going to be provided in Saskatchewan, 

but we are de-insuring them in the sense that they will not be 

paid for by  

fee-for-service, but they will still be paid for through public 

funding through some other arrangement. 

 

Now outside of Saskatchewan, people will be able to obtain lab 

services in the same manner they had in the past.  If it's on a 

fee-for-service basis, the government will continue to pay for it 

on that basis.  The only time they will . . . the government will 

not pay for it is if a physician from within the province is 

ordering tests outside of the province in a situation where the 

test could be provided in Saskatchewan.  So, and you know, 

and that of course has to be taken on a reasonable basis. 

 

Obviously if someone has to go out of the province for 

treatment or is an emergency, then the service is going to be 

insured on a fee-for-service basis.  But if a physician is trying 

to send someone out of province on a fee-for-service basis, that 

won't be allowed unless it's not available in the province and 

it's absolutely necessary to do that. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, does this Bill contravene the 

Canada Health Act? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- No, because the services are still covered 

and still paid for. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, I have a copy here of . . . 

and this is from MDS.  Now we seem to have been talking here 

that the public-funded labs are more efficient.  You have 

basically rested your case solely on the fact that the 

infrastructure is in place anyway, that you've got the body there 

and that you've got the equipment. 

 

I think that's an extremely weak argument, Madam Minister, a 

very weak argument, simply because if the costs of the tests are 

going to be more expensive, on an ongoing basis the 

operational costs, it doesn't take very many years when the 

advantage of your capitalization is outweighed by the extra cost 

on an ongoing basis on the per test. 

 

Now you refuse to give me those comparative figures because 

you say you can't compare apples with oranges.  I have here a 

copy from MDS Laboratories, and the figures here are 

developed from the data that was included in the Kilshaw 

report. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I'm sure that this letter that I got from 

Forbes Hunter is something that you must be aware of as well, 

and you must have had some kind of communication with this 

gentleman from MDS as well.  And there's a whole list of 

different services provided that included here. 

 

But hematology, for example, in the provincial labs are none 

done.  In the private labs, there's 2.4 million-and-some-odd 

ones.  In the hospitals, there's 5.9. Biochemistry, microbiology, 

and there's a whole list of these kinds of services that are being 

done.  The total tests in the Provincial Lab, Madam Minister, 

were 2.6 million; the total tests in private labs were 7.5 million; 

and in hospitals, over 14 million. 



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2077 

Now, Madam Minister, the total funding for that was seven and 

a half million went to provincial labs, 20 million to private labs, 

and 43 or 44 million to hospitals.  The important and the 

significant feature here, Madam Minister, is that if you break 

that down to costs per test, which is a figure that you didn't 

have or didn't want to share with me, we find that the 

Provincial Lab comes in a $2.81, the private lab comes in at 

$2.70, and the hospitals come in at $3.03. 

 

So, Madam Minister, if you want to take umbrage with these 

figures that I'm quoting to you, you can do that and I will not 

be able to refute your arguments, simply because what I'm 

taking now are the statistics that were sent to me by the private 

lab organization of MDS.  And their calculation, according to 

the accompanying letter, is based on that Kilshaw report, from 

the data that it contains. 

 

So, Madam Minister, what I have here would seem to me that . 

. . and I grant you maybe this is a debatable fact, but on an 

ongoing basis, while we're talking about millions of tests . . . as 

a matter of fact, if I add the total number of tests together that 

we're performed in this province, it's 2.6, 7.4 -- that's 10 -- and 

14 is 24.  It's very close to 25 million tests -- 25 million tests 

that occurred according to these statistics.  And yet the private 

labs were cheaper than both the hospital and the provincial 

labs. 

 

The point I'm trying to make to you when I talk to you about 

operational costs is that it doesn't take very long, very many 

years and your advantage over the capitalization issue becomes 

a very minor issue I would suggest to you, Madam Minister. 

 

Have you taken those kinds of things into consideration? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The savings are not just based on capital 

estimates.  They're based on operating estimates as well, as I 

indicated to the member earlier. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- But you didn't say that before. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Oh yes I did.  Read Hansard; you'll see 

it's in there. 

 

Now with respect to . . . If the member opposite is interested in 

hearing the answer to the question he raised, I want to make 

this point.  To try and make the kind of comparisons that 

you've just put forward is impossible. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I didn't do it; they did. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well it's impossible.  And I'll tell you 

why:  because the private labs do different tests than the 

provincial lab, and different again from hospitals.  There are a 

number of different tests that can be done on hematology, for 

example, and other areas.  They're different kinds of tests.  That 

sort of analysis is simply not accurate because we're talking 

about different tests. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Madam Minister, I guess we're 

 in a stand-off here.  You're saying one thing, with the help of 

your officials, and I'm saying another thing with the help of the 

expertise and the professionals out there in the private labs in 

the private sector.  So I guess we got a stand-off here. 

 

The only difference between you and me right now, Madam 

Minister, is that you're the Minister of Health and I'm the critic.  

So you wield the power.  You make the decisions.  And so 

therefore we obviously will not be able to accommodate the 

private sector here, because you've got some kind of a 

philosophical motivation behind this, I would suggest to you. 

 

Because, Madam Minister, further to what I've been doing so 

far, this is a letter that has been sent to me by a physician, by a 

doctor.  This is one of the front-line troops.  And I'm going to 

read parts of the letter to you for your edification.  And yes, 

you do have a copy of this; he also sent you a copy, this 

physician.  He says: 

 

 We are writing at this time in regards to the upcoming review 

of the medical laboratory service. 

 

So obviously this gentleman had opportunity to have input 

before you made your decision and you simply decided to 

ignore it. 

 

 As medical practitioners . . . 

 

And again, Madam Minister, I'm not standing up here as an 

expert in this.  I'm relying on the people out in the field for my 

information and I pass this on to you. 

 

 As medical practitioners we have had direct experiences with 

public and private medical labs.  We are also acutely aware 

of the need to control medical spending and expenses. 

 

So he acknowledges that and certainly I acknowledge that.  But 

again I think it's the motivation that where we are having a 

difference of opinion.  He continues: 

 

 We are aware of the present lobbying effort being put forth 

by the SGEU and are dismayed by inaccuracies and 

half-truths presented within this effort.  Having reviewed the 

actual costs involved, we have no doubt that private labs are 

at least as cost efficient as public labs and maybe more cost 

efficient. 

 

So he's very conservative in his estimation there. 

 

 We have definitely found that the private labs are more 

efficient in providing good medical care.  We have found that 

the private labs provide quicker and more efficient results, 

and that a greater degree of patient and physician teaching is 

achieved.  As physicians we have received invaluable help 

from the private labs in interpreting and utilizing the lab 

results.  This has resulted in better health care and an overall 

saving of health dollars (Madam Minister). 

 

This is the opinion of one of the experts out in the field 



2078 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

that utilizes labs.  He's obviously not a lab expert but he is a 

physician that utilizes the results of the labs and the lab 

technicians.  So, Madam Minister, what is your reaction to a 

doctor like this that says they are at least as cost efficient, 

maybe more so, and yet they are very responsive and very 

efficient and effective in supplying our needs.  What is your 

response to that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- With respect to the member's concerns 

about the quality, for example, of lab services, I want to point 

out to the member once again that the College of Physicians 

and Surgeons monitors quality of labs and lab testing, and that 

there will be a central provincial management unit in 

government that will be constantly monitoring and evaluating 

quality and accessibility.  So those areas will be looked after 

through the College of Physicians and Surgeons and through 

the Department of Health -- quality and accessibility. 

 

As to comments that it's cheaper in the private sector than the 

public sector, I've repeatedly said tonight that to try and make 

these kind of comparisons is an impossible task, that we know 

that there are staff already hired and facilities already available 

in the public sector that aren't being used to full capacity.  And 

if we're being responsible to the taxpayers, they should be used 

to full capacity.  And that's what we are proposing to do. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, the long and the short of 

what we have been discussing tonight . . . And you have not 

been able, by any stretch of the imagination, to convince me -- 

and I'm sure any of the viewers --that what you're telling is the 

way it should be.  You have not presented any evidence that 

supports what you're saying.  The facts are not there.  You will 

not give them.  You will not share them.  I know you have 

them, but you hide behind the apple and oranges theory. 

 

(2115) 

 

The conclusion I have come to is that your decision and your 

conclusion is based upon a fundamental premise that has very 

little to do with cost efficiency, but a whole heck of a lot to do 

with political ideology and political philosophy. 

 

And I think, Madam Minister, that the biggest motivating 

influence behind your decision to de-insure medical services, 

the laboratory services in the private sector, has been based 

largely on the lobbying efforts of the SGEU (Saskatchewan 

Government Employees' Union) and that this is another prime 

example of your government's determination to have 

union-only policy permeating your government, permeating 

throughout the economic structure -- be it the water project in 

Melfort or be it the highway projects that we have throughout 

this province or be it the various SaskPower projects where 

tenders have been left and then whoops, okay, we'll kowtow to 

the union bosses and the union leaders.  And even though one 

project itself will expend over a million dollars of the  

taxpayers' money, that to you is a small price to pay for your 

ideology and the paying off of your union-boss friends. 

 

That, Madam Minister, I suggest to you is one of the 

underlying themes and the underlying motivational force 

behind de-insuring of private labs in this province.  And I say 

that does not befit you well, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I wish to point out to the 

member opposite that the Kilshaw report had recommended 

that funding be moved to the district boards.  And if you move 

funding to district boards, you no longer pay it to pathologists.  

You pay it directly to the district boards.  Also the head of 

economics at U of R (University of Regina) was part of that 

panel and part of that recommendation. 

 

I think it's also important to know and for the public to know 

that there's been a very substantial growth in the cost of lab 

services in recent years, an overall increase of some close to 37 

per cent in the past five years.  And I think that's very 

significant.  And therefore the government moving to save $10 

million in the lab sector is a very prudent and wise step to take 

on behalf of taxpayers, and as well making sure that we 

maximize the investment in the staff that we're already paying 

for is another wise step on behalf of taxpayers. 

 

We are setting up a management unit to make sure that 

accessibility and quality is maintained on behalf of the public. 

And I believe that the lab initiatives that have been taken in this 

province are very progressive and very responsible to the 

taxpayers of this province and to the people who will be 

receiving health care services. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, on a number of occasions 

you've expounded upon the $10 million saving that you are 

anticipating.  I want you to give me a copy of your precise 

calculations where you have arrived at that $10 million figure, 

your research that you've done to make that policy 

determination.  Will you commit to getting me a copy of the 

precise calculations that you used to arrive at that figure? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We can do that. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 86 -- An Act to amend Certain Health Statutes and 

to repeal Certain Other Health Statutes 

 

Clause 1 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister then to introduce the 

officials who have now joined us. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Yes, first of all, Mr. Chair, to my 

immediate left is Mr. Duane Adams, the deputy 



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2079 

minister; and Mr. John Labatt, the executive director of mental 

health services branch -- he's not here; Gerald Tegart from 

Justice; Lorraine Hill, the senior associate deputy minister to 

my immediate right; Danni Boyd, the senior executive director 

of community services branch and former executive director of 

SADAC (Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse 

Commission); Diane Neill, legislation officer; and Barb Shea, 

the executive director of the prescription drug plan, are the 

officials that are available tonight. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Madam 

Minister and officials.  This Act may be cited as The Health 

Statutes Amendment Act.  On first blush it looks to be rather 

insignificant, but when you read on this Act repeals The 

Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission Act, The Department of 

Health Act.  It amends The Prescription Drugs Act, repeals The 

Saskatchewan Health Insurance Act and The Tuberculosis 

Sanatoria and Hospitals Act. 

 

In other words I guess what we're seeing here, Madam 

Minister, is a trend that bothers many people in this province, 

namely that the substance abuse programs within this province 

are potentially in danger of being phased out.  I say that, 

Madam Minister, because you've been talking about 

amalgamating services and streamlining certain aspects of your 

department. 

 

But what this Bill 86 does, what it purports to do is to take 

away the independence of SADAC, and that is the fundamental 

statement I think that has to be made.  SADAC's independence 

is in dire jeopardy here.  The employees of SADAC are the 

ones that are telling me that.  I wouldn't say that on my own 

because I don't know enough about SADAC from my own 

experience to be able to make a statement like that . . . but 

when the employees of SADAC say that's what happening and 

they say please don't mention our names because there's only a 

few of us left and we need our jobs. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, we as an official opposition have been 

asking you questions in the past -- not in the recent past but a 

few months ago about SADAC -- pertaining to SADAC and 

such treatment centres as not only SADAC but the Whitespruce 

Youth Treatment Centre and also the Calder Centre.  And every 

time we have asked you questions about that, you have said, 

well just hold on; information is forthcoming. 

 

Well so far, Madam Minister, we have simply not been 

satisfied with your answers, and I might add that the employees 

of SADAC in particular are also not satisfied with your answer.  

They simply tell us what this Bill is going to be, is another nail 

in the coffin for addiction treatment in Saskatchewan.  It's not 

my words; that's the message that is being delivered to us from 

SADAC.  And I notice that one of your officials is the past 

CEO (chief executive officer) of SADAC, according to your 

introduction. 

 

So, Madam Minister, in this treatment process there has already 

been a significant reduction across the board in the treatment 

centre.  We know for example 

that $240,000 was cut to Myers House, and I have right here a 

Leader-Post article from July 25, 1991 where when we were 

contemplating doing this you as the opposition said, oh no, you 

cannot do that because those treatment centres are too 

significant.  They play too an important role in treating 

substance abuse.  As a matter of fact you told reporters, you 

told supporters of Myers House, as a government you said that 

the long-term plan is to keep the facility open until after the 

next election.  That's what you were telling them -- keep the 

facility open until after the next election and then they could 

hope that the NDP would win that election and restore funding. 

 

And I noticed the member there is beginning to blush because I 

will make the next quote where it was said, a promise that an 

NDP government would provide money to keep the facility 

open, was made at press conference two months ago by Regina 

Centre MLA Ned Shillington.  That's the quote, Madam 

Minister.  Yes, that's the quote. 

 

So that's probably why the supporters of Myers House voted 

for you, because you made that promise and they believed you.  

But then again you are also the same minister that said there 

will be no new taxes two years after we have been elected.  

And you, Madam Minister, said we'll spend more on health and 

we'll spend more on education.  That's why you folks are over 

there.  That's why you were elected.  You made those promises 

and the people believed you. 

 

Now I'm going to resist the temptation to become more 

political and pursue this because we could spend the rest of the 

evening doing that, so I will resist that.  But that point has to be 

made, Madam Minister, that you said, and your cabinet 

colleagues said, Myers House will be open because treatment 

of substance abuse is important to us and we will find the 

money.  That's what was said.  You can't retract that.  That's 

what was said. 

 

So having said that, Madam Minister, there was also another 

$1.1 million in treatment services that have been cut -- $1.1 

million.  You can refute the figure if you want to say it's 1.01, 

but that's an awful lot of money that is being cut, Madam 

Minister, and that's not being cut on administration.  That is 

being cut on treatment services, Madam Minister.  That's what 

I'm being told.  That cut of $1.1 million is on actual treatment 

services, front-line services that are being removed -- not to 

streamline the operation and cut administrative costs -- but 

actual treatment services.  And then we ask . . . wonder why the 

the folks out there and even the employees of SADAC are 

beginning to say, where is the priority of this government. 

 

They have told me that they fear a complete removal of 

addiction services in Saskatchewan.  Madam Minister, that's 

what SADAC employees are telling me.  Not me -- I'm not the 

one that's saying this -- it's the employees themselves, the 

front-line people who can sense and feel the throb of the 

essence of the program.  And they are extremely concerned. 



2080 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

Now if they are wrong, if I am wrong in purporting and 

transmitting this message to you, please get up then -- please 

get up -- because the real concern that we have is that you have 

an ulterior motive here in your rush to work on the deficit and 

that this will be another victim in your deficit restructuring.  

That SADAC is going to be gone. 

 

(2130) 

 

Because quite frankly, Madam Minister, that's what this Act 

does.  This Act destroys SADAC.  This Act destroys SADAC 

because it's no longer an entity on its own.  It's being absorbed 

by osmosis, or whatever process you want to describe, into the 

Department of Health.  And it's going to get lost in the shuffle.  

That is the concern, Madam Minister. 

 

Now again, if you can get up and tell me absolutely -- 

absolutely -- that the essence of SADAC, Whitespruce, is going 

to be . . . is going to remain, that it will continue, then this Bill 

is going to get very short shrift and we'll be going on to some 

other business in this legislature.  But I want an absolute 

commitment on your part that there be not a dollar reduction in 

services rendered to the people out there that need those kinds 

of services, whether it is SADAC or Whitespruce, but that that 

total commitment will continue.  Will you do that, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, Mr. Chair, just so that I can 

explain to the member, the rationale for bringing SADAC 

under the Department of Health is really twofold.  First of all 

there is an administrative saving of some 270,000 by the 

merger. 

 

Secondly, the health care reform policy is to coordinate and 

integrate services, which is what we are proposing to do with 

all health care services -- public health, mental health, all of the 

services.  We're proposing to coordinate and integrate them in a 

fashion that hasn't taken place before. 

 

I have repeatedly said since the summer of 1992 that addictions 

counselling, and I should say on the request of people in the 

field as I travelled throughout the province and talked to 

people, that addictions counselling would be part of the 

services delivered at a district level. 

 

And we want to be able to do that.  We want to be able to 

achieve that coordination of those services because it's very 

important that we provide a single point of entry for people in 

Saskatchewan rather than them having to access a physician 

and then perhaps a mental health worker and then finally they'll 

end up at a facility and some provision of addictions 

counselling. 

 

We are hoping through the coordination of services throughout 

the province that we can provide a better service for people, 

and alcohol and drug addiction counselling and treatment will 

be one of those services that we want to be able to access and 

provide more fully than what we have in the past. 

So the philosophy associated with it is twofold.  There are 

administrative savings but also it's part of the coordination of 

services.  We intend to be setting up a provincial advisory 

council within the Department of Health that will have 

representatives on it who will be setting policy directions and 

monitoring the delivery of addictions, drug and alcohol 

addiction, services and treatment throughout the province.  So 

it will be given important status in the Department of Health in 

order to make sure and preserve the priority of those services 

for Saskatchewan people. 

 

So it isn't just a question of bringing it into the Department of 

Health and forgetting about it.  That's not the intent.  The intent 

is, is to bring it in the Department of Health, to coordinate it 

more fully with other services so that we can make sure that 

we're providing a higher quality of service, and to profile it 

within the Department of Health. 

 

I think it's also important to note that SADAC has been directly 

responsible to the Minister of Health, and the Minister of 

Health and the officials from the Department of Health have 

assisted in the administering of the SADAC program in the 

past.  And what is happening here is not a reduction in their 

independence, but rather a profiling of the addictions 

counselling and making it clear that it is a health issue and 

giving it a high profile in the Department of Health. 

 

So the intent isn't to decrease independence or somehow 

belittle services and do away with them.  It isn't that at all.  It's 

the contrary. 

 

I do want to point out to the member opposite that there have 

been reductions in this area as well as in other areas in the 

health care budget.  So there are reductions in alcohol and 

addiction counsel that have been built into the budget and 

we've talked about them before.  The reason for that is that 

we're using our services at about a 70 per cent capacity.  And 

so there's been under-utilization of treatment services in the 

province, and we want to be able to analyse the services that 

are being provided and the services that are available and to 

move it to a capacity where we are using about 90 per cent of 

the services that are being delivered as opposed to the 70 per 

cent. 

 

That under-utilization costs the province about $1 million a 

year.  So it's very important that we maintain high quality 

addiction, alcohol and addiction treatment and counselling.  

And at the same time, we have to maximize the services that 

we're using and make sure that the under-utilization that's in the 

system is pinpointed and somehow dealt with. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So, Madam Minister, what you did in that 

expos is actually confirm the worst fears that I was talking 

about: that you are determined to cut down the budget that has 

been in the past as far as drug and alcohol abuse has been 

concerned. 

 

You say we have an under-utilization, that we're only utilizing 

70 per cent and you want to reduce that down, the 

under-utilization, to 90 per cent.  So that 



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2081 

 means a substantial amount of money less that you're going to 

be putting into it. 

 

So, Madam Minister, the first part of your question . . . or your 

answer, I was going to say, well that $270,000 you're 

purporting to save in administration by doing away with 

SADAC as a separate entity and rolling that into the 

Department of Health, I was going to suggest to you is a good 

start in spending more money on this problem that is 

throughout our province.  But now at the tail-end of your 

answer you said, oh no, well we're only utilizing 70 per cent. 

 

So, Madam Minister, are you telling me now that you're going 

to cut the substance abuse program by $270,000 and in addition 

cut more so that you can raise the utilization rate of the services 

available to 90 per cent?  Is that what you're saying, Madam 

Minister?  And exactly how many dollars less are you prepared 

to spend on substance abuse? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I think it's important to note . . . there's 

two points I want to make.  And that's, first of all, the member 

has said SADAC staff are telling him they're unhappy with this 

Bill.  We also have spoken to SADAC staff and there are a 

number of people who are very supportive of integration and 

addiction services with broader health reform.  And as I 

indicated to the member opposite, I heard that throughout the 

province.  Virtually every place I'd been there would be 

SADAC staff in the meeting or in the audience who would 

make the point that it was absolutely necessary that we 

integrate and coordinate those services.  So I think that's 

important. 

 

The member opposite should also understand that when we talk 

in terms of under-utilization, we're not necessarily talking 

about reducing services and not looking after as many people 

as we have in the past.  We're talking about utilizing the 

facilities that we have and the staff we have more fully because 

there's only 70 per cent utilization right now. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The minister made comment, Mr. Chairman, 

that she has talked to certain members of the staff at SADAC 

and they are gleeful about what you're purporting to do.  I 

would suggest to you, Madam Minister, that it would seem 

kind of ironic if one of the staff members was going to take you 

to task and chastise you face to face about the step that you 

were being . . . even contemplating.  And I think you realize, 

Madam Minister, that people meeting you face to face under 

those kinds of circumstances are not going to create a hassle for 

themselves by confronting you, and I think you understand that 

as well. 

 

Madam Minister, this Bill 86, in addition to the things that 

we've been talking about, gives you some rather sweeping 

powers because it's going to give you the right to do whatever 

you want, including cutting funding through the amounts of 

grants, subsidies, loans, charge levies, and the like. 

 

Madam Minister, considering that addiction treatment is vital to 

the well-being of Saskatchewan, 

Saskatchewan families, what assurance can you give these 

people that addiction treatment will remain the same in the 

province?  Can you give them any assurance that the scenario 

that I have outlined, that SADAC is dust, that it's going to be 

swallowed up within the tentacles of the massive Health 

department and it will be virtually impossible for anyone to 

maintain a grip as to what's happening in reality to the drug and 

alcohol abuse programs that we have . . .  

 

I asked you this at the outset of this, Madam Minister, and you 

skirted the question.  And I'll ask you that again. Will you 

commit to maintaining the programs that are present now and 

enhancing wherever possible and wherever the need is in the 

future? 

 

Because certainly, Madam Minister, the problem as it stands 

right now is not going to go away.  We know, and I'm sure that 

you recognize as a government, that the stress levels of many 

of our citizens is rising, and it's rising dramatically as we have 

economic and social pressures being put upon our citizens.  

And we know that a certain percentage of those citizens are 

going to seek relief from that pressure and that stress through 

other than the normal process, which is just simply to put a stiff 

upper lip and go forward.  And they're going to resort to some 

of the drugs that are available to relieve those pressures. 

 

So there is going to be an increased demand for these systems.  

And rather than cutting back and curtailing, Madam Minister, 

what we are being told is that the need is ever increasing.  And 

again, I want you to give that assurance that that support 

system will be in place. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite should be aware, as 

I indicated earlier, that there will be a provincial council within 

the Department of Health to profile drug and alcohol addiction 

services, and to make sure that these services are being 

delivered throughout the province in a proper fashion. 

 

And our commitment of course to the people of Saskatchewan 

is to improve alcohol and addiction services as we move 

through health reform.  And as I pointed out to the member 

opposite, there are people working in the field -- not people 

necessarily in administration -- but working in the field, the 

counsellors themselves, who have expressed enthusiasm about 

moving to a district system with coordinated and integrated 

services.  Those are the people working at the grass roots, Mr. 

Member. 

 

So I think that it's important to note that there is a feeling that if 

we coordinate and integrate services, that we can improve the 

quality of drug addiction and alcohol addiction services to the 

people. 

 

We also want to move to a more community-based system.  We 

believe that we can provide better services in the community in 

many instances, rather than under-utilizing some of our 

institutions.  And so that will be part of the health reform and 

part of the analysis that will be done in the months to come as 

to where we can improve upon those services and how 



2082 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

we can improve upon the services that are available to people 

who require this treatment. 

 

So our commitment is not to maintain status quo blindly but to 

improve services for Saskatchewan people.  And there is a 

general recognition by counsellors in the field that a more 

coordinated, integrated system and in some instances more 

community-based services would improve the quality of 

services to people.  We still have to maintain in-patient 

treatment services as well, and we need a stronger combination 

of the two systems in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, before making these 

changes did you consult with Alcoholics Anonymous to see 

what their feelings were on this issue? 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- People who support the philosophy of 

AA (Alcoholics Anonymous) have been involved in the 

consultations and support the integration process.  So there has 

been consultation on an ongoing basis with people who are 

supportive of the philosophy of AA. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You didn't answer my question . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Then I don't understand AA if you said you 

answered my question.  If I understand AA, would you 

expound upon . . . you talked to people who are supportive of 

the AA.  To me that means you didn't talk to the AA but 

indirectly people who support it. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The AA as a group do not come forward 

with political or public opinions.  They don't get involved in 

that and therefore you can't go to that group and say, what's 

your opinion on this?  But you can consult with individuals of 

that community and that has been done on an ongoing basis. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I appreciate that explanation, Madam 

Minister.  Did you consult with any other professionals, 

Madam Minister, that deal with addictions of this kind on a 

regular basis?  And I refer specifically to perhaps 

representatives from Whitespruce Youth Centre or the Calder 

Centre or the Pioneer Lodge.  Did you consult with any of these 

groups, Madam Minister, and did they all agree to every aspect 

of your promotion? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, the department advises me 

that there have been a number of discussions with people such 

as the chairman of SADAC, and I'm advised that she supports 

the proposal.  The Calder Centre, that's our staff that, the 

Department of Health staff, in effect that's at Calder Centre, 

and it's our understanding that it's supported in that regard. 

 

There's also been an announcement made, as the member 

opposite knows, on this issue, as the amalgamations that were 

going to take place, and that announcement was made prior to 

the budget coming 

down.  And we have had as far as I'm aware, no negative input 

with respect to the proposal.  The hon. member, Associate 

Minister of Health, and Ms. Danni Boyd, attended an 

interagency meeting on the issue of the amalgamation and the 

agencies there did not express concern about what we were 

doing other than to ask how they were going to get involved at 

the board level because they wanted to get on to that as quickly 

as possible, and wanted to be able to make a contribution at that 

level. 

 

So the . . . I don't believe there were discussions with Pioneer 

Lodge, but it's my understanding that there have been ongoing 

discussions with many people involved in the alcohol and drug 

addiction services, such as members of the Whitespruce board 

-- I'm not sure they talked to all members, but some of them -- 

the Calder Centre people, the interagency meeting that took 

place and so on. 

 

We have not determined any major objections to the move.  

There obviously will always be some people who object to a 

change, but as far as we've been able to determine, it is viewed 

as being positive by most people that we have talked to. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You see, Madam Minister, the concern that 

many people have is that in your desire and your rush for 

deficit control you're ready to do almost anything.  And this is 

the concern that we're getting out of Whitespruce and SADAC. 

 

But, Madam Minister, you just finished telling me that the 

director of SADAC is in total agreement with what you're 

saying, with what your plans are.  That surprises me because 

that's not the information that we've been getting from the staff 

of SADAC.  So again I say, that surprises me. 

 

And I want you to understand, Madam Minister, that there are 

many, many studies I'm sure that you are aware of and your 

staff is aware of, that stress the significance and the importance 

to continue the best level of services required for substance 

abuse programs, studies, Madam Minister, from doctors, 

researchers, James Million, Frances Hamm, the National 

Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, and Canada's Drug 

Strategy Baseline Report.  And all of those have one common 

theme, Madam Minister, that if addiction treatment centres are 

not equipped to give proper addiction care, there is going to be 

a long-term cost both in physical, human, and monetary issues, 

that the long-term cost is not going to be cost-effective. 

 

And too often we've seen examples of that, of your 

government, where in your desire to save money you are 

prepared to do things that in the long term and in the long run 

are going to be counter-productive.   And you're going to have 

more accidents, you're going to have more family violence, and 

you're going to have reduced productivity and the resultant 

crime rate increasing, Madam Minister. 

 

As far as Whitespruce is concerned, my understanding, Madam 

Minister, is that Whitespruce 



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2083 

had a surplus of close to half a million dollars last year.  Now 

the employees of SADAC have already informed the 

opposition that this money did not in any way go back to 

improving the facility whatsoever.  In fact, the money 

disappeared.  Could you explain for me please just exactly what 

happened to that amount of money?  What happened to that 

amount of money? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Yes, there was a surplus I'm advised, of a 

half a million dollars last year because the facility was being 

under-utilized.  So the money isn't taken back.  What happens 

is the grant this year is reduced by that amount to reconcile it 

with the utilization that took place last year. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Right.  So if they save money then you cut 

back next year and bring it into the system. 

 

You say it's under-utilized.  Just out of curiosity then, Madam 

Minister, could you explain the referral system to me.  Is it the 

same today as it was two years ago, three years, or five years 

ago?  On what basis are patients referred to that centre? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, with respect to the referrals, 

what has happened is the Department of Health and officials 

from the Department of Health worked with SADAC to make 

sure that young people were being assessed more appropriately 

than what occurred in the past throughout the whole system, 

and also that Whitespruce would be more responsive to the 

needs of young people. 

 

And as a result of that, they went from 17 admissions for a 

30-bed facility, like is being funded for a 30-bed facility, to 23 

to 24 admissions for a 30-bed facility.  So referrals, there has 

been a change in the referral policy, I'm advised by the 

Department of Health, that has improved the system and has 

actually increased the number of admissions to Whitespruce. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, the number of drug and 

alcohol related admissions, as you have just indicated, are on 

the rise and that's been the case for several years -- the number 

for drug and alcohol related admissions.  And you just 

confirmed that.  How many people were admitted into 

Whitespruce last year on an in-patient basis and then also on an 

out-patient basis? 

 

I have a series of questions here, Madam Minister, that are kind 

of rapid-fire, informational type, so I will be able to base my 

judgement on your answers. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We don't have those numbers here at this 

point and we will get you that information.  We think it's gone 

from about 17 to 23 or 24 but that is without seeing the actual 

data.  And we can verify that or give you the corrected data if 

that's not accurate.  The other thing is there is no out-patient 

services out of Whitespruce. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- All right.  I'm kind of surprised that you 

wouldn't have that information being that that whole issue is 

kind of controversial and I suspect you were anticipating 

questions along this line.  And I will 

take you for your word, Madam Minister, that you will be 

supplying that information for me. 

 

Madam Minister, how many individuals were admitted into the 

Calder Centre in Saskatoon also?  And I'll ask you the same 

question on an in-patient, out-patient basis. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We'll get you that information. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- How many were admitted into the Pine Lodge 

on an in-patient, out-patient basis. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We'll get you that too. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I'm going to have a very difficult time 

here summarizing this issue tonight if I haven't got the basis for 

doing that summary.  Are there any other alcohol or drug 

addiction treatment centres in Saskatchewan that I haven't 

mentioned that I'm not aware of that you may be aware of, and 

how many were admitted to those, if any, on an in-patient, 

out-patient basis. 

 

(2200) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There are 33 different programs and 

rather than reading them off in the legislature, I'll get the 

department to send that information over to you.  But I have 

several sheets of paper here on the different programs that are 

available. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, are these programs that are 

funded at least partially by your department?  And also indicate 

to me that if there are this many programs, what is the basis for 

the referral to these various institutions?  And then yes, I would 

appreciate you sending over that list. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I am advised that these are all funded by 

the government.  As to the referrals, it is a whole range of 

anything is referred to them.  It could be a self-referral, it could 

be a family referral, it could be a referral by someone in the 

workplace, it could be an employee assistance referral, it could 

be any of these referrals to these places.  And as I indicated 

earlier, it's all funded by the government. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm sorry, Madam Minister, I didn't catch the 

last phrase that you talked about.  Madam Minister, you said 

there were 33 of these different agencies to which people could 

be referred.  On what basis is it determined that this person 

goes there, and this person goes there, and this person goes 

there?  Who makes that determination?  Is this by the 

individual, by the self-referral, or by a doctor, by a friend, by 

the department officials?  Who makes those determinations? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- With respect to the out-patient services.  

It will . . . there isn't any specific referral system.  It's anyone 

who shows up there, referred in any manner. 

 

With respect to in-patient services, there is an assessment done 

at the out-patient service or through 



2084 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

an employee assistant counsellor or individual who does the 

assessment, and then they would be referred to an in-patient 

facility when that assessment is made.  I'm advised that the one 

exception is St. Louis, and in that case you need a second 

impaired driving offence in order to be referred there, and the 

courts are involved in that process. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, what I would like you to do 

is to confirm for me your commitment to addiction services, to 

those people who are suffering from many of the substance 

abuse problems.  Will you confirm, Madam Minister, that you 

recognize that any short-term cost savings have inherently the 

danger of being a long-term cost, that money saved now 

without adequately addressing the problem is going to be 

ineffective, is going to be counter-productive, and will indeed 

increase the hazards to the welfare of many, many people in 

this province. 

 

I've been trying to, over the course of the evening, to get a 

handle on the numbers that we're talking about, and I really 

haven't been that effective in determining perhaps the number 

of alcoholics that are facing a problem in this province or other 

drug abuse people.  You have been indicating to me and trying 

to give the impression to the people of this province that it's not 

really such a big problem, that you're overstocked, that we've 

got more facilities and more personnel on hand willing to 

combat this problem than we have patients.  And I don't agree 

with that and I don't think the people of this province buy into 

that as well. 

 

I could ask you the question about those 33 facilities.  I didn't 

know there were 33 facilities . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . oh 

programs -- pardon me -- perhaps.  What type . . . You know, 

when I was minister of Social Services I was very often 

accused by you people in opposition of that day that we had 

some good programs out there but we did our best to hide them.  

Oh yes, that's exactly what we were being accused of.  Because 

if we advertise them, then the uptake would be greater. 

 

So I'm going to turn the tables on you right now and say, are 

you doing your best in promoting the services that are available 

or are you doing your best to hide them in this shuffle so that 

the uptake will even be less last year simply because people are 

not aware of the programs that they can access. 

 

That's a concern that's been . . . and I'm repeating it because 

that's the most repeated concern that we are hearing as an 

opposition, that what the government is trying to do now is 

save money.  And they're going to put SADAC, and they're 

going to put it under the envelope of the Department of Health 

which is a monstrosity -- as you will admit -- of bureaucratic 

nightmare and just get lost in the shuffle.  And thereby you're 

going to be able to save $10 million.  You talk about saving 

$10 million.  That's a concern that these people have.  I don't 

have that concern because I'm not familiar enough about it. 

 

So again, as my critic role, I'm passing on the concerns that are 

given to me by the people out there.  I'd like 

you to address that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, I indicated earlier and I'll 

indicate again: through district health reform, we will be 

making this information more available to communities.  

District boards will have to go to their communities and the 

residents within their district and provide a status report on the 

health status of people.  That will include the whole issue of 

addictions counselling and treatment. 

 

So through health reform we will be profiling these services 

and allowing for more input by communities.  I think that can 

only enhance people's awareness.  And the member had asked 

the question about people don't know about these programs.  

That's the whole purpose of health reform, is to make it easier 

for people to access the programs that are there.  And this will 

be in the hands of communities and I have every confidence 

that they will make sure that residents of their communities will 

access the programs when needed. 

 

The Department of Health will be profiling addictions 

treatment through a provincial advisory council in the 

department that will give it that kind of profile in the 

department.  It isn't going to simply get stuck in the department 

and lost.  It's going to be given a profile position, as I indicated. 

 

So the member's quite accurate; we are committed to 

improving the quality of services through health reform and 

through profiling it in the Department of Health and making it 

clearly a health issue.  Because that's what it is, is a health 

issue. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I don't disagree with that at all.  I think 

you're right on that one, Madam Minister. 

 

So let me then just be crystal clear so that everyone who is 

listening and has a concern on this issue understands fully what 

you are saying.  You've just told us now that you're going to do 

the best through this health reform of yours to increase the 

profile of services available.  Is that correct?  I think I 

understood you to say you're going to be increasing the profile 

so that the communities out there will know what kind of 

programs are available. 

 

Then, Madam Minister, I can only assume that if you will be 

increasing the profile of programs available, that the uptake 

will be greater; that we will have more people with alcohol 

problems and drug problems coming forward and saying, I 

need treatment, or their friends will be identifying individuals 

that need treatment.  So not that we're going to have more 

"drunks" out there, but rather there will be a greater 

identification of those that need this kind of service. 

 

So then I ask you, Madam Minister, is it not a logical 

conclusion that instead of cutting $500,000 off that you save in 

Whitespruce because of under-utilization, that you shouldn't 

have taken that away?  Because your anticipation should be 

that because of the higher profile there will be more coming 

forward that need this help.  So why would you cut?  Why 

would you cut 



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2085 

that funding by that amount?  That is a question that I want you 

to undertake. 

 

And certainly by what you have said and because of the higher 

profile that you have just identified, the need for SADAC will 

be there.  So that you will be able to get up now in response to 

my comments and say categorically: Mr. Member, we will not 

be doing anything to dismantle SADAC because it's needed.  

So I'm looking forward to that reassurance. 

 

And, Madam Minister, further, I think the people of this 

province are looking forward to your assurance that 

Whitespruce will continue and that there's no danger of you 

shutting down Whitespruce.  And I compliment you on that. 

 

So, Madam Minister, with those comments and with those 

assurances that indeed you are committed, you are committed 

to maintaining a high quality service that we have, and not only 

maintaining the services that we have available now but 

enhancing them -- because you've made the commitment that 

you're going to make your programs that are available, make 

them more readily available, make them more accessible, 

profile them higher so that people will be able to access them 

more readily and be aware of them quite frankly, Madam 

Minister -- so if you're giving me those assurances and if you're 

giving the people of this province those assurances, I want to 

take this opportunity to compliment you. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, I want to once again reiterate 

that by bringing the control and participation closer to the 

community level, I believe that we will increase the profile and 

enhance services in this way.  The community people will 

become more involved in the delivery of the services and bring 

them to the attention of people within the community, that there 

will be early intervention in many cases where it doesn't occur 

now.  And when there is early intervention, it is less costly to 

the system over the long haul.  And it's more effective and 

provides a higher quality of service for people.  So if we can 

raise the profile at the community level, through district boards, 

it becomes less costly and more effective. 

 

The services can be of a more community-based nature if we're 

involved more in early intervention.  And we see that, of 

course, through out the entire health care area, that there is a 

need to review institutional services and move toward more 

community-based services.  The need has been illustrated time 

and time again that that real possibility exists in the health care 

system.  And it also exists in the area with respect to addictions 

treatment and counselling. 

 

So we will be doing a review of all adult institutional services 

in determining whether there's a more appropriate way to 

deliver these services within the community.  It's important to 

maintain a strong, in-patient treatment component.  But it is 

also important for us to review the services that are being 

provided in that regard.  And I made that statement earlier. 

I do believe, however, that through early intervention -- and 

that is the objective -- we can provide a better service for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wasn't going to 

get up again but I have to address your latest comments, 

Madam Minister, because it's only a lawyer that could put the 

terminology in the way in which you just presented yourself 

and the message, and the message that you have clearly 

demonstrated.  I won't say double-talk, but what you were 

doing is very diplomatically delivering this message.  This is 

the message that you just delivered.  Whitespruce is gone; 

SADAC is gone.  And I say that, Madam Minister, I say that 

because you are emphasizing the community-based services.  

Well what does that tell us?  You're not going to be shipping 

anybody . . . shipping is not the right word. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Sending. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Sending isn't the right word, either.  Okay, for 

a moment here I'm lost for words about getting people to go to 

these treatment centres.  Referring them to the treatment 

centres is what I was looking for. 

 

(2215) 

 

You used the terminology, for example, review the institutional 

services.  Well that can only mean one thing.  That can only 

mean one thing, Madam Minister.  So if you're going to close 

Whitespruce, why don't you just get up and say those facilities 

are gone; we don't really have that kind of need any more, or at 

least it's not paramount in our minds.  So let's quit this 

double-talk and be forthright and just simply say the way things 

are, Madam Minister. 

 

Or -- and you're smiling and laughing, having a great time -- 

then get up and say, Mr. Member, you're totally off the mark; 

those institutions, that kind of service is going to remain 

because it's an essential component of the overall treatment 

centre.  Make that commitment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I have told the member opposite that we 

are fully committed to improving the quality of services that 

are available, and the member opposite laughs at that.  And I 

want to say this, that we are going to be reviewing all adult 

institutional services as we are doing throughout the entire 

health care sector. 

 

We are reviewing institutional services and not to do that, to be 

black and white, as the member opposite is, which is keep all 

the institutional services and don't change anything and then 

you're okay, but if you suggest you're going to do any kind of a 

review, obviously you're closing everything.  You either keep it 

all or you close it all -- black and white -- that's where the 

member opposite is coming from. 

 

The only way we are going to be responsible to the public is to 

do the kind of review of institutional services throughout the 

entire sector, not just with 



2086 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

respect to addictions counselling but in the acute care centre as 

well.  That has been ongoing over a period of several years 

now, I might add, and we are continuing that process and that 

will be done in this area as well. 

 

The commitment is to improve the quality of services, to try 

and deal with more early intervention, but it doesn't mean that 

we're going to close our eyes to the institutional issues, turn a 

blind eye and walk away from any of the tough decisions that 

may have to be made as a result. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I don't think, Madam Minister, that you have 

reassured very many people tonight. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to on division. 

 

Clauses 3 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 53 -- An Act respecting Natural Resources 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 42 -- An Act respecting the Creation and 

Supervision of certain Crown Corporations 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 85 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 

Care Insurance Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 86 -- An Act to amend Certain Health Statutes and 

to repeal Certain Other Health Statutes 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move the Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:24 p.m. 

 


