




















































Hansard: May 06, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1503 

 May 6, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 38 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 38 — An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before 5 o'clock, 

Mr. Speaker, I think I spoke about 10 minutes and I'll just give 

a few highlights of what I said. I'm sure the members would 

like me just to repeat just a little bit. 

 

I said it wasn't necessary to have Bill 38 brought before this 

House; it wasn't necessary at all. I wasn't a bit surprised, Mr. 

Speaker, that this Bill came before the House, of course, 

because when the NDP (New Democratic Party) won the 

election in '91 I've been looking for it last session and this 

session. It's just that I thought maybe it would come in in a 

little different manner than what it did. 

 

When I closed off, Mr. Speaker, I was just in the middle of a 

paragraph, so I'll go back and I'll just continue on. I'll start back 

on that paragraph and repeat that bit so it will flow properly in 

Hansard. 

 

Likewise with employee health insurance benefits for same-sex 

partners, the government, a court, cannot hold that 

discrimination is unlawful in this province and also hold that 

benefits will only be paid to partners of the opposite sex. 

Denying them those of the same sex, that is discrimination 

which is unlawful. If discrimination on the basis of sexual 

orientation is unlawful, then one cannot consistently and 

logically hold that marriage or spousal benefits can only be 

available to members of the opposite sex. To do so would be 

blatant and obvious case of discrimination based on sexual 

orientation and thus unlawful. 

 

And we don't know what sexual orientation means, Mr. 

Speaker, because they've never said what it means. They've 

never told us what sexual orientation means. In every Bill I've 

ever seen in 15 years in this House, there's always the words 

that are more technical, always explains the meaning of that 

word. But no, they didn't do it with sexual orientation. So 

prohibiting discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation 

leads directly, if not immediately, by logical reasoning 

following this discrimination thinking, to provisions for 

homosexual marriages and same-sex benefits. The famous 

Mossop case recently ruled on by the Supreme Court, February 

25, 1993 — and that's just a couple months ago — and the 

Haig and Birch case are clear examples of homosexual activists 

demanding family status and spousal benefits on the basis that 

to not grant such would be discrimination on the basis of sexual 

orientation. 

In a third well-publicized Ontario case, Beaulne and Layland, 

two men were seeking to be married. They argued that they are 

entitled to equal benefits and equal protection of the marriage 

law, and to construct marriage as being exclusively 

heterosexual institution is a denial of equal benefit of the law. 

Dissenting Madam Justice Suzanne Greer agreed, stating that 

restricting marriage to opposite sex couples was discrimination 

against homosexuals. 

 

Pro-homosexual groups argued a family is whatever the 

participants choose to define as a family, even if there is no 

habitation, and to deny this is to discriminate against 

homosexuals. An Ontario human rights tribunal recently read 

out an opposite sex definition of marital status in the Ontario 

code because it was discriminatory and ordered the Ontario 

government to pay full employment benefits to same-sex 

partners. 

 

Also 79 Ontario laws are being rewritten to be consistent with 

this decision — changing the definition of spouse and family to 

include same-sex partners — laws dealing with adoption, 

division of property, custody, wills, and estates, etc. Amending 

the Human Rights Code to prohibit discrimination on the basis 

of sexual orientation could and will lead very quickly and very 

simply, if pushed, to homosexual marriages, employment, 

health benefits for same sex partners. I know, Mr. Speaker, that 

the majority of the people on the government side don't agree 

with that, but if they would go to their own lawyers even and 

get the Bill interpreted, they would know that I am right. 

 

Another quote from the Minister of Justice. Premier T. C. 

Douglas and Prime Minister John Diefenbaker "were great 

champions of human rights." 

 

Mr. Speaker, human rights, maybe; homosexual rights, no way. 

Tommy Douglas would have nothing to do . . . And that's why 

probably the now Premier . . . the now Premier, the then 

attorney general in 1970, wouldn't bring in sexual orientation 

into that Bill because Tommy Douglas was still living and he 

wouldn't allow it. 

 

 . . . human rights legislation must . . . be amended from time 

to time to meet our changing social values. 

 

That's what the minister says now. Changing social values. 

Many, the majority of people believe in values that do not 

change from generation to generation. Principles of family 

truth, religion, Christianity do not change. Most people believe 

what was wrong yesterday is wrong today and will be wrong 

tomorrow. 

 

The Minister of Justice, another quote: 

 

 . . . our social values . . . are not frozen and stagnant . . . our 

understanding broadens and deepens. We become more 

tolerant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my comment, changing social values. 



1504 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

And he says again: 

 

 This . . . legislation . . . strikes chords of deeply held social 

beliefs and prejudice. 

 

To oppose special rights for homosexual amendments has 

nothing whatsoever to do with prejudice. Prejudice is 

unreasonable, without reason, ugly. To oppose restriction of 

freedom of speech, freedom of religion, educational programs, 

affirmative action programs, gag laws, extension of benefits, 

homosexual marriage is not prejudice but common sense. The 

people who oppose Bill 38 are not prejudiced bigots which the 

minister appears to be calling them. If anything the minister 

should apologize for insulting the large number of fair-minded 

Saskatchewan people who oppose Bill 38 who are not 

prejudiced. I don't think it's right, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Minister of Justice and two or three more in the front row are 

calling me a bigot and prejudiced because they're saying that to 

me. When they say it to all people that believe against this Bill, 

they're calling us bigots, and I don't appreciate that. 

 

I have . . . The Minister of Justice said it on radio the other day, 

and he has said it many times. He said the other day that, Mr. 

Speaker, the day before yesterday, he asked people not to sign 

the petition. But if they did and they had enough votes, the law 

says there'd have to be a vote. And it would cost too much 

money, and we won't honour it anyway. Now who's 

discriminating on who, Mr. Speaker? That's discrimination of 

the worst kind. I've never heard of such a thing. 

 

If the people of Saskatchewan spoke in a plebiscite, then the 

government must listen. And I think they will listen because I 

think that the back-benchers and the good-thinking people on 

the other side will see that three or four people that have 

hoodwinked you on the facts of this Bill . . . I think it will 

happen. 

 

"The right to equal use of public transit by blacks . . ." — that's 

the quote from the minister. And I'm saying it has nothing 

whatsoever to do with homosexual rights, a flawed and 

inappropriate analogy. General Colin Powell, chairman of the 

U.S. (United States) Joint Chiefs of Staff and the 

highest-ranking black man in U.S. military history, does not 

like the comparison of discrimination against blacks with that 

of homosexuals. How do you compare blacks and homosexuals 

together? That's just like comparing whites and homosexuals 

together. It's terrible. He says that skin colour is a 

non-behavioural characteristic. 

 

Homosexuality is perhaps the most profound of human 

characteristics. Comparison of the two is convenient but invalid 

argument. The minister quotes again: 

 

 . . . legislation which is based squarely on our traditions of 

tolerance, fairness, and understanding to promote recognition 

of the inherent dignity and equal rights of all the members of 

the human family." 

My comment: to object to Bill 38 is not to be intolerant, unfair, 

and irrational. All people are born with inherent dignity but not 

all behaviour is dignified. There is nothing dignified about 

homosexual behaviour. He states again, "Our starting point is 

to eliminate wrongful discrimination." I say: does that mean 

that there is wrongful discrimination and just or reasonable 

discrimination? 

 

The minister quotes again: 

 

 . . . Code provides protection to persons who, because of 

certain characteristics . . . historical disadvantage, or 

vulnerability to political or social prejudice." 

 

Response: code protects certain characteristics not behaviours. 

Prejudice again not the point. The thousands, even hundreds of 

thousands of Saskatchewan residents who oppose Bill 38 are 

not prejudiced — quite a patronizing statement. If reasonable 

people happen to disagree with the minister, they are 

prejudiced. And I say again that I am very disappointed in the 

minister's saying that we're prejudiced. 

 

A quote from the minister again, "most people of this province 

strongly reject discrimination." Discrimination simply means 

wise choices is my point, separating one from the other and 

analysing. All law discriminates between acceptable and 

unacceptable behaviour. This is the basis of all law. This is a 

foolish statement — law discriminates between murders or 

robbers and law-abiding citizens. 

 

Most people strongly reject Bill 38, and more would reject if 

they knew what it will do. Most people in this province reject 

special rights for homosexuals. Most people in this province 

reject the homosexual agenda that the NDP has been taken 

captive by, and the legislation of the agenda of the fringe, 

special-interest group. 

 

". . . there remains a minority who out of fear or intolerance or 

simple misunderstanding . . . That's another statement by the 

minister. My response: to disapprove of homosexual behaviour 

is not the same as fear and intolerance. This sounds just like 

Egale's irrational rantings as in their February letter. 

 

Another statement from the minister: the most significant 

amendment — that's right — has generated some controversy. 

Sure has. Get the hint? "The protection that is extended is a 

very limited but a very important protection". My response: the 

minister is misleading the people of this province, looking at 

sections 14, 25, and 47, fundamental law implications. This 

Bill extends much more than what the minister is saying it 

does. 

 

Hypothetical example: lesbian fired. Pretty extreme example 

designed to emotionally sway public sympathy. 

 

Point one: that is all we are talking about. "A job and a 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1505 

home." That's what the minister says. That's all we're talking 

about — job and a home. Right. And section 14, gag law, 

section 25, educational programs, section 47, affirmative action 

programs, same-sex benefits, homosexual marriages, parental 

choice in who teaches their children, effect on school 

curriculum. 

 

The minister is misleading the people of this province to think 

that this Bill is much more moderate and harmless than it is. 

 

The minister states again, point two: 

 

 The Bill does not confer rights at all, it merely prohibits 

wrongful discrimination. To suggest that it creates special 

rights is to profoundly misunderstand the scope and the 

function of human rights legislation. 

 

 . . . the right to work free from discrimination is not a special 

right. To rent an apartment . . . The plain fact is that these 

amendments do not create any special rights at all. They do 

not create any extraordinary legal status. They seek only to 

eliminate discrimination. 

 

Again, that last paragraph was the remarks of the minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my response. Section 14, right. To silence your 

opponents is a special right. To force a particular employer to 

hire you or particular landlord to rent to you, or be charged 

because of the sexual orientation is a special right. Now that is 

a special right. To be the only group whose immoral behaviour 

is protected by law is a special right protected from the natural 

consequences of an immoral lifestyle. To prohibit parents from 

objecting to homosexual teachers in their children's classroom 

is a special right. To classify a teacher's immoral lifestyle as 

irrelevant. Only sexual orientation is a special right. 

 

The section 25, educational programs, and section 47, 

affirmative action programs, are special rights. And promotion 

of the homosexual lifestyle. To eliminate discriminate on the 

basis of sexual orientation leads to special rights, rights that 

others in society do not have. Adulterers, homosexuals, to be 

the only ones protected is a special right, not available to 

others. 

 

To specifically recognize homosexuals in the code is special 

rights. Special recognition is the law. In the law, a distinction 

in the law, is a special right. 

 

Another point from the minister. Point three: 

 

 We can't ignore the similar developments in human rights 

legislation in other provinces . . . and at the federal level. 

 

Similar legislation introduced federally. So what? My response. 

So what if other provinces have amended their codes. Doesn't 

mean we have to. Public attention, information in these 

provinces were scarce. 

If people would have known what was being passed and its 

implications and seen the results that we now see, many would 

not have been amended. 

 

(1915) 

 

The federal government is not going to amend the federal code. 

You can look at The Globe . . . see Globe article, A44. 

 

Another quote from the minister: 

 

 . . . not to afford the protection of human rights legislation to 

groups that have been subjected to considerable and blatant 

discrimination undermines the very integrity of these laws. 

 

My response, quite the opposite, Mr. Speaker. To protect 

immoral behaviour, homosexuality in the code, as compared to 

morally neutral birth characteristics, undermines the integrity 

of these laws. The very legitimate protection offered to black 

people, Chinese people, is diluted because of this amendment. 

Public support for these important laws crumbles. 

 

Shame on them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again he quotes: 

 

 . . . this is a fundamental human rights issue. 

 

He's not right. It is a moral issue. It is a freedom issue. It is a 

"thought police" issue. 

 

Another quote from the minister: 

 

 If we do not protect this group, how will we proceed in the 

future when other groups are singled out for their particular 

characteristics and are denied full participation in our 

society? To leave one group beyond the pale sets a very 

dangerous precedent. 

 

My point is, if you protect homosexuality, how can you 

consistently deny another group protection for their immoral 

behaviour? To specifically recognize one group in the code 

based on the behaviour, especially immoral behaviour, sets a 

danger precedent. How can the government deny similar 

protection to other groups in the future — adulterers, foul 

mouths, liars. Where will this end? 

 

Another point from the minister: 

 

 . . . a recent Ontario court ruling . . . the federal government 

was told it must amend its law to comply with the charter. 

 

My point. The courts are not to dictate to the elected 

representatives what the laws are to be. They are to apply the 

laws but not make them. The people . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . That's correct. They are to apply the laws but not make 

them. You must listen to the people. The people in democracy 

through their elected officials make the laws, not the courts. 

The 



1506 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

courts don't make the laws. And what you're doing here is just 

a cop-out. They're saying, Mr. Speaker, they're saying what, 

what? — to me as if they make these laws. I guess they got the 

power to make them, but they're supposed to make them 

through the people. But this government has chose to go a 

different way and not listen to the people. That's why they don't 

want plebiscites or petitions. 

 

Point four the minister makes: ". . . legislation does not make a 

value judgement about the homosexual lifestyle"; ". . . does not 

speak to the question of individual acceptance of homosexual 

behaviour. It does nothing to promote homosexuality." 

 

The minister is absolutely wrong, and he knows he's wrong, 

and that's the problem. If the minister would have just have 

stood in your caucus and explained this whole Bill to them, to 

all you people, you would agree with me. And if you find out 

. . . time will find out that everything that I'm saying in here is 

fact. 

 

Another quote: the government simply does not believe the Bill 

will contribute to a breakdown of family values or traditional 

family lifestyle. The acceptance, promotion, condoning of 

homosexuality goes against the most basic of traditional family 

values and is very offensive to those who hold these 

common-sense values. 

 

The minister's remark again: 

 

 First, there is nothing in the Bill that changes the traditional 

definition of who can be considered as married. In plain 

terms, the legislation does not recognize homosexual 

marriages. 

 

My response, as explained on page 1, this is simply not true. To 

outlaw discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation stops 

the government, a court, from holding that marriage is only 

between a man and a woman. This is discrimination; it's now 

unlawful. To deny marriage privileges of two people of the 

same sex and not to two people of the opposite sex is 

discrimination and is not allowable. It's being proved, is noted 

page 1, in the most prominent Supreme Court cases today. 

 

You don't have to pay any attention to me, my friends in this 

Assembly, all you've got to do is just read the court cases in 

Canada. Don't just sit there looking like you're hearing 

something for the first time. You all know it, but you don't 

want to admit it. Just do such, and you'll find out. 

 

Another remark: 

 

 I should note an important exception . . . permits 

discrimination in one circumstance. 

 

My answer: I thought discrimination was unlawful in this 

province. Another contradiction. If some forms of 

discrimination are allowed, why not others? Home owner 

renting one suite to homosexuals, why is discrimination 

acceptable in this case, but not in others? If discrimination on 

the basis of . . . is so evil, 

why specifically and purposely allow it here? And why allow 

with one suite and not with two? 

 

I mean I can't understand this, and this is what the minister said 

from his second-reading speech, Mr. Speaker. He says if it's 

one person in a home, they don't have to take a homosexual or 

lesbian person in. But if they've got two or three or more, why 

does two or three or more make it right? If it's right, then the 

one person should be forced to do it. It's just not consistent. 

 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

  . . . nothing in the Bill that touches on the content of school 

curricula. The rights of parents as they relate to educational 

programs in our school system will not be affected by these 

changes. 

 

This is not true, Mr. Speaker. Letter section (e) stated that 

lesbianism is an irrelevant personal characteristic, in regards to 

a teacher in the public school system. Parents have no grounds, 

now, to object to a lesbian teaching their children . . . must 

accept, unlawful to discriminate. 

 

Further the Bill opens the door for curriculum like the Toronto 

Board of Education sexual orientation, lesbianism, 

homosexuality, and homophobia. To not allow it in the schools, 

to refuse to teach it, to object to it as a parent will now be 

discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, which is now 

unlawful. Some homosexuality-promoting curriculum is the 

logical and direct extension of section 25, educational 

programs. 

 

Another comment the minister made: 

 

 Legislation alone cannot eliminate prejudice . . . but some 

moral goals can be expressed in legal terms. 

 

My comment: prejudice has nothing to do with this issue. 

Reasonable people can have very legitimate objections to the 

homosexual lifestyle that have nothing whatsoever to do with 

prejudice. And frankly, you are offending the thousands and 

thousands of people of this province who object to Bill 38 by 

calling them prejudiced. Some moral goals, I thought, that were 

a human rights issue only and not a moral issue. 

 

Then he states, the minister: fear or hatred: 

 

  . . . this common thread of fear or hatred lies at the root of 

discrimination against homosexuals. 

 

My answer: what an insult to the people of this province. You 

are now calling the vast majority of the people in this province 

who oppose Bill 38 fearmongers, full of hatred, prejudiced. 

 

Another comment from him, the minister: 

 

 This legislation gives voice to society's 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1507 

rejection of the passive acceptance of prejudice and wrongful 

discrimination . . . an outright rejection of discrimination in all 

of its forms. 

 

Society's rejection — Saskatchewan society is rejecting Bill 38. 

The government has no mandate whatsoever from the people 

on this issue. 

 

When he's calling people prejudiced, he's calling myself 

prejudiced and calling me a bigot. He's calling my preacher in 

my home town of Davidson, he's saying that about him. He's 

calling all the ministers in this province and their followers, 

they're calling them bigots and prejudiced. And that's not right, 

Mr. Speaker. That's not right of the minister to do this. 

 

I've been involved with the person that they call . . . very 

clearly, they say that Mr. Hassett, head of the coalition of the 

family, I've had ministers tell me that the man is crazy and 

there's something wrong with him. By saying that you're saying 

that to all the fundamentalists in this province and all the 

followers that back him, who are most of the Catholic people in 

this province and many others — thousands of good, moral 

people. 

 

Many of you people are saying this about Mr. Hassett and you 

shouldn't do it. He put this book out in the '91 election called 

The Real Issues. I went and bought . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Yes, somebody from Bengough-Milestone, the member 

says, oh yes. Well I'll tell you I attached my name to that book, 

sent out 5,000 . . . to 5,000 families and put my heading on. But 

I got here. 

 

People appreciated that book. They're talking about it more and 

more all the time. But oh, somebody's shaking their head. You 

go out into Bengough . . . I say, Mr. Speaker, to the member 

from Bengough-Milestone, you got out and say all the things 

that he said in that book, that I endorse, and you tell people 

public in your riding and I guarantee you'll never get back here 

again. 

 

Another quote: All people are equal. And I say yes, but all 

behaviour is not equal or positive or desirable. 

 

Another quote he makes: 

 

 When popular opinion is based on prejudice, or when it is 

based on a lack of understanding of the effect of the 

legislation . . . each one of us is duty-bound to give calm 

consideration to the proposed law. 

 

My comment: the Government of Saskatchewan is saying 

popular opinion is based on prejudice and lack of 

understanding. 

 

Does this government have no respect at all for the common 

sense of the people of this province? Just how much can the 

government say against the people. How entirely arrogant they 

are. 

 

Another comment from the minister " . . . horrible 

injustice of wrongful discrimination." Horrible injustice — I 

say what horrible injustice? Where's the evidence, the 

documented proof? I'm 62 years old, Mr. Speaker, and I've 

never heard of anyone in this province yet — there's probably 

some, but I've never heard of one — that's lost a job because 

they were a homosexual or a lesbian, or put out of a home. 

Maybe it's happening but I've never heard of one. I don't think 

many people have. 

 

This Bill is not for that. It's the cover-up for the big things that 

they want to do. Another quote he says: 

 

 I believe that most citizens of this province will support our 

approach to this issue, based as it is on values that lie at the 

very root of our existence. 

 

That's not right, Mr. Speaker. The citizens of this province are 

opposed to Bill 38. They do not support the government's 

approach. The "values that lie at the very root of our 

existence". What about traditional values of right, wrong, 

family, morality? Another quote from the minister: 

 

 Thoughtful men and women, recognizing the lack of any 

rational basis . . . 

 

Thoughtful men and women. Only those who agree with the 

government's line are thoughtful and the rest are prejudiced. 

How arrogant they are. 

 

My last remarks that I'm going to read just at the moment is 

Premier Douglas, a Baptist preacher, would never have 

supported homosexual rights. He was a Baptist preacher. I want 

you to keep thinking that, you people. Think about Tommy 

Douglas, the one who started your CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation) party and was still here when it 

was called the NDP, and see what he would think that if you 

were doing such a thing as you are. Baptist people are 

fundamentalist people, Christian people, and he would not 

allow it. No such a thing would ever happen if he was here. 

 

But you people have changed. You're not the same group of 

people that I sat in opposition with from '78 to 1982. The front 

row, several of them are still there and most of them have all 

changed and it's not to the good, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to turn to a pamphlet I have here and it's 

got in here, at the NDP annual convention, November 6 to 8. 

I'm just going to read out the one, just the one that's means 

something to what we're talking to on Bill 38: 

 

 Changes to the definition of a spouse, family and married 

status in all provincial statutes to include same-sex partners. 

 

Now they try to tell us they're bringing a Bill in that they 

wouldn't think of ever letting . . . the minister said no, we'll 

never ever allow marriages and that'll never do a thing like that. 

But if they're going to do what their convention says, Mr. 

Speaker: 



1508 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

Be it resolved that this annual convention express its grave 

concern that our government has failed to live up to the 

promise to establish protection against discrimination 

because of sexual orientation and has thereby left gay men 

and lesbians exposed to harassment and just denials of their 

rights, benefits and opportunities generally available to all. 

 

 Be it resolved that this convention urges the NDP 

government to recommit itself to amending the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code to specifically prohibit discrimination 

based on sexual orientation; and further, to review all 

provincial statutes with the objective of amending the 

definition of the term spouse, family and marriage status, 

wherever they occur to include same-sex partners so as to 

ensure that lesbian and gay partners enjoy the same benefits 

as are available to heterosexual partners under pension, 

disability, sickness and other benefit plans. 

 

This is your own resolution. So don't any of you people go out 

and talk to the press and to your constituents and say that we, 

as a party, don't believe in it because it's right there. You do, 

very, very clearly. And it's sad, Mr. Speaker, very sad, that we 

have a government that believes in such things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is fooling Saskatchewan people. 

They've made a good job of it because the minister's come out 

so quietly and nicely. He's saying it's all we're talking about is 

jobs and a home for these people. And maybe that's all right but 

there's better ways of doing it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1930) 

 

I say the problem is much bigger. Most of the caucus I don't 

think believe this but they'll find out if they push their front 

row hard enough — and when I say the front row I don't mean 

all 11; I mean about 3 or 4 in the middle there — have misled 

their back-benchers. Marriages and adoptions, full rights to all 

rights for same-sex partners, this is what the main part of this 

Bill means. This is what they're going to have happen. 

 

They know perfectly well that if they just wanted to protect, 

Mr. Speaker, to protect somebody to have a home, to have a 

job, there's other ways of bringing it in. They could have done 

some of what some of the states have done in the United States. 

Some of the states have just brought in Bills that just covered 

protection for those kinds of things without touching the 

Human Rights Code. 

 

MLAs (Members of the Legislative Assembly) who believe 

this is wrong, on the government side, stand up and be counted. 

If each and every one of you people would stand up that 

believe as I do, and I know many of you do — many, many of 

you do; you have made the statements that you do — and if 

you'd stand up and be counted, you could stop this Bill. 

Mr. Speaker, what do people that call themselves normal . . . 

normal sex partners, heterosexual people, what do they do to be 

protected? What are they going to do? Do they have to be a 

lesbian or a homosexual to hold a job? I want to tell just a short 

story about what a principal in one of the schools said, in my 

constituency. 

 

They said what will happen if we have to advertise for a 

teacher in our school and we get two applications and one is an 

excellent resume and the other one is not a good résumé. So 

naturally they hire the person with the good résumé. But the 

one that's the other person happens to be a gay or a lesbian, and 

so they get the job, and then you've got the one with the poor 

résumé and the gay and the lesbian. 

 

Try it and wait. They're sitting there laughing. The Minister of 

Education is smiling and laughing. I don't see anything here to 

protect that. I don't see anything in this Bill to protect my rights 

if I don't want my children or my grandchildren to be taught in 

school by a lesbian or a homosexual, so they can teach their 

lifestyles to them. It's happening enough in the schools without 

them being homosexuals and lesbians, without having them 

right there. Because if the children have a lesbian or 

homosexual teacher, they're going to say, what's wrong with it. 

They're going to say, what's wrong with it. 

 

And they maybe some day will become one and you people 

will be the victims. Because I got one person sitting there, one 

member sitting scowling at me, I think she really believes that 

homosexuals are born that way. Well they're not. Sin makes 

them that way. When people are born, they're all born equal. 

Homosexuals . . . If you read your Scriptures and read it very 

carefully and read the Bible very carefully, you'll find out that 

no one is born a homosexual or a lesbian. They become that 

through sin. 

 

And before I'm closing I'll give you all the reference to the 

Scriptures to tell you such, so you don't have to sit there and 

smirk at me because you can go home and spend the evening 

reading it because it is fact. It is God's law. We still call 

ourselves a Christian nation, don't we, Mr. Speaker? Well then 

if we don't want to call ourselves a Christian nation, then take it 

out. Don't have it in our charter that we honour the supremacy 

of God. 

 

People sit in shock that I'm saying such things. Well I'm in 

shock of what they believe. If they want to believe it that's fine, 

but don't scowl at me for believing what I believe. I have my 

right. I have the same right as . . . Where they come from, some 

of the seats they're representing here tonight as I know 

fundamentalists in Saskatoon, the evangelical people, 20,000 

there, 12,000 in Regina and 4,000 in Moose Jaw, along with 

thousands of more people that believe the same as they do. 

Exactly the same. I know what can happen if you people would 

stand up and be counted. 

 

I'm just going to go back, Mr. Speaker, and a just a little bit 

more reading here. Mr. Speaker, the minister, 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1509 

January 7, 1993, these are some letters from NDP MLAs, and 

I'm not going to be mentioning names. I'm not going to pick 

any individuals out because they'll know who I'm talking about. 

In response to a pastor-parent concern about how this Bill 

would affect teachers in the public school system and parents' 

concerns about who teaches their children, that lesbianism is an 

irrelevant personal characteristic that should not be the cause of 

dismissal from employment. 

 

This question and your response highlight the sides in this 

debate — the side most Saskatchewan people are on, the side 

you are on. You say that this legislation will only affect 

employment, accommodation, and public services. People are 

concerned about what else it will affect. This letter is a prime 

example to just one other area it will affect: the ability of 

parents to have any say in who teaches their children. I know a 

great many parents that would have objections, legitimate 

objections to their children being taught by homosexuals and 

them not being able to object without being told by your laws 

that they are discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation. 

Not many people would agree with your statement that 

lesbianism is an irrelevant personal characteristic in relation 

teachers in the public school system teaching young, 

impressionable children. This, Mr. Minister, is a very serious 

concern. 

 

This Bill will affect parents' objections, choices, as who is 

allowed to teach their children. This is a reasonable concern. 

Will you admit that the Bill would force parents in this 

province to accept lesbian and homosexual teachers? I got a 

snarl a few minutes ago, Mr. Speaker, from the Minister of 

Education as if I'm wrong. Well if you're going to protect all 

people on the jobs, then if a lesbian or a homosexual is 

teaching my children, there's no way to stop it. This Bill affect 

education in this province. Parents' rights to have a say in who 

teaches their children — will you stop playing games with such 

an important issue and be upfront with the people of this 

province and let them know some of the real implications of 

this dangerous Bill? 

 

Another member has admitted receiving numerous letters — 

this is a member, an MLA on the government side, and I'm not 

going to mention names — numerous letters, phone calls and a 

few petitions regarding this issue. He says that it is my belief 

that the act of homosexuality is sinful and contrary to God's 

law. Go back to your caucus you people and talk to them. 

You've got lots of them right there that believe the same as I 

do. 

 

He knows most certainly that this is bad legislation. As a 

self-confessed Christian, he knows that he cannot in all good 

conscience vote in favour of this Bill — a Bill that sends a 

message opposite to everything he must stand for as a 

Christian. Are you going to suppress those in your caucus to 

object to this Bill, those who haven't already caved in to your 

party lines? 

 

Another MLA — I have had hundreds and hundreds of 

telephone calls. And this is also a government MLA. 

I've had hundreds and hundreds of telephone calls and letters 

about many important issues, but I have not . . . I have had not 

one from my constituency in support of the proposed 

amendment to included sexual orientation. Did you hear that? 

Did you folks hear that? He said not one. If you go out in rural 

Saskatchewan, you'll find in my constituency I sent out 5,000 

letters to ask them to fill in their answers, and I got one out of 

hundreds that I got back. Does that not tell you anything about 

what the residents of this province believe? Residents who are 

smarter than you give them credit for, who object to this Bill 

for reasons other than, as you say, fear or intolerance or simple 

misunderstanding. 

 

The member from — and as I said I wouldn't say — goes on to 

say: I am not in favour of the amendment only because of the 

signal it sends to the people of the province. Did you hear that 

again? Your own member, the member from . . . And he is 

right. He is absolutely right. He says further, I believe 

homosexuality . . . This is what he says again: I believe 

homosexuality is a sin and therefore I cannot support it in any 

way. He cannot support it in any way. 

 

Now listen to this: most people would see this proposed change 

as our government — he's saying this — most people would 

see this proposed change as our government agreeing to or 

condoning homosexuality. And again, I'm saying he is right 

again. He is right on the mark. That is exactly how people see 

Bill 38, and they're right. 

 

The member continues: I believe we as a government have to 

guard against this perception. I think homosexuality is wrong 

and I believe we as a government should be saying so. So 

maybe you people over there don't believe what he's saying, 

but many of you do. And the ones that believe what he's 

saying, for goodness sakes, stand up and say so. 

 

The member is saying exactly what we have been saying. Your 

own members. And I got quite a few more here, but I only 

picked out two or three. The member is saying exactly what 

we've been saying, exactly what the people of the province are 

saying — Bill 38 is sending the wrong signal. Bill 38 cannot be 

supported by anyone with any moral standards in good 

conscience. The government should be identifying abnormal 

behaviour as such, and not making special laws to protect it. 

 

The member says: in conclusion, I believe homosexual conduct 

to be morally wrong and I cannot lend my support to this 

amendment for the above reasons. This is one of your own 

speaking. 

 

Mr. Minister . . . to the Minister of Justice, not one of us, that is 

one of your own MLAs, not one fanatic bigot or . . . and many 

of your MLAs feel the same way. Do you call them bigots too 

in your caucus? Is that what you do? Say you're prejudiced, 

you're bigots and you're stupid like Hassett? Is that what you 

say? Is that what you say to them? Do you scowl at them like 

you do at me when I'm speaking? But I see you're very quiet 

now when I've got . . . reading the letters from 



1510 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

your own members. 

 

The member from — which I said again I wouldn't repeat his 

seat or whatever — is not alone in his views. His views reflect 

the majority of Saskatchewan residents. They reflect a good 

number of those in your caucus. They reflect many opposition 

MLAs' views. The member — it's again, I'm not going to say 

. . . There's 1, 2, 3, there's 5, 6, 7, 8 ridings here where there's 

letters that I have in my hands and I'm not going to single 

anybody out. So I'm going to jump through these here letters. 

 

Mr. Minister, the questions and the answers contain such 

outrageous . . . You've sent out questionnaires to your people, 

you've talked to people, you've done studies. You've done 

many studies. Mr. Speaker, the government has got a 

government caucus research. 

 

Let me just say something about this government caucus 

research. The questions and answers contain such outrageous 

and unsubstantiated statements that some outside individuals 

investigated your information a little bit further to find out 

where the information came from. Now listen very carefully, 

my friends, and Mr. Speaker. I ask everybody to listen 

carefully where your information came from. The NDP MLAs 

say it came from government caucus research. Is that right? 

That is where it came from. 

 

Well I can prove by the brochures that it isn't true. It's not right. 

Let's be honest here. Look at this. And I have it here in my 

desk here but I would have to . . . I can show you afterwards or 

you can . . . You know yourself; you know I'm right. In fact, 

this information comes from the office of a buddy of the 

government's, homosexual active, NDP MP (Member of 

Parliament) Svend Robinson. Yes, it does. We have copies, and 

concerned individuals and groups have forwarded copies of 

this same questions-and-answers document received as early as 

January '91 and earlier from Mr. Robinson. And we have 

copies that came from Mr. Robinson's office with his business 

card, sent by his office. 

 

His information obtained just in the last few months, and you 

can write or phone Mr. Robinson's office in Ottawa and verify 

it for yourself — if you can phone them before the government 

over there phones and directs Mr. Robinson's office to hide 

their copies and pretend they don't know anything about it, 

although that could be very hard to do considering Mr. 

Robinson's boldness about this problem. 

 

It's true. The Government of Saskatchewan has been sending 

out, with taxpayers' money to their constituents, Svend 

Robinson's homosexual propaganda and they're not even brave 

enough or honest enough to reference this source as Mr. 

Robinson's — just say it comes from government research. 

And it comes right from Svend Robinson's office. Everything's 

word for word, but they say it comes from government caucus 

research. What a scam! 

 

I can't believe it, Mr. Speaker, they'd do such a thing. 

You ought to . . . Every one of you ought to be ashamed of 

yourself. You're saying, oh no, there's no connection at all, but 

you have to get an acting homosexual to write your material for 

you. That's a disgrace to the province of Saskatchewan. You're 

a disgrace to the good, moral, living people out in 

Saskatchewan to do such a thing. How could you send this 

biased propaganda to your constituents with your own money, 

our taxpayers' money? 

 

It is one thing to have such extreme radical views, Mr. 

Minister, another thing to discriminate them to taxpayers with 

their own money; another thing to tell people the information 

comes from government caucus research when it really comes 

from your activist buddy, Svend Robinson. We would never 

condone homosexual behaviour. It is our opponents who are 

dishonest, distributing unsubstantiated propaganda. Come on. 

You've been caught in the act. You really have. You people 

have been caught and you might as well admit it. And we're 

going to get the word out to everybody that can read in this 

province. You've been caught in the act and you should be 

ashamed. Questions and answers on human rights by Svend 

Robinson is what you should be having on your letterhead. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill must be stopped. Some other it has to be 

stopped. I can remember and the older members here, the 

Deputy Premier would remember, that a Bill did get stopped. 

In 1980 — I think it was 1980 — there was a private member's 

Bill came in from a Regina seat by the name of Billy Allen 

sitting where one of the members are sitting now, and that Bill 

at that time was a big thing 13 years ago. It was to promote 

Sunday gambling and Sunday at the race tracks. They were 

going to have gambling at the races on Sundays. 

 

So on our side, Mr. . . . just to show you what can happen. Just 

to tell you what can happen if the people that stand up there 

and be counted. Mr. Billy Allen brought in this private 

member's Bill and on first reading of the Bill we were outvoted 

30-some to 15. We had 17 in our caucus but there was 15 that 

come in and voted with us. And on the final Bill, we won the 

Bill by 15 to 14. 

 

It was outvoted because I stood to my feet when I spoke one 

night and I quoted Scripture in this Assembly and I challenged 

the then premier Allan Blakeney to come to his seat and stand 

up for what he's talking about at that time. I challenged him. I 

quoted Scripture. The Leader-Post the next day said, Muirhead 

quotes Scripture. 

 

And I'm challenging the Premier now, Mr. Speaker, to come to 

his seat and defend all the things that we're saying and what the 

people, the good people of Saskatchewan, are saying and what 

his back-bencher is saying, defend it. And then listen. He must 

listen. But there's been a change in so many people. That Bill 

got defeated. It can happen again. I'm calling on all moral 

government members to stand up against this 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1511 

sinful, immoral Bill — Bill 38 — stand up and vote against it. 

 

They're saying we have to . . . there's other provinces in Canada 

. . . Mr. Speaker, the other provinces in Canada have the same 

Bill. Why, Mr. Speaker, do we have to be like other provinces? 

Saskatchewan doesn't want to be like the rest of the world. 

Saskatchewan prairie people have been above average when it 

comes to morality and if we lose this one, we fall down the 

same as the rest of them. There's four or five provinces in 

Canada that have a Bill something like it. 

 

Why don't you contact all the important people? Why doesn't 

the minister contact . . . if you want to know what people think 

in Saskatchewan, you could contact some important people. 

 

Contact the Pope. Contact the bishops of Saskatchewan. 

They've already come out with a letter, some of the bishops, 

saying they were in favour of the Bill. But contact them and tell 

them what's really in the Bill, and they'll go along with all the 

priests in Saskatchewan opposing it. I can't find one priest in 

my constituency that's in favour of this Bill. They wouldn't 

even read the letter out that the bishop sent but don't blame the 

bishops. They were told . . . they were not told the facts. 

 

If you would talk to all these people. The minister talked to 15 

ministers the other day here. Listen to these people. It isn't just 

a few people. And they represent thousands of people. The 

minister representing the Hillsdale Alliance Church represents 

several thousand people in this here city of Regina. And the 

Canadian Bible College over here. And these people are 

pleading with you to back off. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm about to close but before I do I'm going to just 

give some references in the Bible where people can look to get 

their answers. If they don't believe in the Bible, well that's their 

problem and I feel sorry for them, but if they do, if they believe 

in God's word, you better look in Hansard and get these 

tomorrow. 

 

I'll read two or three out but I'm going to give . . . look at 

Romans 1 to 18, that's: "For the wrath of God . . ." Corinthians 

6 to 9. I'm going to read that one. 

 

 Do you not know that . . . (the unrighteous) will not inherit 

the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived! (neither) 

Fornicators, idolaters, adulterers, (homosexuals) . . . 

sodomites . . . will inherit the kingdom of God. 

 

Galatians 5 to 19. Ephesians 5:5, I'll read that. 

 

 For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person 

. . . hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. 

 

Timothy 1, 9 and 10: 

 

 . . . the law is not made for a righteous (person) 

. . . but for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and 

for sinners, for unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers 

and murderers of mothers, for manslayers (for fornicators, for 

sodomites, sex perverts, homosexuals). 

 

It's made for everybody, but they have to have God's 

forgiveness if they're going to enter the kingdom of heaven. 

 

Timothy 3, 1 to 3, Jude 7:8, Revelation 21:8, Revelation 22:15. 

In the Old Testament you can look in Genesis. Pretty near the 

whole chapter of Genesis, 13, well not really. Genesis 13:12, 

chapter 13 verses 12 and 13, Genesis 18 to 20, Genesis 19, 

Luke 17 to 28. Leviticus 18 to 22: 

 

 You shall not lie with the male as with a woman. It is an (I 

can't see my own writing there but) abomination. 

 

Homosexuality is absolutely forbidden for its enormous sin. No 

place. Some of the . . . one of members here said that some 

people just pick out a few verses of the Bible and you think you 

got . . . think we're right. Find me any place . . . I challenge 

anyone in this room, anybody in the province of Saskatchewan, 

that can find me any place in the Bible where they'll endorse 

homosexuality as being the right and proper thing, where it's 

not a sin. 

 

And I want to make it very clear that I love all my fellow man, 

including homosexuals, lesbians, gay people, perverts, I love 

them all. But I do not love their sin. I've had homosexual 

people in my home but they never bothered me. I wouldn't 

know they were if I hadn't been told. 

 

It's the same thing here. The homosexuals and lesbians want 

protection. They don't need protection. Just keep what they do 

in the bedroom to themselves. Nobody has to know what you 

people do in the bedroom or what I do in the bedroom. God 

gives us that right. So the homosexuals and lesbians do not 

need any more protection than keep their mouth shut and don't 

tell anybody what they are, and who they are, and they can 

have a job and have a place to sleep, and nobody would bother 

them. 

 

But once they start — and you people are going to be 

responsible — it's the same as what's happening in the United 

States, as soon as they start talking about more rights for 

homosexuals, it just stirs it up and makes it worse. You're 

going to stir this thing up so bad that everybody is going to 

know who everybody is in this province. 

 

I don't want to know who my friends are that are homosexuals 

or gays or whatever. I don't want to know. If they don't bother 

me, I won't bother them, and that's the way it should be. But 

you people are going to make it public. What you're going to 

do, you're going to have . . . what's going to happen, you're 

going to have people applying for jobs and they're going to be 

afraid that anybody knows what their . . . whether they're a 

homosexual, or whether 



1512 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

they're heterosexual or whatever. So they're probably going to 

put down both to get a job. You're going to cause more 

commotion than you can even think of. 

 

The last Bible verse is Matthew 19, 4 to 6: 

 

 (Jesus) answered (and said to them) "Have you not read that 

(he) who made them at the beginning, made them male and 

female," and said, "For this reason a man shall leave his 

father and mother and be joined (in) his wife, and the two 

shall become one flesh?" So they are no longer two, but one 

flesh. Therefore what God has joined together, let (not man) 

separate. 

 

And my conclusion on the biblical part, the Bible explicitly and 

repeatedly condemns homosexual acts. Homosexuality acts are 

viewed negatively whatever and they are discussed in the Bible 

without exception. So again if anybody can find me wrong, I 

will withdraw those statements. 

 

And in closing my remarks on second reading for now, Mr. 

Speaker, the only thing that we can do is along with many other 

. . . that I can do and what you people over there that believe in 

prayer, that we can pray for the government. 

 

And I ask all people in Saskatchewan listening tonight that are 

Christian people and are moral people that believe in prayer, to 

pray for the Minister of Justice and the people in the front row 

that we can have this Bill looked at and maybe withdrawn and 

brought in a right and proper manner. This Bill could be 

brought back in to protect the people that you're talking about 

in a right and proper manner without discriminating on the rest 

of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I ask to adjourn the debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(2000) 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Social Services 

Vote 36 

 

The Chair: — I would ask the minister at this time to please 

introduce the officials who have joined us. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. To my right is 

Con Hnatiuk, the deputy minister. Behind him is Neil Yeates, 

acting assistant deputy minister, and beside Mr. Yeates is 

Elizabeth Smith, executive director, support services. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 

Minister, the first question I want to ask you is the 

material sent over, seeing that I was just involved in Bill 38 and 

I didn't have a chance to look at them, does that cover like all 

these kind of questions, like the name, job descriptions, and do 

you have any staff from previous ministers; were those the 

questions that you, when you became minister, you hired any 

new staff for your office . . . are those the type of questions that 

you answered me? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes. The ministerial staff that were 

hired when I became the minister are included in the 

employees that you asked for, in terms of being new 

employees. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Okay, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, and 

Madam Minister, do any of your assistants travel in conducting 

their work? Please provide me with the total your department 

has spent on ministerial assistants' travel expenses. I would like 

full details of this travel. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The ministerial travel is included in 

the information that we sent to you. If you want it in more 

detail, I can give that to you. I can send it over shortly. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Madam Minister, what I said to the 

member on estimates last year, what I said to the minister, it 

would be helpful that if we had that information come not just 

two or three minutes before but a day or two before, if possible 

— and I say that to all ministers — so the critic has a chance to 

go through them and see what's answered and what isn't. 

Because I don't know what's there; I haven't got a clue what 

you've answered. 

 

But this is in detail to the question I just asked. I would like full 

details, and I'll just . . . I think these first questions will likely 

be in there, I'm sure. If not, I want your commitment that we'll 

be able to get the answers if you've missed some of the ones I 

have on my list. 

 

I would like full details of this travel, including the assistant's 

name, total cost per trip, the purpose of the travel, mode of 

travel, who they accompanied, the minister or departmental 

officials, and destination. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I can give you some information for 

the previous minister. Lorraine Bethell travelled with the 

minister on September 17, 1992 to Weyburn for a group home 

opening with the minister, for travel cost, $59.53. Margaret 

Morrisette travelled with the minister on April 26-27, 1992 to 

Saskatoon. And this was for the Social Services appeal board 

orientation. Meals were $16.75. Mark Stobbe from April 23 to 

27, '92 travelled to Saskatoon for a staff training employment 

branch Social Services appeal board orientation. His travel 

costs were a 132.92. Bev Cardinal who is an employee in my 

office travelled with me on February 11, 1993 from Regina to 

Meadow Lake to North Battleford to Saskatoon to Regina. She 

accompanied me on the airplane for a cost of $987. And a 

practicum student in my office also accompanied me on 

February 11, 1993 from Regina to Meadow Lake to North 

Battleford back to Saskatoon for a cost of $509. This was also 

by air for a 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1513 

. . . he was involved in ministerial functions and his name was 

M. Kajmahkotayo, and his first name was Merlin. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, let's do it 

this way for the sake of time because I wouldn't know. You 

said, you got up and said some of these here assistants were 

with the past minister, and I'd like to have . . . I'll just take your 

word for it. But I'm going to . . . so they can get it properly out 

of Hansard and if anything's missing from here or you didn't 

put . . . if it is I'm going to just repeat that, and then they can go 

through it tomorrow and have it sent to my office, anything 

that's missing just for the sake of time here. 

 

Do any of your assistants travel in conducting their work? 

Please provide me with the total your department has spent on 

ministerial assistant travel expenses. I would like full details of 

this travel including the assistant's name, total cost per trip, the 

purpose of the travel, mode of travel, who they accompanied, 

the minister or department officials and destination. So they 

can just look through Hansard. And what I haven't already got, 

just send to my office and I'll be satisfied with that. 

 

My next question, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, ministerial 

travel. Please provide total spent on ministerial travel. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I just said to you, Mr. Member, 

is the total travel for the minister's office. But we will send that 

in writing to you tomorrow. In terms of ministerial travel, I can 

send this over to you, if you would like, or I can read each trip 

into the record. What is your wish? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — I'll give it in more detail and also for . . . I 

told you earlier this evening that we'd be on here at 8 o'clock. I 

tried to get you off, to accommodate you as soon as possible. 

So I'm going to try and do that unless we get bogged down on 

something else here. I'll just put it on the record and take your 

word for it you'll get it sent to my office. 

 

Ministerial travel. Please provide total spent on ministerial 

travel; provide details of this travel including purpose, who 

accompanied you, mode of travel and destination. What do you 

feel you accomplished from these trips? You can just take that 

tomorrow from Hansard. Or if you have more to send over, 

fine. 

 

Mr. Chairman, question to the minister again. What is the total 

number of people that were on social assistance in January of 

1991? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell you is in the year 

1991-92, which is probably the figure you're interested in, the 

case-load was 28,167. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — When you say '91-92, is that a certain year 

end there, or what? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — That would take you to the end of 

March of 1992. 

Mr. Muirhead: — Now give me the '92-93 then. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The total case-load was 32,904. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — So it went up about 5,000 just about; 

28,167 to 32 . . . almost 33,000. Okay, my next question. How 

many people on social assistance today? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The latest figures that we have 

available take us to the end of March of 1993, and the total 

case-load is 35,044 cases. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, would you describe to me 

what you mean by case-load? Does that mean an individual or 

does that mean families? So maybe we have to get different 

figures here. If it's 28,167 families or individuals or what? 

Explain that to me, what you mean by case-load. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — A case could be a combination of 

single people, families, couples without children, couples with 

children, single-parent mothers or fathers with children, or 

people who are alone. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — So then as I kind of expected, Mr. 

Chairman, Madam Minister, when you gave me the figures, it's 

a little bit misleading — 28,167 and 32,994 and 35,040 or 

whatever. I need the figures, the total figures of individuals is 

the question I asked you. I said: what is the total number of 

people that were on social assistance. That wasn't families. So 

the figure I want is how many individuals. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I heard the member ask for cases, so I 

gave you cases. If you're interested in individuals, for the year 

ending March 31, 1992 — so that would be the 1991-92 year 

— there were 56,555 individuals on social assistance. For the 

year 1992-93 — that would be ending March '93 — there were 

64,915 people on social assistance. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, what's 

the total today? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As of March 31, 1993, there are 

68,235 individuals receiving social assistance. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, did I hear that figure right 

— 80,000? 

 

An Hon. Member: — 68 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Sixty-eight thousand — sorry. I see the 

budget has increased, the social insurance budget. In fact it's 

the first time in the history of this province the social insurance 

budget is more for the entire budget for all of agriculture for 

the whole province. 

 

Madam Minister, I guess with all the new families having to 

apply for it, this increase was necessary. After all, we've lost 

over 16,000 jobs in this province since the NDP administration 

has taken over.  There's approximately 16,000 jobs lost since 

you've taken 



1514 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

over. So naturally that's why the increase here. 

 

What are the projections of the ever-growing numbers of social 

assistance applicants for the end of this year? Because if you 

take a look at your own figures — 56,000, 64,000, 68,000 — 

what are you estimating's going to happen this year, in the 

worst year in history, with all the people your government has 

fired and the farmers losing their land? What are you 

estimating? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — First let me say this to the member, 

that social assistance case-loads, regardless of what province 

you happen to live in, are escalating. There isn't a province in 

the country that has not seen an increase in the number of 

citizens coming onto social assistance. And as you are probably 

aware, Canada is facing an economic recession and all 

provinces are facing similar situations as the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In terms of your question, we are estimating a case-load this 

year of 34,200, or approximately 68,000 individuals on social 

assistance. The other thing that we should note, Mr. Member, is 

that now that we are coming into the spring and summer 

season, historically case-loads decrease during the months of 

May, June, July, August, September. And then they start to 

increase as we go into the winter months. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Well that's understanding — even the 

comment you made, this is happening all over. But that isn't 

what was promised by your government in 1991. They 

promised that they were going to have jobs for everybody. So I 

don't think you should stand up, Madam Minister — you used 

to sit over here yourself — and stand up and say, when we get 

to be government, we're going to correct all these things that 

you people did. Well these here individuals have sure changed 

from when we were in government, from 56,000 to 68,000. 

 

Now when you're saying 68,000 by the end of the year, that has 

to be a poor projection — maybe now, but by the end of the 

year, you're saying there will be the same amount of people on 

welfare as there is today. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well as you may know, we look at 

averages. And we're predicting or suggesting that there will be 

an average of 68,000 people on social assistance. But we 

expect the numbers to decline over the spring and summer and 

going into fall months, and then they will go up, as they have 

historically done. So this is an average case-load we're 

predicting. 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Madam Minister, the question I asked in 

the first place: what was Social Services department expecting 

would be at the end of the year. I didn't ask the question now. 

What is expecting? They must be projecting. I mean when this 

government just fired hundreds of people, and maybe they 

won't be going onto social services but they might be bumping 

somebody else that is or whatever, and there's people losing 

their jobs that don't have pensions and severance pays, and 

things are getting worse out there. Farmers are leaving the 

farms, and there's farmers that are definitely, I know, applying 

for welfare now. 

 

So I asked you . . . they must have because in your budget 

you've asked for . . . the money you've asked for in the 

estimates, in this year's budget, you must be planning some 

place with a future claim of what it's going to be because it 

certainly changed from 56, 64 to 68. Your change in every leap 

is . . . you changed leaps and bounds. When we were in 

government it was 56,000 but that took in also '91-92, so that's 

half of us. Then it jumped almost 10,000 right away. So it 

looks like under your government it can sure get people on 

social aid in a hurry, or they have to be on social aid. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I want to thank the member for the 

question and just say that if you look at the figures that existed 

in 1984-85, '85-86, you saw a trend of social assistance 

increase because, as you may be aware, social assistance . . . 

people coming on to social assistance and the numbers parallel 

what's happening in terms of unemployment rates in provinces, 

and it also parallels what's happening with the economy. 

 

But if you look at the numbers of people as a percentage of our 

population on social assistance, we have the lowest level of 

dependency in the country. And Newfoundland, Prince Edward 

Island, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Quebec have much 

higher rates of dependency as a percentage of people living on 

social assistance relative to the overall population. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — I didn't ask you, Madam Minister, anything 

about 1984, but if you want to start doing comparing, can you 

tell me this: is 68,000 — that's the figure we have now of 

individuals on welfare in this province, on social assistance is a 

better word — is that the highest ever in the history of this 

province? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The answer to that question is yes. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Okay, Madam Minister, since the numbers 

of those on social assistance is growing so rapidly, what 

measures have you taken to combat this serious problem 

because it's going to be escalating some more? We know that 

for sure. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well obviously unemployment is the 

major concern of the Government of Saskatchewan, and 

obviously these numbers are a major concern to the 

government. And we are working very closely with New 

Careers Corporation to ensure that there are employment, 

training, and educational opportunities available to people who 

have to rely on social assistance as their form of income. As 

well we are very optimistic that the economic development 

strategy that has been adopted by the government, as outlined 

by the Minister of Economic Development, will be very 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1515 

helpful in terms of reducing these numbers. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, when you 

took over government in fall of 1991, you dismantled the 

Saskatchewan Works program. Can you tell me how many 

people were unemployed as dismantling the Saskatchewan 

Works program? How many people were unemployed and 

went on social aid after that was dismantled. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The Saskatchewan Works program 

was replaced with a community employment program. The 

program was not dismantled. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — So you were just so desperate not to have 

any name that was even connected with the Tory . . . That's 

why you had to just change the name, so you're saying it's the 

same program. Why didn't you just leave the name the way it 

was, and it wouldn't mix people up? You've done everything 

that you possibly could just so you . . . anything that we done 

was right . . . you're saying the same program . . . 

 

Now I was misunderstanding here because I, on the heels of 

dismantling the Sask Works program, I thought you unveiled 

the New Careers home repair program. How is that connected 

with what you just was telling me? Is that the same program, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — That is part of the community 

employment program. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — I realize this now then, but it's the same 

program. It's just to get people working, the same thing really 

as the Saskatchewan Works program — it's just to get people 

working. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There was a different emphasis in that 

we were trying to assist single-parent families or single-parent 

persons, most of whom are women, to be able to access career 

opportunities, to the program. As you probably know, Sask 

Works program, a lot of its emphasis was more male oriented. 

And because a number of people on social assistance are single 

parents and the head of that household is a female, we wanted 

to change the program somewhat so there would be 

opportunities for female assistance recipients. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — I realize the New Careers home program, 

that's not under your department now; it's now under Education 

I understand. But it's still connected because it takes people 

from social welfare to work in that program. So between the 

two programs, whatever, whether they're connected with 

Education or not, I'd like to know how many people are under 

those programs. I believe the New Careers home program is 

under Education and Training. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The 7,590 spaces through New 

Careers employment and training programs, that was for 

1992-93. This year the estimate is 7,810 spaces, but in fact the 

participants are higher so I'm now going 

to give you the participant numbers: 1992-93, 8,590 

participants; and in 1993-94, we're expecting 8,760 participants 

— that's because more than one person may go through a 

space. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I 

understand the New Careers home repair program offers work 

experience but of a very limited . . . it's very limited, is that 

correct? Or can you explain what they do, or what type of 

work. I understand actually work itself is very limited. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As you may know, New Careers 

Corporation has been transferred to the ministry of Education, 

Training, and Employment. Her estimates are coming up 

shortly and I would suggest that you ask the Minister of 

Education those questions. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Madam Minister, which program then is 

offering . . . A pilot program is supposed to be in Saskatoon, is 

supposed to be under way now. I wonder which department is 

that then. Which one is that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — If you're talking about the home repair 

program, that is with New Careers Corporation and the 

Minister of Education is now responsible. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Okay, for any of the people on social 

assistance, Madam Minister, and they're chosen, how are they 

chosen to work on any of these here programs? How are they 

chosen? Is it by their choice or your choice or how are they 

chosen for any of these type of programs? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Individuals are referred to New 

Careers Corporation through their social worker. They may ask 

to be referred there. It's on a referral basis. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Well if they . . . Mr. Chairman, Madam 

Minister, if they volunteer to do something will they get 

something to do? Will you find them something to do? If 

somebody volunteers that's on social assistance, they just want 

to do something, is there something for them? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Many individuals ask to be referred to 

the program and they are. Many individuals have opportunities 

to find employment in the community and their social worker 

may assist them in doing that. So we think that we are doing all 

we can to assist individuals in terms of becoming independent 

of social assistance. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Madam Minister, the way these figures are 

going up, you wouldn't think that — it's going up by thousands. 

But I hope you're right. I'll take your word for it. 

 

But what if you ask . . . what if you have a job? What is your 

policy, Madam Minister, if you have a job available for 

someone, and someone is strong and healthy or whatever, and 

if they say no, what do you do? 



1516 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — If an individual is capable of work and 

they have access to a job and if they refuse to take the job, then 

they disqualify themselves from benefits. So that's one of the 

provisions of the plan. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Now this is getting to be a . . . No, it's 

costing a lot of money. Social Services is a large budget. Has 

the government got new plans? I mean you've just come out 

and said, pretty well what you've done is just took over . . . 

called it a new name and took the same program as we had, 

Saskatchewan Works program, and you've got a New Careers 

under Education. 

 

What are you doing to try to get the people working, to find 

something for them to do? Even if they're getting social 

assistance, maybe there's work they could do for free in the 

cities, or whatever. Are you doing anything to try to teach 

people to work? 

 

Now there's many people on social aid that couldn't possibly 

. . . I don't believe that pregnant mothers and single mothers, I 

don't believe they should have to, I think they should be with 

their child for as long as possible. And there's people out there 

like that that have been left stranded and their spouses have 

passed away and things like that, I don't believe that. 

 

But I believe that there's strong individuals that are just wasting 

their good muscles, that you should be doing something in the 

Department of Social Services to encourage them to be doing 

something, if it's only work for the communities or whatever. 

Because I always believe that anybody sits around idle and that 

gets to become a habit, it's hard for them to work when the job 

does come along. 

 

But what are you planning, Madam Minister, to combat this big 

problem that's coming upon us in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well that's a very good question, 

member. In March, at the end of March, 1993, 3,746 people, or 

11 per cent of the total social assistance case-load, were in 

training and that was an increase of 12 per cent from March, 

1992. And this number . . . I just want to tell you what the 

number consisted of. We had 1,896 single persons involved in 

training and we had 1,850 family heads involved in training. 

 

And we're of the view that it's important to assist recipients in 

terms of becoming independent from social assistance 

dependency. A job is the best way of insuring that one doesn't 

lead a life of dependency, along with training. And that's 

exactly what we're doing to insure that people do have the 

skills necessary to meet the new challenges in the workforce. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — What kind of response are you getting from 

the people on social services to respond to your program and 

. . . (inaudible) . . .? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Very positive response. I think what's 

interesting is that the people that I come in 

contact with on a daily basis want to work. They do not want to 

be on social assistance. They do not want to have that kind of 

dependency, state dependency. 

 

The feedback that we're getting is that the people have an 

opportunity to be trained or to receive an education or to have a 

job. That's what they want any day over living on social 

assistance. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, the 

member from Rosthern is going to ask you a few questions 

now. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

Madam Minister, I had not really intended to get involved too 

deeply today, and I don't think I will. But from some of your 

answers and from some of your comments, I cannot help but 

notice that the weight of government falls heavily on your 

shoulders, because the comments and the answers that you've 

been giving to my colleagues thus far fly pretty well in the face 

against what you were saying while you were in opposition and 

certainly your opposition critic of the day, Peter Prebble. 

 

Now you made the comment that all provinces are having 

trouble with deficits, all provinces are having trouble with 

growing case-loads and so on. But I suggest to you, madam, 

that this is the only province where the opposition ran on a 

campaign to eliminate poverty. 

 

You folks, in your study that you did — and I think you were 

one of those that went around the province in this study — said 

that we will eliminate poverty. Now that was a tremendous 

promise at the time. And I know that during the election many 

of the folks out in the province of Saskatchewan were taken in 

by that and they certainly voted NDP because they did not like 

being poor. And so they voted for you because you were going 

to eliminate poverty. 

 

And yet as I look at the statistics that you handed over to my 

colleague, with case-loads of 28,000, 32,000, 35,000, talking 

literally of 70,000 people on social services for whatever 

reason, this I would suggest to you is hardly an elimination of 

poverty. 

 

Now the other question that I want to bring into consideration 

here is, I understand that Ed Bloos from the Food Bank in 

Regina — and I know Lorraine Stewart from Saskatoon is 

probably experiencing the same thing — I understand through 

the media that Ed is saying now that, even as late as the early 

part of this week, the case-loads that they are experiencing is 

increasing by about three families per day. 

 

Now whether you want to confirm that or add to that, I'd be 

interested in your comments about the fact that things are not 

quite as rosy as you were indicating a year or two ago. Now I 

know what you're going to be saying is that we don't have the 

resources. And to kind of offset that right at the beginning, at 

the outset, we know that. But you knew what the financial 

situation 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1517 

of the province was during the election of 1991, and in spite of 

that, you still held out this carrot to the people of 

Saskatchewan. And I'm just wondering what your reaction is to 

that particular situation. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I want to thank the member for the 

question. First of all, let me say this. That the document that 

you refer to that was undertaken by some of my colleagues in 

opposition, along with myself, talked about eliminating poverty 

by the year 2000 . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — You admit you were naïve then? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I wouldn't admit I was naïve. I think 

it's always important to have noble goals. And if you do not 

have goals and a vision for the future, then you don't know how 

to get from point A to point B. And I think what we were 

talking about were some principles, something to strive for. It's 

important that governments, citizens, individuals, have things 

to strive for. And we are striving to eliminate poverty by the 

year 2000, not unlike a number of other governments across the 

world that are on the road to trying to do the same thing. 

 

Now in terms of what has happened, we have seen some major 

changes to unemployment insurance since we came to 

government, changes in the rules regarding people accessing 

unemployment insurance programs. There's been a reduction in 

the number of weeks . . . or an increase in the number of weeks 

that a person has to hit in order to be eligible. Obviously that 

impacts upon our case-load. As well, we've had some other 

changes to unemployment insurance regulations and that 

impacts upon our case-load. 

 

The other thing that I'd like to point out to the members is that 

our 1993-94 budget addresses, or attempts to address, needs of 

children. And we will see the children's benefit under SAP 

(Saskatchewan Assistance Plan) and FIP (Family Income Plan) 

increase by $5 a month effective July 1. And we are designing 

a new children's benefit that hopefully will be implemented on 

January 1 of 1994. 

 

As well, we are now beginning to pay actual utility costs, and 

the hope is that people will not take their food money to pay for 

utilities and that we will begin to alleviate a little bit of the 

pressure at the food bank. 

 

The other point that I would like to make. I understand from 

speaking to people at food banks across the province that not 

all of the people that visit the food bank are on social 

assistance, that they are other individuals who, because of 

circumstance, are coming to rely on food banks. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. 

Unless things have changed, the way you operate is that you 

take an individual and you make an assessment on that 

individual based on that individual's or family's . . . the 

case-load's needs, then you take a look at the resources that that 

person has on his own or through government, other programs 

and so on, and the difference is the balance that you will 

supply in order for that individual case-load to support him or 

herself. 

 

I'm still wondering, are there any deductions from outside 

sources that you are still deducting from the amount payable to 

this individual? And I refer specifically to family allowances. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We are doing the same thing that you 

did and previous governments did. We are deducting the family 

allowance from benefits paid to families with children. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — What about the amount deductible in terms 

of the individual being able to earn money on his own. There 

was a cap on it and after that it was dollar for dollar deducted. 

Has that changed? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We have not changed the income 

exemption since coming to government. The other thing that I'd 

like to point out in terms of the family allowance, what we did 

do was increase the benefit to families with children by $5 

come July 1, 1993. And we are also designing a new children's 

benefit that will affect individuals with children on social 

assistance but also will have some help for low income 

working families. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I'm pleased to remind you that we increased 

those by $10 per child while I was the minister. But the point 

I'm trying to make with you, Madam Minister, is simply this: 

the weight of government is falling heavily on your shoulders. 

 

I remember very profoundly, and so do you, Mr. Prebble 

standing here, chastising us in no uncertain terms for having 

the audacity to deduct family allowances, but that would be 

changed when you were in government. And the people voted 

for that. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, you have just informed me that 

essentially you haven't changed anything. Why not, Madam 

Minister, when with the stroke of the pen, with the stroke of the 

pen, you could put all of those additional dollars into the 

pockets of families that needed that? That's the point that I'm 

trying to make with you, Madam Minister. And I just couldn't 

resist getting up to make that point and showing a little bit of 

the hypocrisy that we are experiencing. 

 

Madam Minister, one other thing, and I just want a general 

comment from you on this, and that is that whenever you were 

on your feet or the member from Saskatoon, Peter Prebble, 

whenever he was on his feet, always continually referred to that 

magic safety net, the safety net that was there to catch people. 

I'm interested in your philosophy as Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

I never subscribed to that philosophy of a safety net and I still 

don't. I don't view Social Services to be a safety net, because in 

my opinion a net is exactly that. That it catches, it holds, and it 

destroys because it won't let go. That's the problem with fish in 

a net. Now that may be a crude analogy, Madam Minister, but 

that's the problem I have with safety nets. 



1518 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

And you should, as we were, spend much more of your 

emphasis on the springboard effect. The springboard is where 

you kick, wherever necessary, people so that they are 

catapulted back into being productive members of our society. 

And that was the essence of all of the training programs we 

had. Whether it was Sask Works, and I'm glad to hear that in 

spite of the rhetoric of the former minister of Social Services, 

the hon. member of Finance now, Minister of Finance, that you 

have in fact retained Sask Works, and like my colleague says, 

that you're disguising it in different terminology, but that it is 

still there. 

 

Now first of all, Madam Minister, a reaction on your 

philosophy, personal philosophy perhaps because you're 

permeating that throughout the department, so that is 

significant I think. And secondly the issue of Sask Works, is it 

still there? Are the training programs there? 

 

Another question I could ask: why did you do away with the 

job search program in Saskatoon that I put into place in 

conjunction with the business community in Saskatoon? Very 

effective, and yet that was done away with. 

 

So all of these things I think are part and parcel, and just a 

quick reaction on your part, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Prior to becoming a politician in 1986, 

I worked with street kids, and many of the kids that I worked 

with came from low income families. My personal philosophy 

with regard to Social Services is this: that everybody in this 

province regardless of where they live, who they are, what sort 

of background they come from, what the economic status of 

their family happens to be, is entitled to be treated with human 

dignity. That means that they are entitled to be treated fairly 

and equitably. It means that they will not be judged because of 

the circumstances they face. 

 

In terms of personal philosophy when it comes to the 

Department of Social Services, it is my expectation that the 

people who work in the department will serve the clients in this 

province. They are there to serve clients, and they are to act 

professionally, and they are to treat people with human dignity 

and respect. 

 

In terms of what I expect from the income security system, I 

expect that an income security system will meet people's basic, 

human needs. I am personally of the view that our system does 

not yet do that because we have too many people that are 

having a very difficult time living on the basic income that the 

Department of Social Services allows. 

 

Obviously, as you know, our province is facing some dire 

economic circumstances, and we are trying our best. In terms 

of what we have been able to do, given our very limited 

resources, I can say that we now acknowledge people's shelter 

allowances. We actually are beginning to pay utilities, laundry, 

and telephone. 

In terms of basic allowance, if you're a single mom, your first 

child is treated as an adult, and they saw the basic allowance 

for the first child increase to $195 per month. All other children 

receive, at present, $155 per month, but as of July 1, that will 

increase to $160. 

 

In terms of personal living, we've had an increase to personal 

living, effective August 1, 1992, to $85 a month. We now are 

assisting recipients with travel allowance to allow them to go 

on medical trips and to travel to places of employment and 

training. As well, effective August 1, 1992, we increased the 

northern food allowance to $50 per month per recipient, and 

that's to all recipients north of the 54th parallel. 

 

As well, we are trying to change our social service delivery 

system so that staff will have more time to do what they are 

paid to do, and that is to do social work. As well, there are 

some other increases, but I know you have many more 

questions that you'd like to ask, and I would be quite willing to 

send all of the detail of the changes to the system to you for 

your perusal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much for that litany, Madam 

Minister. I guess that begs this question. With all those 

wonderful things that your colleagues are applauding you for, 

how many children are living in poverty in Saskatchewan 

today? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Far too many children live in poverty. 

Twenty-seven thousand children live on social assistance in the 

province, and 20,000 children receive social assistance living 

on Indian reserves — 47,000 children living on social 

assistance if you include both on and off reserve. 

 

As well, as have many children whose parents come from low 

income, working backgrounds. That is something that we are 

personally committed to reducing. And that's why, on January 

1, 1994, we hope to have a new children's benefit designed to 

assist kids in this province, so that their parents will have 

money to feed them and shelter them, and make sure that they 

have access to recreational programs like other middle-class 

and upper-class children. That is something that our 

government is committed to improving for the kids of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Madam Minister, remember your promise. 

You didn't promise to improve it. You promised to eliminate 

poverty. You promised to eliminate poverty. Something that 

someone greater than any one of us said: the poor will always 

be with us — but the NDP in Saskatchewan determined they 

were going to beat the odds and you were going to eliminate 

poverty. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, one other thing now. The figure that 

you give me is very startling, because you didn't come up to the 

64,000 children in poverty that you were always quoting while 

you were in opposition. And yet now you're equating poverty 

just 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1519 

to people being on social aid. I don't equate that. So your 

case-load is higher and yet your number of children that you're 

admitting are in poverty is lower. 

 

Now here's my question. What is your definition today of 

poverty? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. My definition of poverty is 

when you don't have enough money to meet your basic needs, 

like food, shelter, clothing, and ensuring that your kids have 

access to some form of recreational activity. Food for your 

spirit, your emotional well-being, your physical well-being, 

your psychological well-being — all of those things that ensure 

that we are healthy, whole individuals. 

 

And in terms of your previous question, why the 47,000 versus 

64,000, I can say this. Forty-seven thousand children live on 

income support in the province of Saskatchewan; 27,000 of 

those children live on SAP, social assistance plan; 20,000 

receive funds from Indian Affairs, through their band councils. 

There are other children who are not on income support — and 

when I say income support, I'm talking about state income 

support — whose families work but they are still classified as 

children living in poverty, and those families are the working 

poor. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Well, Madam Minister, the definition of 

poverty, I guess I could throw back at you the StatsCanada 

statistics and so on of 58 per cent for food, shelter, and clothing 

that you used to throw at us. You conveniently forgot to 

mention that at this particular point. 

 

But all I'm trying to do, Madam Minister, is show the people of 

Saskatchewan that when you are in government it is much 

more difficult to fulfil the wild statements that we tend to make 

sometimes in opposition. And I think that is exactly what you 

are finding out now as I did — as I did. And I'm sure that you 

are just as sincere as I was that we want to do more for people 

and we want to do good, but there are restrictions within our 

system. 

 

And I guess what I'm trying to do also is show that the 

philosophical approach is not always the same between us 

either. I still maintain the springboard effect is more effective. 

But we could spend a lot of time on that and I don't want to. 

 

There are just a couple of other areas that I want to touch on 

briefly, Madam Minister. One thing that I was very proud of, as 

being part of the government, before I was minister, my very 

first news conference ever as a politician was in my home town 

of Hague. And it was in the town hall, and some of your 

officials are here tonight that were there with me at that 

particular time. 

 

And the news conference was held to establish the first group 

home of the mentally retarded where we, in spite of the Prince 

Albert members and so on, violent . . . vigorous perhaps is a 

better term, vigorous opposition to the closing of North Park 

Centre and the institutionalization that had been going on. We 

scattered group homes throughout the province. And I think if 

you have had the opportunity to visit some of those folks who 

are in group homes you can certainly attest to the tremendous 

increase in quality of life in small town. 

 

You don't need your officials for this, Madam Minister. I see 

you're trying to signal them. All I want from you is your 

indication once more in terms of what you intend to do with the 

process that we began in terms of the group home concept as 

opposed to the institutionalization that was the process for 

many, many years in Saskatchewan. 

 

And while you're addressing that, just from a philosophical 

point of view, maybe you can add to me an indication of what 

you expect to be doing with Valley View. I've always been of 

the view that Valley View in Moose Jaw will always be there 

because there will be always that need. And the folks that are 

left there are very, very high needs people. Do you see more 

coming out of there? And don't worry about the specifics, we 

can get that at some other time. I just want your general 

reaction. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well as you know that there are people 

living in Valley View who are very severely disabled, and it is 

unlikely that they would be able to live in the community in a 

group home setting because of the severe disabilities that they 

have. And so I agree with you that there will be need for that 

type of institutionalization for some people, some citizens in 

the province of Saskatchewan. We are committed to making 

the transition for mentally challenged people from sheltered 

settings to more community settings, and so therefore I think 

on this point you and I will agree. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — To a different topic — cheque pick-ups. Are 

you still following that policy? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don't have massive cheque pick-up 

but workers do have discretion to insist that clients pick up 

cheques if they believe the client is having some difficulty. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — So out of a case-load of 35,000, or 

68,000-some individuals, how many of those would be under 

the cheque pick-up strategy? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I don't have that information but I can 

tell you this: that the other day a person living in my riding, 

who I've known for many years, who for the first time in his 

life has had to rely on social assistance, 58-year-old man who 

has always worked but because of changes in UI 

(unemployment insurance) had to rely on social assistance, he 

has picked his cheque up for the past two months. So there is 

cheque pick-up that is still going on but we're not having the 

kind of line-ups that we've had in the past. 

 

And I should also point out that this man told me that it was 

very humiliating for him to have to go down to the Social 

Services office in downtown Saskatoon, 1st Avenue, and stand 

in line with a number of other men. That's something that I 

want to change because I think 



1520 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

people need to be treated with human dignity. Just because you 

have come to a point in your life where you have to rely on 

social assistance, we should not have you pointed out for all to 

see by having you stand in line — when you don't want to be 

there because what you really want is a job — to pick up your 

cheque. 

 

So we're not interested in having that kind of inhumanity put on 

people. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Well, Madam Minister, to follow that weak 

and lukewarm philosophy, does this mean also that you are 

now planning to ban food bank lines as well? Is that not just as 

humiliating? Are you going to establish a delivery system 

whereby you deliver the food to these folks as well? 

 

I mean come on, let's be realistic and logical here. If you say 

that's humiliating, when we're spending taxpayers' money . . . 

And accountability is something that I think, is something that 

you can be condemned for. I think there's an utter lack of 

accountability now in your department. 

 

I know what your predecessor did when the special 

investigators . . . and you say we don't need special 

investigators because they're . . . Well that leads me to the next 

question that I wanted to ask. First of all, error rate, what is 

your error rate? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Our error rate has not changed in the 

past two years. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — What is it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It's 2 per cent. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Which would be . . . about how much money 

are we talking about is what I'm after? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — 2.3 to 2.4 million approximately, I'm 

advised. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — And this error rate and this percentage that is 

being overspent, I am assuming that the error are always to the 

cost of the taxpayer. How much of that is recovered? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — An error rate can be because a client 

may not have understood the program in terms of what that 

client had to report — income, interest, those kinds of things. 

Error rate can also be because the client has been overpaid. 

 

So error rate isn't just error on the part of the system, error rate 

can be as a result of non-reporting by clients. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I understand that, Madam Minister, error 

rates are generated both by the client itself and the department, 

or the system as you put it, and I understand that. 

 

What percentage of those overpayments, money that people 

unrightfully got — because I view that anybody who gets extra 

money is really taking it out of 

that pot that you have to work with and somebody else is 

penalized as a result of that. So how much of that is over . . . 

through overpayments. And I want you to describe for me the 

system that you have in place to recover the error rate, what 

your overpayment system is. 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The causes of overpayments may be 

because of wage reconciliations later inaccurate; may be 

because of utility reconciliations or undeclared changes; may 

be because of lost, stolen cheques, transient aid, utility arrears, 

damage deposits, that sort of thing; and other, which would 

include changes in the family composition or assets, for a total 

overpayment of about $12 million. In that, my officials advise 

me, we collect about $10 million back. And that would have 

been in the past year. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I also asked you to describe for me the 

method that you use to recollect that overpayments, because 

quite frankly, this is a problem I always had when I looked at 

the system. Because as I described to you before, the amount of 

money that a recipient receives is based on, first of all, needs, 

resources, and the difference is the balance that that person 

needs to survive. Now an overpayment, how are you collecting 

that overpayment back from a person that has just his basic 

essentials? That's what I'm asking you. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We haven't changed the way we 

collect overpayments at all. We make arrangements with the 

client to have a small amount taken off of his or her cheque to 

begin to pay the overpayment. As you know, there was the 

Finlay case. The Manitoba government's position was upheld in 

the Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I am certainly familiar with the Finlay case; 

we were interveners on that. Madam Minister, my only point is 

that the weight of government hangs heavily on your shoulders 

because you are not making all of those dramatic changes that 

you were criticizing and chastising us for on an almost constant 

basis. Those very same things, as you have just said, you have 

not changed. Now if we were wrong before, you are wrong 

now; two wrongs don't make a right. That's the point I would 

just want to make with you, Madam Minister. 

 

But I relinquish the floor now to the critic of Social Services, 

and I thank you for your cooperation, and I wish you well. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 

Minister, on March 24, 1993, you announced the Department 

of Social Services' participation in the review — responsible 

partnerships: human services in review. Please provide the 

estimated cost for the department's participation in this review 

and detail for the Assembly today any tangible benefits that 

would be derived from the study for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The cost of the review will be 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1521 

approximately $70,000. The contract is with the Western 

Institute for Public Policy, and Eldon Anderson, a well-known 

person who I believe was a former employee of the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and very involved in 

non-governmental organizations, is going to be the chair of the 

review. 

 

The purpose of the review is to make recommendations on 

ways communities and government can work more 

cooperatively in order to shape some of the future social 

directions in the province of Saskatchewan. We know that the 

NGO (non-governmental organizations) community does an 

absolutely incredible job in providing services, raising funds 

that government alone couldn't possibly raise to ensure that 

citizens who are experiencing difficulty or people who are 

vulnerable have access to community-based resources. So we 

are hopeful that we will find new ways of doing things that will 

ensure that the people that we mutually serve, both in the 

community and through government, will have their needs met 

in a more integrated and holistic way. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Madam Minister, would you for the sake of 

time, would you see that I get sent to my office full details for 

that program, exactly what the cost went to and what for, and 

the details on this here individual that you hired, a past wheat 

pool I understand you say. See if he's eligible for the position, 

or see if he's another political appointment. I'm hoping he's not. 

 

When it comes to Social Services, I hope we can keep politics 

out of there because it's very, very, important. I've always been 

very pleased in when I was in opposition from '78 to '82 and 

the years we were in government that all the people that 

worked for Social Services, I did not see politics have a play. 

And that's very, very, important, that when you're dealing with 

the lives of people out there and that there's no favouritism. 

And I have to say in 15 years as a member I'm very pleased. I'd 

like to get full details on this man that's doing this study. And 

so now, I won't . . . You've nodded that you will do that, so 

maybe I'll let you put that on the record that you'll do that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We'll send the terms of reference and 

all the information regarding the review to you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Yes, Madam Minister, you'll be able to read 

out of Hansard exactly what I asked for so that's what I'll 

expect. Madam Minister, back in January my colleague, the 

member from Moosomin, wrote to you inquiring about a new 

federal child tax benefit program. As you are aware the new 

federal child tax benefit replaced family allowance; we're all 

aware of that, refundable child tax credit and the 

non-refundable children's credit. 

 

The member from Moosomin contacted you on behalf of those 

on social assistance to see how this new program would affect 

their income. As you are well aware, those who receive 

additional monies generally have this amount deducted from 

their cheques. Your response was to announce that she would 

make 

policy changes to partially exempt the federal child tax benefit 

for people on social assistance. I repeat, Madam Minister, you 

said, partially exempt. Now I didn't like that word, but you did 

say it. These benefits . . . this money is for children. Why are 

you taking these benefits away from individuals with children 

who are on social assistance? You say that those in need will 

be protected, but you don't hesitate to deduct money from their 

social assistance cheque that is an earmark for their children. 

 

Now if that was provincial money, that's different, but this was 

special money, extra money, this is federal money, Madam 

Minister, allocated to children, and the NDP government is 

taking it away. You give a new meaning to the term federal 

transfer payments. 

 

I'd like you to explain in your own words really why you did 

that and why you didn't let them have all that extra money from 

the federal government. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We continue to do what your 

government had done. As you may be aware, prior to the child 

tax benefit coming into force in January 1, 1993, we had the 

family allowance which amounted to $34.88. Your government 

deducted $34.88 from social assistance for families with 

children. When the new child benefit came into effect on 

January 1, we continued to deduct $34.88. 

 

But what we are doing is increasing benefits for children come 

July 1, 1993 in the amount of $5 per child, and we are 

designing a new children's benefit where we will take monies 

from the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan designated towards 

children, monies from the Family Income Plan, plus some other 

monies to try and design a new program that will assist low 

income families with children. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, that's fine 

and that's exactly how I knew you were answering, and you did 

answer. But the thing is, when you were sitting over here when 

we did things like that, you said that you were going to do it 

different. You said we were starving the people. You and 

several ministers . . . critics for Social Services through the 

years, every time we done anything like you're doing: you're 

starving the people, we're cruel the things we were doing. 

 

Now things have changed a lot in the last two to three years, 

Madam Minister, as you know that we have a real problem out 

in rural Saskatchewan and that comes into being into all the 

urban areas, that there's people without jobs and it's getting 

worse because of the economy. And I'm not blaming the 

economy onto any government, it's happening all over North 

America. 

 

But when a few dollars comes through now when things are 

getting much harder . . . Tonight I read in the Leader-Post 

where a family, a mother has one child said her total money 

from Social Services — it's in the Leader-Post. I intended to 

bring it with me but I didn't — and she said 400-and-some 

dollars total and she said how much it took for . . . $100 for 

special milk 



1522 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

replacement for the child and what it cost for food and 

clothing, and they were actually sending the child to school 

hungry some mornings. And they had to depend on . . . 

sometimes she had to depend on food banks and help from 

school and what not, and I felt sorry for this woman because 

she sounded like a proud lady that didn't want to be in this 

position. But you people said you wouldn't let this happen 

when you were over here, and I wonder what you're going to 

do about this. 

 

So I'd just like to, I think, at this time to help save time again 

here, I'm going to ask you these questions all at once here. You 

said to my colleague from Rosthern tonight, who used to be the 

minister of Social Services, how much you've increased some 

of the funding. If you can't answer me this tonight, that's fine, 

as long as I get it. How much funding to a single, individual 

person able to work? How much will they receive? A single, 

with one child, a single with two, three or more, or whatever? 

Maybe you can answer me this tonight. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — If you're an adult with one child, your 

basic allowance is $390, the maximum to $390; your shelter 

allowance, maximum to 385; utilities and laundry, maximum 

125; for a total of $900. And then we exempt the family 

allowance of $34.88, so the total is about $865. 

 

If there are two adults with two children, their basic allowance 

will be, starting July 1, $700; their shelter allowance, 

maximum $440; utilities and laundry, 140; for a total of 1,280. 

Once again we deduct the family allowance, for approximately 

$1,210. 

 

If you're a single employable, your basic allowance is 195; 

your maximum shelter is 210; utilities and laundry, 75; for a 

total of $480. And if you are a single disabled person, your 

basic allowance would be maximum 195; you have a 

supplementary allowance for your disability of $40; your 

shelter, 320; utilities and laundry, 110; for a total of $665. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Madam Minister, for those 

figures, having them available for me. 

 

We'll just talk for a moment about this individual that had an 

article in the Leader-Post tonight that somebody wrote upon. 

She said she had to pay $100 extra for milk replacement for the 

child that couldn't drink milk. Is there any extra available help 

for this child or this family? Because I find out so many times, 

and it's not anybody's fault, but maybe . . . because I know 

there's many people and social workers have a hard time 

getting their messages out. Some people . . . I know in my 15 

years, especially the last five or six years, there's been many 

times people have come to me and said, well this is all I get, 

and finding out that they had more available but didn't know. 

So is there some way that this person can get more funding 

here? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I just sent some information to you 

regarding the allowances for various types of family situations. 

And the second thing that I would say in terms of the person 

that you mentioned, that she 

should contact her social worker as soon as possible because 

what our system tries to do is fund need, and if there are 

families that have special needs, obviously that will be looked 

after by the system. We do not want people who require special 

foods and that sort of thing, because of allergies, to continue to 

have medical problems that cost the health system on the other 

end, so we could make arrangements for that woman, I'm sure. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I appreciate 

that and I'm sure they will too. 

 

Madam Minister, I've just got one last comment. I've got 

figures; I brought them up in the House the other day to the 

Minister of Agriculture and I'll bring them to you, from the 

Farm Debt Review Board, that we have more people in 

financial straits in rural Saskatchewan this year since 1939. 

 

And I know there's families in rural Saskatchewan that they 

still might have a little equity left in their land or maybe they 

have in their tractor and they have equity but they're absolutely 

cash broke. I know of a farmer that had to trade the last wheat 

that he had, frozen wheat, two bushels for one, to enable to be 

able to seed his crop. Is there anything available for these kind 

of people to get emergency food, because I know there's some 

out there that it's happening and I don't think they know 

whether they can or they can't. 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, there is help available and once 

again I will send you over our income security program for 

farmers. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and that's all 

the questions I'm going to ask, and we said we'd let you away 

in good time tonight. We're 15 minutes overtime; I said 

approximately 9 o'clock. 

 

But I just want to close in saying that I think you have a real 

problem ahead of you and I wish you good luck because Social 

Services is going to have much more demand on it. The policy 

of the NDP government has always been the same as it was 

back each time they've been in government — that they like to 

tax people and they don't seem to look to be creative things to 

get people working. Now it seems to be what's happening here. 

 

I hope that you can put your heads together, you ministers, and 

the back-benchers, and all you people, and get some people 

working so we can have less welfare. And I'm not blaming you 

if can't because maybe things will just get so much worse that 

you can't. 

 

I know that many farmers are in a serious situation. As soon as 

the farmer runs into trouble, he can't pay his bills, it leads to the 

people he deals with in the little communities, and there's some 

people out there that are getting in desperate, desperate 

situations. I think many of us, unless you're in contact with 

rural Saskatchewan, don't understand. 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1523 

See, we in this room don't know what it is to go without food or 

go without a dollar in our pocket. But it's not that way in 

Saskatchewan. I can remember the end of the '30s when people 

were hungry and they were tramping the rods, and I just hope 

. . . or the rails looking for something to eat. 

 

In 1939, the war broke out and it took them away and made 

them heroes and everything seemed to turn all right. Now 

they're saying that things are turning back as bad as that in rural 

Saskatchewan. I'm hoping that things turn around and I'm sure 

you do, too, Madam Minister. 

 

But I just wish you good luck in trying to . . . in your 

department. I'm the critic for Social . . . for your department 

and you can have full cooperation with me for anything we can 

do to help the people in Saskatchewan. I'll do anything I can to 

cooperate and I wish to thank your officials for being here 

tonight and for your prompt answers, and good luck to you, 

Madam Minister. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too would 

like to this evening extend a welcome to your civil servants for 

joining us. 

 

After reviewing the Estimates I noticed a number of increases 

in spending in certain areas such as income support through the 

Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, Family Income Plan, and the 

senior citizen's benefits. 

 

All told these increases amount to some $37 million in 

additional funds for supporting family income. While 

supporting these, and individuals obviously who are most in 

need, is very worthwhile, it does raise some questions to which 

I'd like you to respond. 

 

Firstly, Madam Minister, your department benefited from 

additional funding and it was, I'm sure, very needed funding. 

Other departments weren't so lucky, however. The departments 

which experienced the greatest cuts were the Department of 

Agriculture, to which I think the member from Arm River was 

referring, and the Water Corporation. And somewhat behind 

those in percentage cuts is the Department of Health. 

 

While it may not seem so, this does bring a great bearing on 

social policy in our province. It has a great bearing on social 

policy because whatever positive effects the increases bring to 

people that are serviced by your department, it's going to be 

negated in some ways by the ill-thought-out changes that will 

occur in other departments. 

 

Departments are being cut. And in the case of Agriculture, in 

particular, there were very, very deep cuts. Those cuts, 

especially cuts to farm support programs, are truly hurting rural 

Saskatchewan families, both economically and socially. And I 

believe that the cutting of your government should not come to 

the point where what it does is disempower people in order to 

be productive. 

Added to this is the fact that your colleague, Madam Minister, 

the Minister of Health, has been reducing health expenditures 

significantly. And we know that we have to handle health 

differently in the province, but the expenditures are now being 

cut by some $20 million and resulting in significant lay-offs of 

rural workers in particular. 

 

I'd like you please, Madam Minister, to explain how all of this 

can be reconciled. I'm just wanting to understand it better, to 

come to some understanding about whether or not we can come 

to some consistency here. 

 

And the questions I pose are these. First of all, how are we 

better off when, although you've been given what was probably 

a very needed increase to income supports, other programs, 

especially those affecting rural areas, are cut deeply, which are 

causing job loss and many, many livelihoods to disappear. 

 

I'm going to cite two more questions that go along with that 

one, and if you wish for me to repeat them I will. How does 

this ultimately improve the social well-being of our province, 

and how is that a good vision for the social well 

_being of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well you're on a topic that's near and 

dear to my heart as someone who grew up in rural 

Saskatchewan and whose family has been involved in 

agriculture in this province since 1903. Obviously as a member 

of the Saskatchewan government I watch very carefully what 

happens to rural communities. 

 

As you probably know, in the '80s we saw a major change in 

how agricultural support programs are funded in this country. 

And as I've heard you say in the past, you believe that we need 

to have a national agricultural policy, and I agree with you 

totally. It is my view that we cannot have province-by-province 

approaches to agriculture because basically Canada is an export 

country when it comes to the business of agriculture. What we 

saw was a downloading on the part of the federal government 

from their national responsibility to provincial responsibility. 

And therefore the province took on more and more financial 

responsibility for various, what I would call, income support 

programs for people living in rural Saskatchewan who are 

engaged in the business of agriculture. 

 

When our party came to office in October 1991, we 

immediately set about taking a look at what had taken place in 

this province in the past nine and a half years. We had to come 

to terms with the fact that we were teetering on the brink of 

financial disaster. And from my personal point of view, it 

wouldn't have mattered whether it was the present Premier 

sitting in that chair or yourself sitting in that chair or the 

member from Estevan sitting in that chair, whoever was the 

government in October of 1991 would have been dealt the 

same set of cards. We had a $15 billion debt. That debt was 

escalating, and we had to start to deal with that debt. 



1524 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

What our government did was take a look at where we were 

spending money. And from a public policy point of view, with 

a citizenry of less than one million people, with over 40 per 

cent of agriculture in this country done in our province, we 

could not expect the provincial treasury to continue to support 

agriculture to the magnitude that we had, given our fiscal crisis. 

 

And so what we saw was a change in how we approach 

agriculture in the province, particularly when it comes to 

subsidies because we couldn't afford to pay the 200 

million-some-odd dollars. 

 

As you also probably know that there has been a demographic 

shift in the province. People are making the transition — and 

this is not new; this is something that's been going on since the 

'30s — people are moving from rural Saskatchewan to urban 

Saskatchewan, and in fact we've seen for many, many years 

people then leaving our province. Many of the institutions that 

we have in this province at present, in terms of our health 

institutions, our educational institutions, our municipal 

institutions, were designed in the '40s. But we are now in the 

1990s, and change is painful, horrendously painful but the 

institutions have to adapt to some of the demographic changes 

that have occurred, and consequently there's a restructuring 

going on. And whenever you have restructuring, there is pain 

because change is painful. And so you will see, I think, in this 

transition period people who are going to be caught in that 

transition. 

 

But I'm very optimistic that people can be retrained, they can 

be re-employed, they can have access to the new kinds of jobs 

that will emerge in this decade. So in terms of what about the 

social well-being of this province, I think if we hadn't begun to 

restructure our institutions, our province, come the year 2000, 

would be in much worse shape than it presently is in. And I 

think by the time we hit the year 2000 we'll be in shape to meet 

the new challenges of the next century because of the changes 

that we've undertaken. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Just to go 

back to my initial question, it really is about how does one 

reconcile choices. Okay? That's really what it's about. I don't 

think there's anyone in the province that disagrees that this is a 

time of change, and I was talking to someone earlier today 

about a quote that I'd read early this morning saying that one 

has much more teaching from 10 hours of agony than 10 years 

of contentment. So I think we will all be well educated after 

this decade. 

 

I guess my concern lies in the fact that this is all about choices, 

and there are ways in which people can make decisions about, 

are we going to be people who deal in the stock market with 

our Cameco shares of $340 million worth, or now that they're 

very high . . . I mean, are we in fact considering selling them? 

 

Do we in fact have some kind of a commitment to SaskEnergy 

to the point where, even though other provinces are looking at 

and already have made 

significant changes, that they are doing that but perhaps for 

some ideological reason we would not consider that or perhaps 

we were . . . You know, I'm talking about the kinds of things 

that can deal with changing the monetary situation for the 

province, and the only reason we would want to be making 

some decisions is that they're in the best interests of the people. 

Now we've talked many, many times before — not in this 

Assembly — about people. And you and I know that Freud 

said the only thing that's required to be a healthy person is to be 

able to love and to work. 

 

And this is really much of what I'm talking about here is is 

there not a way that there can be greater coordination between 

departments to work toward having people have the dignity of 

employment versus spending the dollars that all . . . although 

no one would argue are very, very needed for the quality of life 

of individuals — what in the long run is going to be in the best 

interests of the people. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You raise a very good question and I 

agree with you. I agree with you that in terms of a person's 

overall well-being they need two things: they need love and 

they need work. I agree with you. 

 

In terms of our approach to government, when we came into 

government it was pretty clear — and as someone who's 

worked in the community and you will appreciate this — that 

departments tended to be in their boxes, vertical . . . they took 

vertical approaches. And what we have seen is a much more 

integrated approach to problem solving. 

 

We will soon release a childrens' action plan to the public of 

Saskatchewan. And that is a plan that was developed by seven 

different departments because seven different departments deal 

with children. We have a day care review that's presently being 

undertaken. We have a number of different departments 

involved in that review because day care shouldn't just be a 

social welfare issue — it is an economic development issue, it's 

a labour issue, it's an education issue. And so we're taking a 

more integrated approach. 

 

(2130) 

 

The ministry of education and our ministry are working to do 

some pilots, looking at preschool intervention. In communities 

where we have at-risk children, lots of single-parent moms, 

we're developing a children and youth plan where we will take 

. . . we will work across departmentally so that we can 

approach high-risk children in a more integrated way. 

 

And that's what we expect from the NGO review, where 

communities are saying we can't continue to be in our boxes, 

we can't afford to do that, and we have to work together. So if 

government can integrate and communities can integrate and 

then we can work cooperatively, I think that we are on the road 

to a new vision. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1525 

Madam Minister, some of your comments actually lead into my 

next question, but I do want to make a comment first. I'm 

absolutely delighted that there's an undertaking of a pilot 

project. It's something I've been talking about ad nauseam in 

here regarding the Department of Health which I think we 

could have gone much further in the last 18 months with health 

reform had there been an undertaking of a pilot project, 

particularly in strategic rural areas of the province, and learned 

a great deal by doing so and implementing changes that would 

not have resulted in the kinds of problems we're having today. 

 

I'm concerned about some of the choices that have been made 

in increasing social income supports. And I examined the 

estimates for the New Careers Corporation which provides 

retraining, and I noticed that it was hardly increased at all. And 

while we all appreciate that people in trouble could always use 

more money, I fail to understand why the increases to income 

supports were so disproportionate to those for upgrading and 

training people on social assistance. 

 

And from looking at the relative differences in the increases, it 

does not appear as though the emphasis was on getting people 

to become part of the workplace, but the emphasis appeared to 

be helping the people to stay on welfare. And I would like your 

comments please. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well as you probably know, New 

Careers Corporation has been transferred over to Education 

Training and Employment in order that we can take a more 

integrated approach to how we do training and employment in 

this province. So I'm quite pleased about that transfer. 

 

In terms of the increase in income security in our budget, I can 

say this, that we've had some major changes to unemployment 

insurance which has had an impact upon our budget. We've 

been notified by the federal government that there's a very 

good possibility that the province is soon going to have to take 

ownership, I guess, of income support for aboriginal people 

who are living off reserve for one year. And of course, we've 

had escalating case-loads. 

 

So the increase that you see is not so much an increase in 

benefits for people living on social assistance or having to rely 

on social assistance; it's to deal with some cards that have been 

handed to the province that we hadn't anticipated because of 

changes in terms of federal government policy and in terms of 

new people coming onto assistance. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you. Last year I sent your 

predecessor a series of written questions. I was unable to 

present them in person in the Assembly because I was with my 

husband during his illness. In those questions, there was a lot of 

focus on restructuring and quite a bit on preventive work rather 

than interfering at a later point in crisis, where of course 

interference or trying to get involved would be far more costly. 

 

Now if prevention is really such an important factor — which I 

agree that it is an important factor — I find it 

inconsistent that your colleague, the Minister of Health, chose 

to cut programs involving alcohol abuse. The Minister of 

Health cut the Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse 

Commission by $1.079 million and that's an absolutely 

significant cut in a budget of some $14 million. 

 

And I'm really wanting your opinion here. I'd like to know how 

you think this will affect the work of the Department of Social 

Services and what you as minister have been doing to in fact 

meet with and discuss the ramifications of this decision with 

the Minister of Health, given the importance of these programs. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think if you look at the budget for 

SADAC (Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse 

Commission), there have been some fairly significant increases 

in that budget over the last several years. And I think what 

we're trying to do is move away from institutional-type care to 

more community-based care. And as I read the literature and 

understand some of the new research, that you don't necessarily 

have to have 28-day programs or institutional-type programs in 

order to deal with addictions. 

 

In terms of youth and what sort of impact that will have on our 

department, we are presently developing a youth plan for our 

department, and I would be pleased to share that with you if 

you would like a briefing by the officials in the department 

because I think you would find it quite interesting. And I'm 

sure you would be supportive because what we're trying to do 

. . . if you look at the way our budget is structured, most of the 

money goes towards core programs such as residential care, 

those kinds of things. And very little goes to prevention, and a 

little bit more goes to intervention. And what we're trying to do 

is shift the focus to more prevention before we have to 

intervene and then institutionalize kids. 

 

So if you would like to have a briefing, we'd be pleased to 

provide you with that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — I would be delighted to receive that 

information. I guess part of what I'm having difficulty with 

here is I do know a number of people in the addictions field, 

and they have grave concerns about this. These are not 

individuals who are on the payroll of SADAC. These are 

people who are very familiar with addictions as people who 

suffer from addictions and have been recovering for many 

years. And if they have grave concerns, then I think that it's 

something that the government has to take heed of because the 

focus really of what I'm pointing to here is on prevention. And 

one of the things that one has to be cautious of is not having the 

right kind of structure in place to take over when a transition is 

going on. What happens then is of course things are 

helter-skelter. And again it's not prevention, it's trying to rescue 

out of a crisis situation. 

 

I do understand your points of view on this however. For the 

time of . . . the expediency here, Madam Minister, in response 

to my written questions again last year, it was emphasized that 

you would be 



1526 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

making a greater effort to involve aboriginal peoples in the 

delivery of social service programs. And I think you wanted to 

offer them greater control so that natives, particularly troubled 

youth, could enjoy the benefits of help from those of their own 

social milieu in the confines of their own community. 

 

And in the responses last year, they were vague. I was going to 

say somewhat vague, but they were very vague, I'm sorry to 

say. In light of that, I'm hoping that you'll be able to clarify the 

status of this now for us and what you've done to facilitate 

greater aboriginal involvement in the delivery of social 

services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Let me say this, that we have seconded 

three people to the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations); that we now have a family connections program 

where we are working with bands in identifying kids that were 

taken into care by the Department of Social Services and then 

looking at reconnecting them to their families. We will have 20 

individuals this year working in this area. We are hiring more 

aboriginal people within the department. And we have 

recognized the day care equivalency standards that the 

Meadow Lake Tribal Council has adopted as equivalent to the 

day care standards that our province presently has. We're in the 

process of recognizing the legislation that the FSIN (Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) with regard to child and 

family services . . . and recognizing that equivalency so that 

tribal councils can begin to set up their own child and family 

service agencies in this province. 

 

Aboriginal people are telling us that for many, many years they 

have had to deal with a Social Services department that was 

basically nonaboriginal and that they have now got the skills, 

education, training, and ability to begin to take over their own 

services. So we are in that process of devolving services, and it 

is our hope that we will have some news to announce — I 

won't say shortly, but in the very near future. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much. Madam Minister, I 

would also like to raise a matter which I brought up last year 

and that is to get clarification regarding the coordination that 

there will be between services in your department and the 

many stakeholders and health care providers under the 

government's new wellness model. 

 

You provided some description of that coordination that you 

were engaging in during this past year, and now that we have a 

somewhat better idea about this whole thing and what it might 

look like — in other words, in light of the 52 fewer rural 

hospitals in the newly formed health districts — can you give 

an update on what this coordination might look like, and how 

it's been considered? 

 

If I may, I'll just illustrate. A lot of the regional personnel who 

would leave, let's say from Swift Current and go out into 

different regions, many of them served a lot of functions that 

would be interdepartmental, if you will. And that's really what 

I'm interested in, is how this is now being 

conceptualized in the coordination that will take place? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well we're very interested in that too 

because we believe that in order to have wellness in the 

province, you have to have social well-being as well, and that 

the Department of Social Services, with our regional structure, 

because we do have a decentralized regional structure across 

Saskatchewan, we can fit very nicely into some of the work 

that has been done by the district boards that have been struck. 

 

As I understand it, we have many people who are active 

employees of our department who are involved in some of the 

discussions that are taking place at the community level with 

regard to the types of services that could be provided by a 

district board. In fact I was up in the Melfort area on Monday, 

and one of our employees was going off to a meeting to talk 

about the new health district and some of the services that 

would be available. My impression is that our employees are 

being asked to be involved and are involving themselves in the 

process. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you. Do you actually see this in a 

way that you could be able to articulate what it is exactly that's 

going to be happening at some point? I don't expect that this 

evening. I'm actually thinking of terms of . . . You know, it's 

one thing to come up with a model, but if it's only a model 

because it's never been done before, it's very important for us to 

have clear guidelines as to what the expectations are within a 

particular time period with measurability. 

 

Is that something that's actually going to transpire here, 

because part of what people need is not just the reassurance 

that something's going to happen; with such change going on, 

they actually need proof that what is being said to be better for 

them is actually in fact better for them. Is that something that is 

being worked on in your department so that you can work with 

the Department of Health and come up with some clarity here? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Our department . . . As you may know, 

the former associate deputy minister of our department is now 

the associate deputy minister in the Department of Health, and 

we're very pleased about that because we think that he has an 

understanding of the types of services that our department has 

delivered across Saskatchewan. He has a working knowledge 

of the NGOs that are in the community. He's also a community 

developer and he understands that it's important that 

communities have an opportunity to come together and talk 

about their vision for their community. 

 

We don't have a master plan emanating from the Department of 

Social Services as to how we will fit into the health reform that 

is occurring, but certainly our employees are citizens in those 

communities where health reform is happening and they are 

being asked to participate. And they are participating because 

we think that wellness includes much of the work that we do. 

We're talking about the social 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1527 

well-being of children, the social well-being of women, men. 

Many of the people that our department serves also are served 

by the health system in this province. As you know, if you are 

poor you are more likely to use the health system. 

 

And so we have lots of people that are being engaged in the 

discussion, but if you're asking me for a blueprint I can't give 

you that. If you're asking me what I think the health reform will 

look like at the end of the day, I have my own personal vision 

of what that will be. But obviously each community, each 

health district, is going to look at their own community and 

determine what their community needs. I think that health 

reform will vary across the province because communities will 

identify different services that they want to have in their 

communities and then they'll go after them. I don't think we're 

going to have the same system regardless of where you go; it 

will differ. And I'm not talking about acute care or long-term 

care; I'm talking about community-based services. 

 

(2145) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — I do understand that. Before I ask you my 

next question, I just wish to make a comment about it however. 

I really believe very much in providing something that would 

have a way of measuring what is transpiring, and so that there 

is some way of people having a sense over a time line where 

things are going. And if there in fact are going to be differences 

around the province . . . there are differences in some ways 

already, where some parts of the province, even in their own 

hospitals would have a particular area that they may have as an 

area of expertise where one may not, some people who are 

particularly skilled and so they've gathered them at one facility 

— so one does expect differences. But I think it's important for 

there to be an understanding of . . . and most importantly a 

collection of information, a database being formed on what is 

happening. And that's really crucial for us to understand, first 

of all where we're at, so that when we get where we're going, 

we know what's actually happened. 

 

So I hope that does take place, and that it's done in a 

methodical way with time lines and the like, and of course in 

cooperation with the people who are carrying things out in their 

own communities. 

 

I know that some of this has been raised by the official 

opposition, but I do want some comment from you to me about 

this. Last year, there was comment on the — and it was in 

quotes, I think, during the budget — a significant increase to 

child hunger programs, a large percentage increase. While it 

sounded like an impressive increase, I think it was . . . I mean 

relative to what there was before, anything would have 

sounded like a significant increase. I think it turned out to be 

$244,000, in real dollars. That increase brought the total budget 

for child hunger to $1 million. And if one thinks of it, $1 

million is not particularly a large sum of monies. In fact, a lot 

of people have been raising criticism that that's the amount that 

was increased to the provincial secretariat in this previous 

budget, the budget of late. 

All that people know, really, is that if we're going to have to 

look at the description of what is done by one department, like 

the one that I've used for illustration purposes, versus the need 

to feed hungry children in the province, I think there's a 

question of priorities here. And I'm wondering if you could 

comment on the dollars and cents figures and how it's actually 

being addressed as an issue in the province. And I am 

interested in knowing how it is your department is keeping 

statistics on this really serious area of problem in our province. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Right. First of all, I believe that the 

budget was $740 million and we increased the budget by 

$260,000 . . . or 740,000 and we increased it by 260,000 to a 

total of $1 million. Nineteen organizations in this province 

deliver 101 feeding projects in 17 locations. Twelve of these 

locations are rural and new projects have been announced in 

the cities of Yorkton, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and North 

Battleford, as well as the town of Lestock and Spiritwood. 

 

I should tell you that we are told by the groups that are 

involved in these child feeding programs that for every dollar 

they receive from us, they're able to lever 3 to 4 to 5 more 

dollars. So in fact, the $1 million means much more than that 

because we have communities through volunteerism and 

through fund-raising, doing extraordinary work in the 

communities. 

 

As you may know, the child nutrition and development 

program was started in 1990 under the former administration. 

And they did so in consultation with the communities. In terms 

of the numbers, projects that receive the funds report to us with 

statistics and information, and that information is not yet 

available. I notice that you had asked for some information on 

that. We won't get that information until the end of March. And 

we're just now compiling that information. But we will provide 

you with those figures. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. I 

only have two questions, so I do hope that you will be patient. 

Earlier this year the people of the province discovered an 

interesting, if not heroic story of two physically challenged 

people in Saskatoon who wanted to get married. And both 

persons are employed by Cosmopolitan Centre in Saskatoon. 

But one who has cerebral palsy requires constant assistance. 

 

That need for almost constant care may prevent them from 

fulfilling an aim in life which most people can enjoy. And they 

can't find suitable housing because of waiting-lists. And they 

cannot find financial assistance to provide one Lisa Belhumeur, 

I think her name is, the individual with cerebral palsy, the help 

that she requires. 

 

That special assistance was available at one time but was 

cancelled by the previous administration. I'd like to know 

whether this administration has anything in place that could 

help these particular individuals or 



1528 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

individuals like these people? And I believe many people in 

this province are very empathetic as well as sympathetic to the 

plight of these two individuals involved and would like to 

know if your department has something that could provide 

them with assistance. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This is the attendant care issue that 

you're talking about. The Department of Health and the 

Department of Social Services, along with Elmwood lodge, is 

attempting to sort this individual's problem out. 

 

We know that there are many people in this province if given 

the proper resources, could live independently. These are very 

expensive resources and obviously there are some financial 

implications given that the province is facing some horrendous 

fiscal circumstances. I can assure you that we are committed to 

ensuring that people in the situation that you've described can 

live as independently as possible. And this is an issue that we're 

working on very, very hard. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you. I think they'll be most pleased 

to hear that. 

 

Madam Minister, you mentioned earlier about the pilot project, 

the integrated, school-based services project, I believe. I'm just 

wondering if you would be able to provide some detail to me in 

the near future about how that's working. I . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Okay. All right. You haven't started yet, but 

I'm most interested in that. 

 

Madam Minister, Hon. Minister of Social Services, I would 

like to thank you very much for your responses this evening, 

and I'd like to thank your officials. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I'll make my remarks right at the end, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Supplemental Seniors' Support agreed to. 

 

Vote 36 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992-93 

Consolidated Fund 

Budgetary Expenditure 

Seniors' Secretariat 

Vote 42 

 

Vote 42 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992-93 

Consolidated Fund 

Budgetary Expenditure 

Social Services 

Vote 36 

 

Vote 36 agreed to. 

The Chair: — That concludes the estimates and 

supplementary estimates for the Department of Social Services. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want 

to take this opportunity on behalf of the official opposition to 

thank the minister for a frank and candid dialogue, and also the 

officials of the department who are very dedicated and capable 

people. And I know that the job that they have to perform is a 

very challenging one, and it is a difficult one. And I know that 

as far as the officials of the . . . not only the officials here, but 

indeed the officials throughout the entire department are going 

to do their jobs in implementing the policies which are dictated 

to them by the government. 

 

And all that we can do is hope that the government stays the 

course and has policies that will indeed fulfil the needs of the 

people of this province. Mr. Chairman, again thank you, 

Madam Minister, and officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I want to thank the opposition for their 

questions. I appreciated the discussion. I actually anticipated 

that it might be a lengthier discussion but it wasn't. 

 

I also want to thank my officials. As the member of the 

opposition has said and being the former minister of Social 

Services, he knows how incredibly hard these people work, day 

and night, in some cases, weekends. I think that if the public 

only knew the kind of dedication that the civil service in this 

province has to their work, they'd be truly impressed, and I 

guess that's up to members of the legislature to get that 

message to the public. So I want to thank my officials as well. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 


