




















































Hansard: May 03, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1377 

 May 3, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and 

through you to the members of the Legislative Assembly, 22 

grade 10 students from the Muenster High School. They are 

accompanied by their teacher, Paul Reist; chaperons, Sharon 

Blanch and Della Thiemann. 

 

This has been an annual event for the grade 10 students from 

Muenster and I would like at this time to have all members join 

with me to extend a warm welcome to the grade 10 students. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Also, Mr. Speaker, in your Speaker's 

gallery we have Watson Elementary School represented by 34 

grade 6 students. They're accompanied by their teachers, 

Bernice Gerspacher, Ted Biemans; chaperons, Al Gerspacher, 

Debbie Fetter, Shelly Frederick, and Brian Scheuchuk. I'd ask 

all members to join with me to welcome the students and the 

chaperons and teachers from the Watson Elementary. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like 

you to recognize . . . there's some individuals sitting in your 

gallery and I believe there are a number in the west gallery — 

concerned men and women from across the province, across 

the city of Regina, who took time out of their daily schedules 

just to spend some time on the lawn and calling out to our God 

Almighty just for divine guidance at this present time in our 

province. 

 

And I'd just like to mention they're from representatives from 

Big Sky Free Methodist Church, Faith Baptist Church, 

Morning Star ministries, Hillsdale Alliance Church, Rosewood 

Park Alliance, Fort Qu'Appelle Alliance, Weyburn Pentecostal, 

people from Moosomin, Northside Baptist, Avonhurst 

Pentecostal, the Sunrise community, Speak Out Canada, and 

Community Impact. 

 

And I want to welcome all these people to the Assembly here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

SaskTel Holding Company 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

my question is to the minister responsible for SaskTel. Madam 

Minister, on April 28 

you signed an order in council which transfers a large portion 

of both the assets and the liabilities of SaskTel over to a 

holding company. I wonder if you could explain the reason for 

these transfers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry to have to say to 

the hon. member that while I'm acting for the minister 

responsible who is absent today, I'm not familiar with this 

transaction and therefore will have to take notice of it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Minister of 

Justice then, on this next question. Mr. Minister, according to 

the OC (order in council), you transferred SaskTel's interests in 

SaskTel International, Leicester Communications, Information 

Systems Management, DirectWest publishers, a number of 

cable companies, SaskTel mobility assets, and all of SaskTel's 

property and buildings, including the head office building in 

Regina, to this holding company. You also transferred $145 

million in debt over to the holding company. 

 

This seems to be a very significant transaction, Mr. Minister. 

Your government professes to be open and accessible and you 

didn't even bother to announce it or bring it up in this 

Legislative Assembly. You simply signed an OC that juggles 

around millions of dollars of government assets and liabilities 

and, I believe, hope that no one would bother to ask you a 

question. 

 

Mr. Minister, if this transaction is as you say, in the best 

interests of the government and the people of Saskatchewan, 

why was it not announced in this Legislative Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 

opposite for that question. In the fall of 19 . . . or the spring of 

1992 we introduced into this legislature a piece of legislation 

setting up or establishing the holding company. And we made a 

full and free explanation at that time and in committee on the 

Bill as to the purpose for setting up the holding company, being 

prepared for the regulatory environment changes that the 

federal government was in the process of putting into place, so 

that those areas of commerce within SaskTel corporation that 

would not be subject to regulation would be held separately. 

And that was a subject of discussion in this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Question to the 

same minister. Madam Minister, the debate that took place over 

that particular piece of legislation dealt with the problems of 

SaskTel and the CRTC (Canadian Radio 

_television and Telecommunications Commission) and long 

distance regulations. 

 

What you have done in this particular OC is go far beyond 

simply long distance. This is every part of SaskTel and its 

operations including many companies that I'm sure most 

taxpayers have never even heard of before. 



1378 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

Madam Minister, could you tell me why the transfer price in 

each one of these components sold to the holding company was 

given as book value? With the exception of the buildings and 

the properties, none of these book values have been provided. 

Madam Minister, will you provide that information to the 

Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, we would certainly, in 

the honest, open, and accountable way that we do business, be 

prepared to provide the member with this information. It's not 

something that I have at hand so I would take notice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, on a transaction this 

size which obviously deals with assets spread all over this 

province, assets that are held in conjunction by other entities 

besides SaskTel, you would think that you would know more 

about what was going on here. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, why was the transfer price of all of 

these assets at book value rather than fair market value? 

Wouldn't this transaction better reflect what you are doing if 

you used fair market values in your evaluations? And could 

you provide us with the difference, Madam Minister, between 

the book value and the fair market value for each of the assets 

transferred. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, in reorganizing the 

affairs pursuant to the legislation that we would provide for 

this, we would rely on the advice of experts — financial 

experts and legal experts — as to the organization. And we 

would behave accordingly to protect the interests of the people 

of Saskatchewan who are the shareholders of both the SaskTel 

corporation and the holding company. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Question to the 

same minister. Madam Minister, we're talking about $145 

million here. We're talking about the transfer of assets all over 

this province. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, what this Assembly needs is simply not 

some offhand explanation about your experts. Your experts 

haven't been doing well lately. What the province wants to 

know and what the taxpayers want to know, Madam Minister, 

is the inside of this particular deal. 

 

Madam Minister, could you provide us with the fair market 

value of all the assets transferred to the holding company and 

what the total amount of that transfer was. Would you do that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, the orders in council 

that the member opposite referred to would reflect the numbers 

in the transaction in an open and accountable way and would 

reflect the best interests for the people of Saskatchewan who 

own all the assets 

of the company prior to the transfer, and who continue to own 

them subsequent to the transfer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Question to the 

same minister. Madam Minister, I have the OC here, in all its 

dozens of pages. The questions I have asked you are not 

answered in the order in council. Once again your government 

is pushing through a complex set of financial data by OC and 

saying to the public, trust us even though we aren't willing to 

disclose all of the information in this order in council. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, that is why the Provincial Auditor has 

been asking for the opportunity to audit Crown corporations, 

major transactions like this one. If everything in this OC is as 

sound as you say, Madam Minister, then why not let the 

Provincial Auditor have a chance to go through it, pass 

judgement on it, and let's see if what you say about this large 

order in council and $145 million of taxpayers' money is as is. 

 

Madam Minister, will you let the Provincial Auditor do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the operations and the 

accounting for this kind of transaction is the subject of 

financial advice from within the corporation, the supervision of 

the CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), 

the CIC which is audited by the Provincial Auditor. So the 

details of these transactions are transparent to the Provincial 

Auditor. 

 

This legislation was assented to in December of 1991, so I 

correct my earlier statement. I knew it was one of the first 

sessions of the House; it was the opening session in the fall of 

1991. So it's been debated here now over a year and a half ago. 

 

I think that we were preparing ourselves, and we explained at 

the time, to protect the interests of the people of Saskatchewan 

and the telephone rates in Saskatchewan from the predatory 

actions of the CRTC and your Tory friends in Ottawa, and 

what they were doing to the regulatory environment for 

telephone companies. 

 

I suppose I wish, the people of Saskatchewan might wish, that 

this same accountability would have prevailed, for instance, 

when millions of dollars were paid to George Hill without 

public accounting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

what is at issue here is closer to a half a billion dollars in total. 

There's $145 million in debt alone which you are moving 

around without this legislature being informed about. A half a 

billion dollars is the total impact of what you've done here, 

Madam Minister. That wasn't done by one minister alone. That 

is obviously a cabinet decision. 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1379 

Madam Minister, we've asked you some questions about 

numbers in this document. Would you now please answer the 

questions about the difference between fair market value and 

book value on a transaction that covers a half a billion dollars, 

Madam Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I would just point out to 

the member opposite that the value . . . for instance let's take 

the asset being the head office. Whether it's held by SaskTel or 

whether it's held by a holding company for SaskTel doesn't 

affect the value of the asset. And I think we've tried to explain 

the reason — that we were simply reorganizing the affairs of 

the corporation, anticipating changes in the regulatory 

environment. 

 

And I just want to quote from Hansard, December 19, 1991 

referring to that telecommunications Bill. The House Leader, 

Mr. Neudorf: 

 

 Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I don't think we have 

any major problems with the Bill. In order to facilitate 

expediency we'll let it go into committee . . . 

 

So there wasn't a problem with the Bill at that time, the purpose 

of which was explained. The order in council is pursuant to that 

legislation and we think that we are serving the best interests of 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

the question at hand today isn't what you promised a year and a 

half ago in this legislature. Because what you had promised a 

year and a half ago has been broken in each and every case. I 

can bring up a dozen subjects where you haven't kept your 

word, Madam Minister. You haven't been true and honest with 

the people of this province in the implementation of . . . you 

say one thing in here and you do another outside. 

 

Madam Minister, this moving around of a half a billion dollars 

in SaskTel's assets without having the OC cover off a number 

of the issues, Madam Minister, are you setting this corporation 

up for privatization? Are you doing that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, interesting. I just want 

to read from Hansard again on December 19, 1991 where I 

moved second reading of The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Holding company Act. I said at that time: 

 

 As many members will be aware, this legislation is designed 

to allow for the reorganization of SaskTel in anticipation of 

federal regulation by the Canadian Radio-television and 

Telecommunications Commission. 

 Unfortunately the federal government does have the 

legislative authority to regulate SaskTel if it decides to go 

ahead with the amendments that are required. 

 

And to my recollection you voted in favour of the Bill at that 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, as I said before, 

what you say in here and what you actually do are two different 

things. I mean, did you tell the truth about protecting health 

care? No. Did you tell the truth about not raising taxes? No. 

Did you tell the truth about helping farmers? No. Did you tell 

the truth about patronage? No. 

 

Madam Minister, no one in the province today believes you 

when you say something any more, because you simply haven't 

kept your word with the taxpayers and voters of this province. 

 

Now I ask you once again, Madam Minister, is it possible that 

these moves are being set up in order to privatize portions of 

SaskTel? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, the comments of the 

member opposite are beginning to border on hypocrisy. He 

talks to us about privatization. He talks to us about 

accountability. 

 

We said, we said that we were passing this legislation to allow 

for the reorganization of SaskTel in anticipation of the federal 

regulation by CRTC, the predatory actions of the federal 

government into the area of operations in our provincial 

telephone company. We've moved pursuant to that legislation. 

We are reorganizing the assets using the telecommunications 

holding company and the enabling legislation. 

 

We haven't changed the value of any of the assets. We are 

making this move to protect the assets of the people in 

Saskatchewan from that competitive environment and from 

those predatory actions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Question to the 

same minister. It seems, Mr. Speaker, that maybe now we're 

getting down closer to the truth here. We all know the other 

day that Madam Finance Minister was asked about 

harmonization, and she said it's actually a good idea; she just 

couldn't bring herself to say the word. 

 

Well we asked the Minister of SaskTel about privatization. 

And we know, we know the problem that these people have 

with the P-word, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Madam Minister, now we get reorganization. 

Harmonization we can't say. Privatization we can't 



1380 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

say. But we can say reorganization. 

 

Madam Minister, you are moving around a half a billion dollars 

of the people's assets. You aren't disclosing all of the 

information. Madam Minister, why don't you use the P-word if 

that's what you're up to and tell the province of Saskatchewan 

exactly what you have in mind for SaskTel and its components. 

Why don't you do that, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I'd just like to remind 

the member opposite as well that one of the first pieces of 

legislation that we passed in that session was a Bill to establish 

SaskEnergy, which was a corporation that the members 

opposite had tried to privatize. I have no problem saying that 

word, but that is not the issue. 

 

We have explained over and over again why we set up the 

telecommunications holding company. You agreed with it at 

that time. I don't know when you've changed your mind. We 

haven't affected the value of any assets; in fact by doing this, 

we are protecting the value of the assets in the interests of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Review of Crop Insurance Agents 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Minister, my question 

is to the minister responsible for Crop Insurance. Mr. Minister, 

a while back we learned of a witch-hunt that was taking place 

among Saskatchewan Crop Insurance marketing agents. A 

number of these agents were being called into the head office 

in Melville, told to bring their computers and all their files and 

were being forced to choose between resigning and being 

dismissed, even though in most instances these agents had 

excellent work records. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you tell me how many Crop Insurance agents 

were fired as a result of this witch-hunt, and how many have 

been replaced, and what is the process of choosing their 

replacements? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, there was a review 

of some Crop Insurance agents. The contract under which they 

were working had no system for evaluation or performance of 

Crop Insurance agents. What we did was we called in a number 

of agents and went through their work record with them and 

assessed their performance ability and their desire . . . whether 

or not they desired to continue on. I think there were, if 

memory serves me right, about nine who are no longer with the 

contracts. They have not been replaced; none of these have 

been replaced. The areas have been divided out amongst 

existing contract . . . or existing agents in the areas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I understand 

that the agents that were let go, one was near Prince Albert, and 

I also understand that one Michael Feschuk, NDP (New 

Democratic Party) MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) for Prince Albert from 1971 to 1982, is taking 

classes at Melville at this point in time and is involved in either 

an agency or an adjuster's responsibility. Will you confirm or 

deny that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, we will undoubtedly 

be replacing some agents — or not agents, but particularly 

adjusters — at some point. I do not know whether Mr. Feschuk 

has applied or is in training at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I find this utterly 

amazing. The minister is responsible for a $500 million transfer 

in SaskTel, don't understand anything about it, can't answer 

questions in this Assembly that deal with numbers, that deal 

with facts, and now you're trying to tell me that you don't 

understand whether Michael Feschuk is in Melville at this point 

in time taking classes to be an adjuster or an agent. Would you 

tell us what you are responsible for and why you're getting paid 

that exorbitant salary if you don't understand what's going on in 

your corporation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, it doesn't surprise me 

that the members opposite don't understand this. I think in the 

previous administration that the ministers had a lot to do with 

the hiring and firing and personnel at very low levels of the 

corporation. 

 

I want to tell the members opposite that this government 

operates in a different fashion. We have an administration, we 

have a hiring process, we have the Public Service Commission, 

and we have a process by which people apply for jobs and get 

them based on their competence and their ability, and not based 

on their friendship or political lines or connections to ministers. 

 

I know that the members opposite don't believe that because it's 

not the way they operated government, but I want to assure 

you, Mr. Speaker, that is the way that we operate this 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Mr. Minister, the truth about your 

government is that this restructuring is all just being done to 

replace individuals who have a track record of competency 

with ones that are litmus-tested red and represent a part of your 

NDP organization. 

 

And I want to just . . . why was Zach Douglas brought 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1381 

forward the other day as an individual who is responding to the 

involvement with the Minister of Economic Development? 

And why is Gordon Nystuen involved in the Gaming 

Commission? Lisa Thomson? Why is Oren Reiman and Jack 

Lloyd being involved in your government when you say you 

don't do that sort of thing? 

 

Mr. Minister, my question to you is this. Will you admit that 

your Crop Insurance restructuring is nothing more than a 

witch-hunt designed to make room for more NDP patronage 

appointments? And will you admit that the number of perfectly 

capable agents were let go? And will you also admit that a 

number of these people that you are letting go don't meet the 

requirements that you set out in the blood test, as the member 

from Elphinstone said the other day? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, again I point out that 

this reorganization and restructuring of Crop Insurance has 

been to deliver more efficient service and to deliver better 

service to farmers. I am proud of the record of Crop Insurance. 

I think we have made great improvements in our ability to 

deliver service and do a better job of service to farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the member opposite maybe doesn't 

understand the word competence. This hiring based on 

competence does not mean . . . and I think that somebody who 

has voted NDP is restricted from ever having a job with this 

government. After all, I think if we were to stick to hiring 

Tories, we would have very few to hire. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we have is a professional process for 

hiring people, and that is what we have done in this 

government and continue to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 

responsible for Crop Insurance again. In March 1991 the 

Premier stated that the people in your government would not 

. . . in no uncertain terms that the partisan people, party people, 

defeated MLAs and candidates shouldn't be getting government 

appointments. That's what your Premier said in 1991. 

 

Now I want to ask you: how come you have all of these 

people? You didn't tell the truth about that. You didn't tell the 

truth about health care. You didn't tell the truth about taxes. 

You didn't tell the truth about helping farmers. 

 

Will you admit that your government gives preferential 

treatment to NDP supporters? Will you admit that any time you 

have a problem firing perfectly capable people, any time you 

need to make room for another NDP hack, that's what you do? 

Isn't that a fact, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I think again the 

member opposite does not understand the basis of competence. 

No, we do not hire on the political litmus test, and I guess they 

don't believe it again because that may well have been the 

method by which they hired. 

 

I have here one of the people that the member opposite has 

called incompetent is a Mr. Lloyd. I would like to read a letter 

here from Grant Devine when he was premier. It says: 

 

 I would like to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. I think the 

minister knows that he cannot use the names of individuals in 

this chambers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. I was 

reading from the paper for the member from Estevan when he 

was premier: 

 

 I would like to commend you for the outstanding work which 

you and the other members of the ad hoc committee did in 

bringing together the parties in the Midale dispute. The 

committee has put together a very useful report which 

succeeded in getting the groups to discuss matters. 

 

 Considering the highly emotional nature of the dispute, I am 

sure that you've had to set the stage for the recent discussions 

through many hours of tactful diplomacy. 

 

 Thank you for a job well done. 

 

That's what the former premier said about Mr. Jack Lloyd who 

they are now saying that this guy is incompetent and hired 

because he was a New Democrat. I think that's hypocritical. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 

ask leave of the Assembly to make a statement which will be of 

interest to all members. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1430) 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

National Forest Week and Arbor Day 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, National Forest 

Week and Arbor Day help to increase awareness of the 

importance of trees and forests and the need for continued 

careful management of these vital natural resources. 

 

Arbor Day is a symbolic and meaningful activity which 

emphasizes the importance of conservation and environmental 

concerns. To plant a tree is to demonstrate our faith in the 

future and reflects our commitment to the next generation — 

the promise 



1382 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

that our children will inherit viable forests and a healthy 

ecosystem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have been able to preside over a 

tree planting ceremony this morning which was held in 

recognition of National Forest Week and Arbor Day. This 

event was made even more significant by the presence of 

representatives of the state of North Dakota, Lieutenant 

Governor Rosemarie Myrdal and State Forester Larry 

Kotcham. 

 

The participation of Ms. Myrdal and Mr. Kotcham shows the 

level of commitment which exists to the preservation of our 

environment and demonstrates international cooperation to 

attain our common goal of sustainable living. 

 

I would like to thank also a number of students, groups from 

Herschel, Pilot Butte, Milestone, and the Campbell Collegiate 

Alternative Education Bell Ringers for their significant 

contribution to the events of this morning. They were 

accompanied by their teachers and their parents, and in their 

personally created statements about the future, brought the 

spirit of the need to live sustainably to all of us who are adult 

and need to work in a policy creation which in fact results in 

that sound future for these, our children. 

 

I ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 

recognition of that goal and of the official designation of today 

as Arbour Day and of this week as National Forest Week. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move to convert the 

question to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: — Motion for return (debatable). 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

SECOND AND THIRD READINGS 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 57 — An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year 

ending on March 31, 1994 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I move that Bill No. 57, An Act for 

granting to Her Majesty certain sums of Money for the Public 

Service for the Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 1994, be now 

read a second and third time. 
 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to take this 

opportunity, on this final portion of the interim supply Bill, to 

make a few comments to the legislature and to the public at 

large. 
 

Mr. Speaker, as you know in the past we have seen this 

government bring in a number of interim supply Bills and all 

the way through the process the opposition has not been 

provided much in the way of answers. 

Mr. Speaker, taxpayers around this province, and indeed 

around Canada today, are wanting government to come 

forward with economic plans that are realistic, plans that, Mr. 

Speaker, divert themselves from the political process and dwell 

solely with the reality of the economics in which we face 

ourselves. 

 

During questioning in this last interim supply Bill, the 

opposition members asked the minister responsible a number 

of questions which had arisen out of the previous interim 

supply Bill in this Legislative Assembly. And I think they were 

questions that were very, very pertinent; they were reasonable; 

they were the type of thing that I believe a provincial 

government should be watching on an ongoing basis. They 

were issues that, Mr. Speaker, will tell Saskatchewan taxpayers 

whether we're on track, off track, exactly what is happening to 

the economy of our province. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP government came 

in they brought forward a number of economic analyses — 

analyses that were done while that party was in opposition, that 

was very definitive about the levels of taxation that 

Saskatchewan people could handle, and were very definitive 

about how Saskatchewan people should be taxed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen in the last 16, 17 months of time 

that this government has been in power, almost a total reversal, 

a total flip-flop on the issue of taxation. The very issues that the 

NDP Party highlighted while in opposition about how retail 

growth would be affected, about employment, about almost 

every indicator in our society today that they said was true 

while in opposition, all of a sudden in government now seem to 

want to either totally reject, ignore, or simply not talk about. 

 

We all know, Mr. Speaker, the projections that were made in 

last year's budget about employment level, about growth in the 

economy, about taxation. And I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, 

the proof is in the pudding that none of these targets was 

achieved. 

 

The out-migration of people from our province has continued 

unabated. Personal income taxes, sales taxes, taxes on our 

utilities, all over our economy, Mr. Speaker, the ability of you 

and I as family members, as contributing members of our 

society, that ability has been impaired, Mr. Speaker, by the 

current government that we have in Saskatchewan today. 

 

I heard on the news coming in this morning, Mr. Speaker, that 

the average Canadian family for the second year in a row has 

had a drop in income, of real disposable income; that the 

average Canadian family is paying more in taxes than they 

have in any time in their history. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, when we ask the Finance minister, the 

associate Finance minister, questions about these trends, 

questions about where our 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1383 

economy is going, questions about how the government is 

strengthening our economy so that our unemployment rate will 

drop, so that the out-migration will cease, so that people will 

exercise the entrepreneurial spirit that many Saskatchewan 

people have so that they in turn will invest their life savings, so 

that they in turn will look for new opportunities to employ 

others, we simply are told by this Finance minister that she 

doesn't have the figures, that she doesn't have the numbers, that 

she has to rely on someone else to garner them. 

 

Yet we see that department in the business of polling on a 

continual basis. We see this government polling on a continual 

basis. We see the Deputy Premier get hundreds of thousands 

more dollars for his department. We see him get more PYs 

(person-years) to be the minister in charge of government 

advertising and polling. Oh, and I shouldn't forget, the keeper 

of the provincial seal. 

 

An Hon. Member: — And the NDP national campaign. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — And the fact that he does attend the odd NDP 

federal meeting just happens to go along with the job. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would think when one was so definitive in 

opposition with what I'm sure at the time was fairly limited 

resources, and being very, very definitive on certain issues 

around employment and taxation and out-migration, that in 

government we would have had answers coming from this 

NDP administration in those areas of economic concern to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

They come into this legislature, they ask for one-twelfth; then 

they ask for two-twelfths this time, Mr. Speaker — in some 

cases five-twelfths — and say to Saskatchewan people, to 

Saskatchewan taxpayers, that I don't have any relevant 

information as to how well my economic game plan is doing. 

That that will all come in due course. 

 

Well unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the due course after granting 

two-twelfths this time will mean that this Legislative Assembly 

probably won't be in session. The members of the opposition 

won't be here on a daily basis to ask this minister questions. 

That we'll be into the summer months of July and August and 

there will be no one in this Legislative Assembly — probably, 

Mr. Speaker — to make this minister come forth with the 

answers that were promised. And I believe that is done 

intentionally, Mr. Speaker. I believe it is done so that they hope 

that Saskatchewan taxpayers and people will simply allow this 

government the freedom to carry on through the summer 

months and not give any indication about where we're going 

economically. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the polling is being done, then I would say to 

you that the results of that polling could be available to this 

Legislative Assembly every 30 days, that we wouldn't have the 

Deputy Premier saying that I don't have to release that 

information to you on that 

regular basis. 

 

It astounds me that the Department of Finance can spend the 

kind of money they do, polling each and every month almost, 

and yet not have any answers, any answers at all when we say 

how are we doing with out-migration. How is the sales tax hike 

from eight to nine doing out there as far as retail business? 

How are we doing at the gas pumps? Are the volumes up? Are 

the volumes down? How is the Saskatchewan business sector 

reacting to the budget brought down by the member from 

Saskatoon? And yet we get no answers at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The reason that the questioning in interim supply this time, Mr. 

Speaker, did not go on as long as it did the time before is the 

simple case of frustration that occurs to members of Her 

Majesty's Loyal Opposition in the face of stonewalling and no 

answers. Mr. Speaker, there's very little point in taking up the 

time of this House if we can't get cabinet ministers to answer 

those vital questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can remember the members of the New 

Democratic Party while in opposition taking days and days and 

days in interim supply and were provided many more answers 

that what we've seen this opposition provided for in the last two 

years of interim supply motions. 

 

It goes back to that promise made by this government, Mr. 

Speaker, not to use special warrants. I remember in this 

Legislative Assembly, sitting in the government benches, and 

listening to the tirades come forth from members of the New 

Democratic Party on the use of special warrants. But they come 

in here; they bring them forward, and they simply say, well 

we're going to do it this time, but we won't do it again. 

 

It's like all the promises made in this Legislative Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker, by this party. The pledges made by the member 

from Riversdale when it came to patronage — they don't mean 

anything today. The promises made on taxation — they don't 

mean anything today. The promises made to the farmers of this 

province who are going to go out and try and seed a crop this 

spring — promises made, promises broken. 

 

That is why, Mr. Speaker, there is such a sense of frustration. I 

think that's why you see, Mr. Speaker, people, taxpayers in 

Saskatchewan, buying advertising, prime advertising time on 

TV, saying to this government, it's time that you started to live 

up to some of the things that you preached about while in 

opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe in the question of interim supply, that if 

this minister had any confidence, any confidence at all in that 

document that was tabled in this legislature — a document that 

is fraught with politics — that this government should have 

been prepared to come into this Assembly and answer the kind 

of questions which have been asked of it now many interim 

supply motions in a row. 

 

(1445) 



1384 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure, I am sure that this government and the 

Department of Finance have been able to analyse how many 

jobs have been lost because of the increase in sales tax in this 

province. They have been able to analyse the downturn that has 

occurred in certain sectors of our economy by hiking fuel taxes. 

 

The issue in my home community of Moose Jaw came to fore 

recently, Mr. Speaker, on the issue of taxes on fuel use by the 

railroads in the province of Saskatchewan. City council in 

Moose Jaw, brotherhood of railway workers, brotherhood of 

engineers, people all through the community of Moose Jaw and 

surrounding area where so many hundreds of jobs are tied, tied 

to the railway economy in this province, lobbied this 

government strong and hard to review the issue because there 

was over 200 jobs at stake, there was an annual payroll of 

between 7 and $8 million, and there were some economic 

opportunities attached to the railway industry that needed 

addressing. 

 

The mayor of Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, after the bid was lost to 

the city of Winnipeg, said that it's obvious that this government 

had not done the proper analysis that was necessary when we're 

talking about over 200 jobs on an annual basis and between 7 

and $8 million in payroll. 

 

Now I don't know how much personal income tax, Mr. 

Speaker, those people would have paid. I don't know what the 

increase in traffic and business done by the railroads in this 

province would have paid. But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that 

any time the province of Saskatchewan has the opportunity to 

work with an industry which is natural to us, which is one that 

we cannot live without, then I would think that the government 

would get down and sharpen their pencil and they would at 

least come forward with some reasoned economic arguments. 

 

In the case of Moose Jaw and the CPR (Canadian Pacific 

Railway), that obviously hasn't occurred. It was simply rejected 

out of hand that we will lose X number of dollars on the fuel 

tax and that there is nothing else going to come back to the 

province of Saskatchewan because we were willing to work 

with someone, we were willing to do our economic analysis. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have been making arguments like that to 

this minister and this government from the time that they 

assumed office. If they don't have the information, then they 

should go out and get it. But my suspicion is, Mr. Speaker, that 

they do have the information and that all we are dealing with 

here is the politics of cover-up, the politics of justification, the 

politics of trying to cover our political tracks from the promises 

we made in the fall of 1991 and the reality that we're dealing 

with in Saskatchewan today. 

 

We've had the recent example, Mr. Speaker, of the Piper 

Aircraft deal, which was announced with such fanfare by the 

Minister of Economic Development and the then-Finance 

minister, evaporating into thin air. I 

would say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the government didn't do 

their homework on that one either. 

 

And that is why people in the province of Saskatchewan are 

saying what in the world am I paying all this tax for; why 

would I work those extra hours; why would I take the chance to 

go out and employ someone else if I've got a government that 

simply either won't or isn't motivated enough to do the proper 

analysis and tell Saskatchewan people exactly where we are? 

 

We've seen this government, Mr. Speaker, come up with all 

sorts, all sorts of justifications in order to hide behind other 

people. It's like we say in here, Mr. Speaker, in nearly each and 

every question period: this government will light up the blame 

thrower and try and blame somebody else for each and every 

thing that affects people in this province, that affects taxpayers. 

 

It's always somebody else's fault, Mr. Speaker. It's never the 

fault of this bunch because they either don't do their homework, 

or if they have got it done, they don't want to reveal it because 

it would break some of the promises. It would show 

Saskatchewan people that the promises of 1991 were simply 

hollow rhetoric, hollow rhetoric that was talked about for 

political purposes — for the burning desire of the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale to be the premier of this province. Had 

nothing to do with economic reality, what the best and most 

orderly way would be for the economy of this province to 

work. 

 

And that is why, Mr. Speaker, we have challenged Finance 

minister after Finance minister of this government to say: 

you've made an analysis of the effects of harmonization at 7 per 

cent on the economy of this province in 1991, and you said it 

would take away so many jobs that it would hinder certain 

aspects of our economy. 

 

So we have asked time and time again to show the people of 

this province how those specific sectors are doing now that we 

have a 9 per cent sales tax, that our unemployment record has 

gone up, that the only inflation being created in the province of 

Saskatchewan is by government taxation, and that 

out-migration has continued to be a reality instead of being 

reversed, as the people in the New Democratic Party promised 

Saskatchewan voters and taxpayers such a short time ago, if we 

simply did away with harmonization and did it their way. 

 

Well what it seems to be coming down to, Mr. Speaker, is that 

the reason they don't want to give this analysis is simply 

because the Finance minister can't bring herself to say the word 

harmonization. She tells the media, she goes to New York, she 

goes different places, and she says yes, it looks like it would be 

a good idea, but I can't say the word. Then maybe integration, 

integration would be more palatable. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that's why people in this province don't 

trust the NDP Party any more and why they don't trust the 

members of the cabinet any more, 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1385 

because they would rather play upon words. They would rather 

play upon words than come clean with the analysis and the 

actual numbers that Saskatchewan people need in order to 

make business decisions, that Saskatchewan families need in 

order to figure out where they're going to find the money to pay 

the taxes with. Where are they going to find the money to 

educate their children with? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other shoe is going to drop in this province 

over the next couple of years. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, for the 

introduction of guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I hesitate to interrupt the member 

opposite, but my wife Cheralyn and my daughter Nicole are in 

the audience, Mr. Speaker, and I take this opportunity to 

introduce them to you and through you to the members of the 

legislature. Cheralyn came in this morning with the students 

that participated in the Arbor Day and National Forestry Week 

celebrations this morning. And Nicole is just home from 

university and preparing for the summer. 

 

So I welcome them and introduce them to all of you. Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the minister on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To close debate. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

SECOND AND THIRD READINGS 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 57 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can assure the 

minister that I have a few more comments to make before we 

close off this debate. 

 

As I was saying before the break, Mr. Speaker, the other shoe 

is going to drop in this province over the next couple of years, 

and it's going to drop in a big way. Because what this Finance 

minister has done is offload onto municipal government and 

school boards, newly formed health boards and others, like we 

have never seen offloading in this province before. 

 

So along with the upfront indicators, Mr. Speaker, that we've 

been asking questions about, about analysis about, we have 

another half a billion dollars. And those aren't my numbers, Mr. 

Speaker. Those are 

numbers that school boards and others are putting forward as 

saying what the potential is for them to pick up over the next 

two years. 

 

This half a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, is going to add to the 

already burdensome debt that many of these areas feel, the 

already burdensome tax load that the average home-owner and 

property owner in this province faces. 

 

When we see mill rate increases approaching potentially, 

potentially double-digit numbers, Mr. Speaker . . . By the time 

you pick up for the education budget, a teachers' contract is yet 

unsigned, the new health districts, contracts and arrangements 

which we know nothing about, Mr. Speaker — the potential, 

the potential for Saskatchewan taxpayers in a lot of areas could 

be devastating. 

 

And I'll give you an example, Mr. Speaker, where this hidden 

agenda will come forward. As you would know, Mr. Speaker, 

as a former Health minister in this province, that when a 

community comes forward for an integrated facility, there was 

a sharing arrangement on the financing tied to a mill rate 

structure in that particular community. 

 

On special care homes, Mr. Speaker, the community was 

expected to pick up 15 per cent of the capital costs and have a 

portion of mill rate over the next 10 years attached to it. That 

figure, I believe, Mr. Speaker, is 15 per cent. 

 

On the integrated facilities, Mr. Speaker, that number was 50 

per cent; and that the mill rate increase tied to that particular 

institution be not more than five mills annualized over the next 

10 years. 

 

So what you have in the case of the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, is all of these integrated facilities, which this 

government just shut down, took away their acute care funding, 

knowing full well that those acute care beds in those 

institutions have already been borrowed and annualized against 

up to 50 mills over the next 10 years, and they no longer exist. 

 

So all of those municipalities now which went out and 

borrowed money, which said to their taxpayers, for this facility 

you have up to 50 mills over the next 10 years attached to that 

facility, they no longer have the acute beds that they went out 

and issued debentures for, or went out and borrowed in some 

other way in order to handle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this has occurred all across the province of 

Saskatchewan. And people are phoning us and saying that this 

is fraud, that we the local district went out and had to borrow 

this money because we had to live up to our 50 per cent 

commitment, and now the beds have been taken away but we're 

still holding the bag. We're still holding the bag, Mr. Speaker, 

for those intensive care, acute care beds, and we don't have 

them any more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is only one example of dozens that 



1386 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

exist around this province that are going to happen when this 

half a billion dollars in offloading by this government is felt. 

And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that come June, July, 

down the road when a lot of this starts to hit, that the numbers 

that the minister has been floating around will simply not come 

true. That when the business person on Main Street, Coronach 

who is responsible for up to 50 mills on an intensive care, on 

an acute care bed in that facility that no longer exists but they 

still have to pay the bill, that is going to prohibit that person in 

Coronach from actually going out and expanding their business 

or hiring more people. 

 

(1500) 

 

And yet nowhere does this minister come clean with the 

numbers of the analysis that we've asked for in regards to 

issues like sales tax, in regards to personal income tax. Because 

if they did, Mr. Speaker, I'm afraid that the numbers would 

show that not only was their analysis in the fall of 1991 wrong, 

that every bit of analysis that they've done since then on how to 

make this economy grow in the province of Saskatchewan also 

rings hollow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the big pledge of the NDP Party in 1991 was that 

they were going to create jobs in this province like we've never 

seen jobs created before. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would say to you that that is totally false, 

that those words are totally hollow, that they are without 

substance, because people, Mr. Speaker, are voting with their 

feet. They are simply leaving this province in droves to go to 

other jurisdictions where governments actually do what they 

say they're going to do, not something entirely opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this minister has had ample opportunity to stand 

in this legislature and say that our economic analysis and our 

economic game plan is creating jobs all over the place. She 

could do it sector by sector by sector, and yet we have heard 

nothing. When we ask for those numbers, she volunteers 

nothing. It is only under extreme badgering, Mr. Speaker, that 

we have been able to obtain any information at all from this 

Finance minister or the associate Finance minister on what is 

actually happening to the economy of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, we know in the health care field alone 

that there will be substantial lay-offs all over rural 

Saskatchewan. We know, Mr. Speaker, that even if we took the 

government at their word and that there would simply be role 

changing occurring and not actual closure of institutions, that 

there will be many of our towns and smaller cities and villages 

that will feel the impact on Main Street. 

 

One of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, that so many people were on 

the steps of this legislature — union people, business people, 

concerned board members from all over the province — is that 

they don't believe this government has done any of the proper 

due diligence or analysis that would be necessary to implement 

massive change in the health care sector without totally 

disrupting the socio-economic fabric of much of our province. 

That this is simply a seat-of-the-pants move by this government 

without the forethought and the human decency that should go 

with dislocations this large. 

 

I would think the Minister of Finance would be interested in 

what is happening to the tax base of that many communities. I 

think the Minister of Finance would want to know the impact 

on personal income tax of the changes in the health care 

system. I would think the Minister of Finance would want to 

know about the impact on goods and services that are provided 

to those institutions, many of which are either sourced in our 

province or close by. 

 

But we have seen no analysis, Mr. Speaker, on what that 

impact will be. That the government simply goes out and says, 

here it is, boys and girls in rural Saskatchewan, here it is. 

Accept it and cope. And if there is major economic and social 

impacts, well we'll worry about that when the time comes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the former government was criticized roundly by 

this bunch about the Fair Share program, and they said, you 

haven't done your proper economic analysis about moving 

government employees to other areas besides Regina. That you 

haven't done the proper social-economic impact that will occur 

on those communities and the city of Regina by moving out 

employees. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they encouraged hundreds and thousands of 

people to come to the steps of the legislature and complain 

about the impact on families that that program would have. 

 

Well I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, if those communities 

which have had their health care sector devastated by this 

government had an opportunity today to access government 

employees and departments from the city of Regina, I would 

say to you, they would jump at the chance. Because they know 

what the economic and social impact would be on their 

community because they've just had their health care sector 

devastated. That's why they were here in their hundreds such a 

short time ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But this New Democratic Party roundly criticized Fair Share 

because they said that homework hadn't been done; that you 

couldn't move families out of Regina to other communities; 

that it was going to cost too much; that the social impact would 

be too much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the health care sector alone, we have seen this 

government do far more than Fair Share ever could have 

dreamed to have done to the city of Regina, and yet it's been 

done all over this province. And when we ask questions about 

those impacts on Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan voters, 

Saskatchewan taxpayers, we're told that it doesn't exist, that it 

doesn't matter, that we should blame someone else for those 

impacts. 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1387 

So you can see, Mr. Speaker, why there's a certain level of 

frustration by the members of the opposition when the minister 

comes in with interim supply and asks for two-twelfths and 

simply says, this is the way it is. 

 

All over this province, Mr. Speaker, people are concerned 

about the economic picture, about the employment picture, 

about their ability as a family and a community to carry on and 

do the things that they know are necessary to keep this 

province going and vibrant. 

 

They know and they're saying to this government, Mr. Speaker, 

instead of always getting in our road, maybe it's time that you 

used that word that you're so fond of and you started to 

cooperate a little bit with Saskatchewan families and 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. That you started to cooperate a little 

bit and not use that word in a political context, as these people 

are so fond of doing all the time, but honestly go out and talk to 

people and make assessments and provide people with some 

answers before they launch off in various directions. 

 

I think if they did that, Mr. Speaker, then there would be an 

honest opportunity for people to create some employment in 

the province of Saskatchewan. There would be some 

opportunity for people to create new taxpayers instead of 

having the existing ones leave our province each and every 

day. If there truly was some cooperation and if these people 

were not hidebound by ideology, hidebound by the promises 

made in 1991 and this constant need to cover up, then I think 

we could get somewhere. 

 

Because I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, people are asking 

questions such as, the recent spot price for uranium was $7 a 

pound; and yet in this latest budget document, uranium, of all 

the non-renewable resources, was the one that was pegged to 

have the largest projected increase. Now $7 a pound, Mr. 

Speaker, will be a spot price and we know that spot prices go 

up and down. But I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that 

long-term contracts follow spot prices. 

 

And the Associate Minister of Finance, who was the Energy 

and Mines minister in this province for a while, knows that 

those long-term contractual prices tend to follow that spot. 

When you're hitting $7 a pound, Mr. Speaker, which is almost 

an all-time low, it's very difficult for anyone to read the budget 

and believe that this is going to be the highest projected 

increase of all our non-renewable resources. 

 

And that's why people are doubting the document put forward. 

That's why people are saying to us, ask some questions about 

where their economic indicators are going. Because $7 

uranium, Mr. Speaker, isn't going to pay nearly as much as 

what the government has projected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you must have an economic game plan in place 

that can survive the ups and downs of the world commodity 

markets. Former premier of this 

province, Allan Blakeney, was asked in the early 1980s, after 

the government had launched off into a number of Crown 

corporation ventures dealing with non-renewable resources, he 

was asked by the media, they said: Mr. Premier, what will 

happen to the Saskatchewan economy if all of these resources 

go down at once? And the Hon. Allan Blakeney, the former 

premier of the province, he said it would be an unmitigated 

disaster, Mr. Speaker, an unmitigated disaster for the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that unmitigated disaster happened to this 

province in the 1980s. All our resources prices all fell at once. 

The price of grain, Mr. Speaker, has not recovered to this day 

from 1985. Yet this government makes projections based on 

non-renewable resources which people are starting to wonder 

about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder that we want this minister to 

come forward with some answers? If this is reality, then 

maybe, Mr. Speaker, the reality of a 9 per cent sales tax is 

simply untenable. If this is reality, Mr. Speaker, then maybe the 

fuel tax on diesel locomotives is simply untenable. Mr. 

Speaker, there are certain things that this government have 

hung their hat on, and if they are not on track and they are not 

true, then, Mr. Speaker, certain things become untenable for 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this province can't afford to have its population 

dip to where it did in the early 1970s. Eight hundred and ninety 

thousand people simply aren't enough taxpayers in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, to maintain the social-economic 

infrastructure that we have in place here. 

 

And my fear is, unless this government is open and accountable 

and cooperative with Saskatchewan people, that that's the 

direction we're taking — that we aren't going to see the level of 

activity that is absolutely necessary to have our personal 

incomes rise, to have new taxpayers created, and to have that 

out-migration slowed down and stopped; and in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, the natural assets and attributes of this province used 

constructively to draw people here. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is why this opposition has felt so much 

frustration with this Finance minister and this administration. I 

hate to say it, Mr. Speaker, but I almost wish that this 

legislature was in session long enough for this minister to bring 

in another interim supply motion, because at some point in 

time, Mr. Speaker, the answers are going to have to be 

provided. 

 

I don't think this government can hide to the next election. I 

don't think Saskatchewan's economic fabric will survive long 

enough to hold on to the next election, if they don't start 

coming clean, if they don't start using the proper words, instead 

of having a play on words. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it's time that this government actually lived 

up to some of the promises of October of 1991, instead of 

simply blaming someone else for each and every failure. 



1388 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

(1515) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to bring forward some of my 

concerns regarding the Appropriation Bill at this time. 

 

As you know, the last time the interim supply was before this 

legislature, I asked many, many questions; a number of 

questions directed to the Associate Minister of Finance at that 

time. We received no answers on this side of the House. 

 

And it was to my great disappointment upon leaving that 

afternoon — I left and looked up in Hansard from previous 

years what would be deemed appropriate questions to ask 

during interim supply — and I found it quite striking, Mr. 

Speaker, that the member from Regina Victoria, who was 

sitting in the Chair that day and regarded my questions out of 

order was in fact one of the MLAs who asked of the previous 

administration many, many questions that were extremely far 

ranging, far more specific, and what I would deem far less 

appropriate, than the questions I was asking that day. 

 

I do hope that with the Minister of Finance with us this 

afternoon, as well as the Associate Minister of Finance, that 

perhaps they will be more welcoming of some of the comments 

that I'll be making this afternoon, and I do hope in future that 

we will be able to have some more specific answers to 

concerns raised. 

 

In developing the budget and assessing the extent of the monies 

that are being asked for today, I know that the Minister of 

Finance had to have made a forecast concerning the 

performance of our economy. In fact just this week, Mr. 

Speaker, the federal government released its own forecasts and 

they predict a double digit unemployment figure for both this 

year and next year. We have to ask: how does this have an 

impact on the employment of people in our province, and has 

our government in fact predicted employment will go beyond 

the sagging 426,000 jobs in our economy? We have to then ask 

how this will have an impact on the overall growth or lack of 

growth in the economy. 

 

The last time we were discussing interim supply in this House, 

I raised the following issues. We knew that the mid-term 

financial report that the Minister of Finance brought forward — 

the previous Finance minister brought forward  

_- they told us that the state of the economy was the reason 

why the revenues in the previous budget were inappropriate. 

They were inaccurate because the revenues were down because 

the revenues from taxation were down. 

 

Now last year the government raised taxes in order to get an 

additional $340 million in new revenues and before that budget 

the Conference Board of Canada predicted a rate of growth in 

Saskatchewan of 2.2 per cent. By the time their mid-term 

report was filed, Mr. Speaker, the report indicated that a 

revised rate of growth was in fact .5 per cent. 

And we now have to contend with the same kinds of factors 

that were present before. Granted we had to contend with crop 

failure having some bearing on this, tax increases very much 

contributed to the downward revision of the province's 

projected economic growth, but overall it does appear as 

though taxes are what have a stranglehold on the economy of 

our province. Governments tend to think, for some reason, that 

they have money but it's taxation . . . the taxation, the tax 

dollars of the real people that are the lifeblood of government. 

 

One of the things that I am truly wanting from this government 

are some clear indications, Mr. Speaker, of what sorts of things 

they've considered in order to make sure that their numbers are 

right this go around. They're asking for one-twelfth of the 

overall budget — one-twelfth — and yet we have very little 

information as to whether or not these numbers are going to be 

correct, given the overall circumstances in the province. 

 

For example, this last week, Mr. Speaker, the government was 

given a report by His Honour Mr. Willard Estey regarding the 

NewGrade upgrader in which our province happens to be a 

partner with the federal government as well as Federated 

Co-ops. That report called upon an injection of increased 

capital from the province of Saskatchewan and the federal 

government and western Federated Co-operatives. And I, like 

most of the people in our province, want to know if this in fact 

is now going to have an impact on the overall budgetary 

predictions. 

 

We have to ask: is there a chance that arrangements regarding 

the upgrader are going to disturb or upset the spending plans of 

the government? Are they going to add extra expense so that 

this figure before us that we are voting on today no longer 

represents one-twelfth of the total expenditure? 

 

Similarly, Mr. Speaker, what other factors really go in to this 

overall figure of one-twelfth? Is the government banking on 

improvements in oil prices, in grain prices and retail sales this 

year? And if so, what are those predicted improvements? 

 

As you are quite aware, Mr. Speaker, I have asked on many, 

many occasions: has the government done a cost-benefit 

analysis? What sort of impact analysis has the government 

done to ensure that in fact certain increases in taxation is not 

going to be very, very seriously affecting the kind of revenue 

that we're expecting to have in the long term? 

 

And as you know, there have been so many changes in the 

areas of health care and drug plan costs and many other things 

that are going to change the way in which people, who are 

consumers, spend their dollars, as well as those many people 

who are affected as far as their own jobs are concerned. And 

that too will have an impact on whether or not they will have 

any kind of monies to spend. 

 

Is the government banking on different kinds of 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1389 

improvements that have not been clearly outlined? 

 

And I'm asking the Minister of Finance because people want to 

be ensured that an advance of monies that they're asking for is 

in fact going to be one-twelfth and not end up being 

one-sixteenth of a revenue shortfall or a series of unpredictable 

expenses, like higher Saskatchewan Assistance Plan payments 

for example. 

 

Earlier this week the federal government had its bond rating 

lowered by a Montreal based firm. This Montreal based bond 

rating agency leads one to ask a question, if in fact this will 

have any impact on our borrowing costs in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And what we need to know are those 

unpredictabilities, Mr. Speaker, whether or not that in fact has 

been factored in to the monies that are being requested today. 

 

If our national bond rating is lowered, will the bond rating for 

provinces like Saskatchewan also be lowered, placing all of the 

budgetary items, the budgetary figures, out of whack, along 

with advances like those in The Appropriation Act that we're 

looking at today? 

 

Similarly, in this last week the government has made a flurry of 

changes and decisions regarding the health care of our 

province. Indications are that these decisions are going to result 

in some 700 job losses in many of the small towns throughout 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Although these lay-offs are not likely to occur en masse until 

October, although I think several dozen were announced today, 

I think it's 51 — I stand to be corrected — in Weyburn, plus 

another dozen over the next week or so. People in the service 

industries that depend on the health workers in a community 

like Ponteix really are going to be feeling the crunch of these 

people losing their jobs. 

 

And I pointed out this past week, Mr. Speaker, that when we're 

talking about 23 or 24 people employed in health care in 

Ponteix, Saskatchewan out of a total population of 630, that's 

like 7,200 people losing their jobs in one fell swoop in a city 

the size of Saskatoon. 

 

Those individuals are taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. Those 

individuals are the ones that take the money that they earn and 

they take them to their local stores and they spend them in our 

province. Those are the individuals who pay taxes, in turn 

providing us with the kinds of government services that we get. 

 

And I think it's very important for us to be able to know, has 

the Minister of Finance determined, calculated the extra costs 

that are likely to take place in this interim supply in advance to 

cover the eventuality that these people will have to rely more 

on government services now that they are becoming 

unemployed. There is so much talk, Mr. Speaker, about 

retraining, further education of individuals who in fact will find 

themselves forced onto the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. And 

I have difficulty in understanding, with the numbers before us, 

whether 

or not all of these things have been considered in the mix. 

 

In this advance that is being requested, Mr. Speaker, the people 

deserve assurances that with some accuracy it really is going to 

amount to one-twelfth of overall expenditures. 

 

Last summer, as we know, it was very cool and the agriculture 

sector in this province suffered extensive damage as far as 

crops were concerned. It's interesting to now look at what the 

long-term forecasts are across the province. And predictably 

they're unpredictable, Mr. Speaker, which of course again 

opens a wide range of possibilities as far as crops being 

substandard again. And it is very important that we have some 

understanding that when the the province is dealing with our 

finances, with the only thing that we have that we turn over to 

them, is to ensure that they are going to treat every dollar that 

they receive from taxpayers in the most cautious and judicious 

way possible; and that while doing so, they are going to really 

take that they've factored in all of the unpredictable factors that 

may have a bearing on the way that we can have some cash 

flow moving in this province. 

 

So one of the questions of course that I had hoped that we 

would get from the Minister of Finance is whether or not there 

was a calculation of extra costs, as far as major crop failure, 

into the budgetary figures that we are going to be faced with 

deciding upon today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a lot of talk has been given as far as our being 

able to rely upon predictable rates of growth in our economy. 

And one of the things that was quite disturbing in the last 

interim supply was the fact that it was going to be paid in part 

by a further $193 million in new taxes. And I know that the 

Royal Bank projected a respectable rate of growth for 

Saskatchewan in 1993, but they did say one thing that is very 

important. They said that that rate of growth was contingent 

upon taxes — contingent upon significant new taxes, to quote 

them directly. 

 

Many do think that $193 million is a significant amount of new 

taxes. So what guarantee do we have that there's going to be 

able to be a balance of revenues with expenditures that we are 

really being asked about today? 

 

Now I am not prepared to vote against an interim supply Bill 

that would prevent third parties in this province from being 

able to receive the dollars that they require. But I do want the 

people of this province and the members of this legislature to 

understand that I think that it is incumbent upon the 

government to be able to provide members of the opposition 

with the kind of information that they require in order to make 

good judgements about what the government is doing. 

 

And I am truly disappointed, Mr. Speaker, that we were able to 

receive so few pieces of information that would leave one 

feeling comfortable about this particular interim supply. 



1390 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I shall close. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to add a few comments too before we move further in 

discussion or passage of the interim supply Bill before this 

Assembly. 

 

As we've seen over the past year, the past year and a half — 

and my colleagues have raised it; certainly, the Leader of the 

Liberal Party has raised the issue too — on a number of 

occasions we've brought forward questions, specific questions 

asking of the minister how she intends to indeed gain the 

revenue to be able to expend the money that she's bringing 

forward or brought to the House. 

 

And I realize that the money that the minister is asking for is 

one-twelfth. But whether it's one-twelfth or whether it's the 

total year's expenditure, Mr. Speaker, it's incumbent upon the 

minister to be a lot more realistic and a lot more real with the 

people of Saskatchewan as to where the money is coming from 

and how it is indeed going to be expended. 

 

And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because there are many people 

throughout the province of Saskatchewan who are very 

concerned with the decrease in funds that they are seeing and 

the operational grants that are coming to their organizations. 

 

And I can remember being on the opposite side of the House 

when we formed government in the late '80s, the first time I 

was here, and the present government, the then opposition, 

continually lamenting the fact that the government of the day 

was not putting the required funds in place to service or to 

allow the educational sector or the health sector service their 

community or provide the services or provide adequate funding 

to allow for proper education of our students, from the K to 12 

and into the university system. 

 

And I noticed a headline this week talking about the . . . the 

headline reads: "EDUCATION REFORM (CUTBACKS)". It 

starts off: 

 

 If you thought reforming Saskatchewan's health-care system 

has been a stormy process so far, wait until a new wave of 

reform hits the education system. 

 

 The clouds are already gathering. 

 

 All over Saskatchewan, in school districts like Saltcoats, 

Arcola, Oxbow and Indian Head, the budget axe is coming 

down and is forcing schools to cut back. 

 

 Kindergarten-to-Grade 12 schools are scrambling to cope 

with the fact that provincial operating grants have been cut 

two per cent this year and will be cut another four per cent in 

1994. 

 

(1530) 

And certainly the interim supply Bill that the minister is 

bringing forward addresses some of that, because some of that 

funding will be rolling out into the educational sector. 

 

And I want to point out the fact the headline in one of the 

locals in my constituency, brought out the very point that this 

article in the Leader-Post of May 3 is raising, the fact that one 

school board is losing $200,000 in operational grants this year, 

and next year will be facing a further cut-back of another 

$400,000. 

 

And you know what that means to small communities? You 

know what that means to rural Saskatchewan? You know what 

that means to the student body and the school boards? Do you 

know what that means to the educators, the teachers who are 

working in those small communities? 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at the reduction in 

foundation grants going to school boards; you look at the 

reduction and the grants going to health boards across this 

province . . . and of course we're all aware of the debate that 

has taken place over the last number of weeks, in fact months, 

regarding the diminishing funding to health care and the 

formation of regional districts. We look at school boards. The 

facts are becoming very real. 

 

And this morning I just stopped on my way into the city just to 

visit a gentleman who is terminally ill with cancer, and just to 

drop by for a minute. And as I was walking out of the hospital 

the one person said . . . I asked how things were, how she was 

doing, and she said, well she was feeling fine, but she said a lot 

better than she'll be feeling in the near future as the realization 

of the reduction in their funding comes through, and the 

possible reduction of staffing in that hospital comes through. 

 

And so when you look at funding, the Minister of Finance I 

believe needs to be a lot more clear, and a lot clearer to the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan, the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers are not only demanding a reduction 

in taxes, as I find out the tax paying public of Saskatchewan, 

even though they would like to see a reduction in taxes, they 

are willing as well to reach into their pocket and dig a little 

deeper to provide essential services and the dollars that are 

needed to provide the funding for essential health care, the 

funding for education. And especially when you look all across 

our rural communities. 

 

And the viability of our rural communities, Mr. Speaker, 

depends a lot upon the jobs associated with the health programs 

in those communities, the hospitals that are in the communities, 

the home care boards, the care home services, and specifically 

education. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what happens as reductions start to come 

through and hospitals are closed and schools 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1391 

are closed, Mr. Speaker, is that families are affected. The 

incomes from working in the health and educational area that 

were kind of propping up, say, the family farm or small 

business or gave a working family just those extra dollars they 

needed to maintain a healthy lifestyle and give them the reason 

to believe that they could provide for themselves and their 

families, that disappears. It becomes a . . . it really has a moral 

impact on these families. It creates a state of depression, 

discouragement, and stress. 

 

And we're going to find that. And I've seen that over the last 

three or four years, even in my area and as I've travelled around 

the province. And, Mr. Speaker, I'm finding that it's becoming 

even greater. There is a lot of concern out there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I realize that there is so much more that could be 

added in this debate. And I also understand that, as we brought 

before, we would like in the future to have the minister . . . see 

the minister to be a little more direct and a little more forthright 

in letting us know where the revenues are coming from and 

exactly how they're going to be expended, even if it's just for a 

one-twelfth or the interim supply, as we're debating here. 

 

Because there are people across Saskatchewan, as I've 

indicated, really want to know how the funding is going to be 

appropriated, where it is going to be placed, what emphasis. Is 

there an emphasis on caring for people? I think that is one of 

the most important things we need to take into consideration. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I believe there's other issues that need 

to be discussed in the Assembly today and therefore I'll take 

my place and allow for the movement of the interim supply 

through the House. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few 

comments to clarify some issues. First, with respect to the 

process, this is interim supply; it's not estimates. So detailed 

questions of the kind that have been asked by members 

opposite — the member of the third party, for example — are 

more appropriately asked in estimates. 

 

This is interim supply; this is not special warrants. When the 

previous administration used special warrants, they were 

heavily criticized for bringing a budget before the legislature, 

proroguing the legislature without ever passing that budget. 

 

And there is a distinction to be made between doing that and 

what this process is. This process is, there's a budget before the 

legislature. The legislature has not had an opportunity to 

review the budget in detail, but hospitals, schools, and other 

institutions require interim funding. 

 

With respect to statistics, the members opposite know that 

there's a delay in providing statistics, that governments are not 

made aware of what the employment figures are, what the retail 

sales figures are until at least six weeks after the time period. 

And so the statistics that we could not provide were statistics 

that simply are not available to any level of government with 

respect to this budget year. 

 

Regarding harmonization, the position of the government is 

clear and consistent. We have opposed harmonization because 

it would force the provincial government to tax all 

commodities and services currently being taxed by the federal 

government. We have opposed doing that. But the idea of 

reducing the administrative costs involved in tax collection by 

having a common system is a possibility, but only in the future 

if the federal government changes its position. 

 

With respect to taxation, the members opposite mention 

taxation is a problem; the member of the third party mentions 

taxation is a problem. I would point out the experience of New 

Brunswick, a Liberal province. The recent budget increased 

income taxes, unlike our budget which did not increase income 

taxes. I would also point out in New Brunswick the level of 

sales tax is 11 per cent and it's 11 per cent on all goods and 

most services. 

 

Finally with respect to projections, this government has been 

totally forthright and comprehensive in the projections it has 

put before the public. It has said . . . and I've said it time and 

time again in this legislature. We took economic forecasts of 

external agencies, what they projected for the province for the 

next four years. We put into those numbers the changes, all of 

the changes associated with this budget, and we have come out 

with four-year projections. Here is what we project with 

respect to economic growth. Here is what we project inflation 

to be for 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996. The same with retail sales, 

employment personal income, and the list goes on. 

 

When we were in New York, investment dealers said they have 

never before seen any level of government in Canada come out 

with a plan that is so comprehensive and so detailed. 

 

I think perhaps, when the members opposite talk about a 

budget that is fuzzy and is based on optimistic projections, 

they're confusing our budget with the budget recently brought 

out by their counterparts in Ottawa. If you compare our 

economic forecasts with the economic forecasts recently 

released from Ottawa for the next four years with respect to 

employment, with respect to economic growth, with respect to 

interest rates, their budget is much more optimistic. I hope that 

they're right. 

 

I would conclude . . . Because the members opposite do not 

seem to have the kind of faith in Saskatchewan that external 

agencies have, I would conclude by reading into the record 

some of the comments made by external financial agencies 

about the recent Saskatchewan budget. This is Wood Gundy. 

Wood Gundy said about our budget: 

 

 The success of Saskatchewan's medium-term strategy hinges 

on its ability to generate sufficient revenue over the next 3-4 

years. The Province's forecast of reasonably strong growth 



1392 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

(average real GDP growth of 2.3% over the next four years) 

should be enough to generate the necessary revenues. The 

underlying (assumptions with respect to the dollar and 

interest rates) their 1993 economic forecasts are similar to 

our own . . . Saskatchewan's Balanced Budget effort sends a 

strong signal to the financial market participants. 

 

Burns Fry says this about our plan: 

 

 The deficit reduction program appears attainable . . . (It) 

gives the province a good chance of retaining its credit rating. 

 

Canadian Bonding Rating Service — which by the way 

downgraded the federal government — confirmed 

Saskatchewan's credit rating and said this: 

 

 The province has taken stern, but positive, measures in order 

to cut both its deficit and its debt. 

 

Finally, Nesbitt Thomson in April 1993 said this about the 

government's balanced budget plan: 

 

 . . . the Government's Balanced Budget Plan, based on 

conservative economic assumptions, (that is, cautious 

economic assumptions), calls for a budgetary surplus to be 

achieved by 1996/97. 

 

We are confident they expressed their confidence that these 

targets will be met. They say: 

 

 Consequently, in an environment which recently has been 

characterized by downward pressure on provincial credit 

ratings, we believe that Saskatchewan may well be the first 

Canadian province to be upgraded in the present economic 

cycle . . . 

 

They go on to say: 

 

 Saskatchewan has achieved a tremendous single year 

turnaround in its deficit compared to fiscal 1991/92. The 

Province's operating budget is now among the most positive 

in the country. 

 

They go on to say: 

 

 While all Canadian provinces face similar problems of large 

deficits and debt loads as well as high taxes, Saskatchewan is 

demonstrating leadership in finding and implementing 

solutions. 

 

They continue to say: 

 

 Saskatchewan has implemented a credible medium-term plan 

intended to eliminate the deficit by fiscal 1996/97. 

 

They conclude by saying: 

Saskatchewan has already made considerable progress on the 

deficit front, despite the economic environment, and is 

beginning to reap the rewards of its self-imposed discipline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I rest my case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second and third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

(1545) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 38 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 38 — An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to make some comments on a piece of legislation that 

certainly has generated a tremendous amount of interest. It has 

generated a tremendous amount of controversy, and one that I 

think that all Saskatchewan people are looking to their elected 

representatives to handle in a very proper and forthright 

manner. I think, Mr. Speaker, that Bill 38 has generated more 

correspondence with my office than any piece of 

correspondence that I can think of in the eight years that I have 

been a member of this Legislative Assembly, that people who 

have been around here for some time tell me it has generated 

more correspondence than any issue that they can remember, 

period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and that is not simply true about the members of 

Her Majesty's Official Opposition, but from comments that I 

have seen in the media is also true. The government members 

in this Legislative Assembly and also, I believe, to the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone, who has also received a 

tremendous amount of public input in regards to Bill 38. 

 

Let me say categorically, Mr. Speaker, that no one individual 

or group of people in this province wants to see a proliferation 

of intolerance in our society today. Mr. Speaker, the 

constituents of Thunder Creek, the riding that I've so proudly 

represented since 1985, reject discrimination categorically. Mr. 

Speaker, my party and my colleagues in this legislature 

categorically and fiercely oppose discrimination against people 

in the province of Saskatchewan and indeed the country of 

Canada and indeed I believe around the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was a Saskatchewan person, a Saskatchewan 

prime minister, a proud Saskatchewan citizen, who led the 

charge back in 1960 against the 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1393 

racial discrimination which had become rampant in the country 

of South Africa. And that was the Hon. John George 

Diefenbaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by listening to the media and listening to people 

in this Assembly, the NDP would like us to believe that they 

are the sole defenders of minorities, that they are the sole 

defenders of people in our society who have in the past been 

discriminated against by other members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that rings very hollow these days. It was in 

this Assembly only a year ago we saw the unilateral changing 

of legal and binding contracts with Saskatchewan people — the 

rights of Saskatchewan people to seek redress in the courts of 

our province were taken away by the NDP majority in this 

province in this Legislative Building. But because you happen 

to be a person who tills the soil, you aren't allowed to have a 

legal and binding contract any more in the province of 

Saskatchewan. That is the legacy of this party that claims they 

are the only ones who can defend the rights of minorities. Well 

the 60,000 farm families in this province, Mr. Speaker, who 

had that happen to them are a minority in our population. 

 

Recently, Mr. Speaker, we have seen the rights of 52 

communities trampled upon by this Legislative Assembly. 

They say that the use of closure in this Assembly has trampled 

their rights as small rural communities to have their voices 

heard and respected by the government of our province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we're addressing the issue of rights, the 

rights of the individual, the rights of groups, the rights of 

minorities in our province, it is not without some wonder that 

people in the province worry about their rights being protected 

by a political party and a government who so callously stripped 

away the rights to the court system just a short time ago 

because it didn't fit with their political agenda in the province 

of Saskatchewan. And that is why people are saying that the 

defenders of medicare have turned out to be the champions of 

"I don't care." 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, governments need to protect those who are 

singled out and treated unfairly. Mr. Speaker, that is why in 

this country we've had a Bill of Rights, protection which came 

about, not from an NDP government but from a Progressive 

Conservative government; protection which took John 

Diefenbaker 40 years of advocacy to bring about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I, like so many Saskatchewan citizens, have a 

copy of the Bill of Rights displayed in my home. It is 

something that we as a province took a whole lot of pride in — 

that one of our native sons would take a lifelong crusade to its 

fruition so that Canadians would have a Bill of Rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would just like to quote from that particular 

document. This was assented to on August 10, 1960 by the 

Parliament of Canada. And I read from Part 1: 

 

 1. It is hereby recognized and declared that in 

Canada there have existed and shall continue to exist without 

discrimination by reason of race, national origin, colour, 

religion or sex, the following human rights and fundamental 

freedoms, namely, 

 

  (a) the right of the individual to life, liberty, security of the 

person and enjoyment of property, and the right not 

to be deprived thereof except by the due process of 

law; 

 

  (b) the right of the individual to equality before the law 

and protection of the law; 

 

  (c) freedom of religion; 

 

  (d) freedom of speech; 

 

  (e) freedom of assembly and association; and 

 

  (f) the freedom of the press. 

 

And as you know, Mr. Speaker, that document goes on at great 

length in a number of areas, to ensure that Canadians set out for 

themselves some reasonable rules for us to live by as a society. 

 

As Mr. Diefenbaker said on introduction of that Bill on Canada 

Day so many years ago: It is one of those steps which represent 

the achievement and the assurance of that degree of liberty and 

freedom under law that was envisioned by the Fathers of 

Confederation. I think it embodies a pledge to all Canadians, 

this heritage of freedoms I pledge to uphold for myself and all 

mankind — which he did both on the national stage and the 

international stage, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know at the time there were those with political agendas 

that scoffed at Mr. Diefenbaker's Bill. They said it was 

tokenism. And I just remind people in this Assembly, that the 

Supreme Court of Canada in judgement on the Drybones case 

decided that the Bill of Rights does and will protect the rights 

of Canadians in the preservation of fundamental freedoms. 

 

At the time, Mr. Diefenbaker said, the Drybones' judgement 

makes it clear that as long as the Bill of Rights in on the statute 

books of Canada, it will be the protector of liberties of every 

Canadian, however humble. 

 

It is my belief that there exists ample protection from 

discrimination for every Canadian, Mr. Speaker, as the Bill of 

Rights asserts. As you know, Mr. Speaker, when the 

Constitution of Canada was repatriated in the early 1980s there 

were various clauses assigned to the Canadian Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms that dealt with individual rights in our 

country. 

 

And I would quote from section 15, which is equality rights: 

 

 Every individual is equal before and under the law and has 

the right to equal protection and equal benefit from the law 

without 



1394 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

discrimination and, in particular, without discrimination 

based on race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, sex, 

age or mental or physical disability. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a proud tradition in this country of 

guaranteeing the rights of individual citizens. Not in any way 

creating anything special for each and every one of us, but 

simply saying that as a society and as a group of people that 

there are rights and freedoms that are inherent to us, and that if 

we use those rights and freedoms properly, Mr. Speaker, we 

can build a just and sound society where citizens will not be 

singled out because of the aforementioned areas. And both the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms and the Bill of Rights is very 

consistent in that regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we now get to the Bill at hand in the legislature of 

Saskatchewan. It is therefore my belief, Mr. Speaker, that Bill 

C-38 has more impact on matters outside the realm of 

protection for individuals from discrimination. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my belief that this Bill has many potential 

ramifications in the areas such as: the definition of families, the 

make-up of marriages, and the tax and employment benefits 

which accrue from such arrangements, changes in adoption 

regulations, and the promotion of certain lifestyles in education 

programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have heard assurances from the Minister of 

Justice that this is not the case. But I'm afraid, Mr. Speaker, we 

have heard the words but we have not seen the substance from 

this minister to back up those words. Unfortunately this 

government has had an uncommon regularity when it comes to 

breaking the commitments and promises that it has made to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We as Canadians, Mr. Speaker, are all aware that once written 

in to be charters, Bills and regulations such as Bill C-38 are 

open for interpretation by judges and courts of law. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is where the tremendous volume of 

mail, of phone calls, of concern comes into play. Without the 

concrete assurances written into law by the minister, can 

anyone in this Assembly — or outside it — honestly say how a 

court may interpret the phrase: on the application of any 

person, the commission may approve or order any program to 

be undertaken by any person if the program is designed to 

prevent disadvantages based on sexual orientation. 

 

How can that be interpreted? That is the question, Mr. Speaker, 

that I don't pose to this Assembly, but that hundreds of people, 

my constituents who are no different than constituents all over 

this province, who are no more upscale or humble, who are no 

more unfriendly to their neighbour than people anywhere else 

. . . how can I answer that question to those hundreds of 

constituents? 

 

(1600) 

Can the minister really assure my constituents that sexual 

orientation programs will not be ordered when the judges are 

left to determine the meaning behind the phrase such as: the 

commission shall develop and conduct educational programs 

designed to eliminate discriminatory practices related to sexual 

orientation. 

 

What exactly is the commission ordering to be developed? Are 

these pamphlets? Are these brochures? Are these television 

programs? Are they changes to the curriculum in the school 

system? I don't know, Mr. Speaker. But once again I say to 

you, those are the questions that good, honest, hard-working, 

family-orientated souls in my constituency and all around this 

province are asking me and writing to me about. 

 

And I'm sure they are asking members of the government the 

same questions: who will do . . . and what will be the result of 

that interpretation? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have heard those in this Assembly and around 

the province say that Saskatchewan people are bigoted if they 

ask the questions about same-sex marriage and will it be 

allowed by the commission. The minister says no. But people 

out there, Mr. Speaker, in the "small c" conservative society in 

which we live, I believe have the right to have the minister 

spell out in very definitive legal terms their concerns in that 

regard. 

 

I have heard people in this Assembly and outside it say that 

people are bigoted if they talk about the adoption of children by 

same-sex couples. Mr. Speaker, they are not bigoted. They are 

products of the society in which they live. They are good, 

honest, hard-working citizens and taxpayers who through our 

history, Mr. Speaker, have shown their concern for their 

neighbour, their neighbourhood, and their community, and 

have always been there to support each other in time of crisis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have heard them ask the questions dealing with 

our school system and the promotion of a lifestyle and an 

orientation which is foreign to many of them but which they 

don't want taken over the heads of the very parents who build 

and maintain and run our school system. 

 

And they are simply saying, Mr. Speaker, they are simply 

saying, be very forthright with us, be very definitive with us, 

because we are not bigoted people. We are not the kind of 

people that discriminate against our fellow man or our 

neighbours. We are not the kind of people who will stand for 

their fellow human beings denied, as the minister said, housing, 

denied the opportunity to work, denied to have the opportunity 

to be a taxpayer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is why I say to the government today, you 

have an opportunity to assuage the fears of Saskatchewan 

people by being very forthright and upfront. There are ways . . . 

And this opposition caucus, Mr. Speaker, we'll be bringing 

forth amendments that we believe that there are ways that the 

minister and his government can take those fears 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1395 

away from Saskatchewan people in a way that will make 

Saskatchewan society truly one that is without discrimination. 

 

And that is why, Mr. Speaker, this caucus and this party have 

said to the government, if you are truly reform-minded and 

democratic, that on some of these issues which strike at the 

very fabric of Saskatchewan people, perhaps it's time that this 

Legislative Assembly took another leap forward — another 

leap forward that would allow each and every member who 

represents a constituency in this Assembly to have the 

opportunity to truly stand in their place and vote according to 

the wishes of their constituents after all debate and 

amendments have been presented in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

That truly this is an issue where Saskatchewan people are 

saying, it is time that the very fabric that we live in be 

represented by the people that we have elected in a way that 

leaves no doubt in the minds of those particular constituents 

that their member is in tune with their wishes. 

 

See, I don't see this exercise, Mr. Speaker, of allowing 

members that opportunity, I don't see that as muzzling 

individual rights. I don't see that as being threatening to any 

minority in the province of Saskatchewan. I don't see that as 

bullying anyone, Mr. Speaker, because it is the ultimate 

expression of democratic will. And I think the challenge would 

be to a government, Mr. Speaker, knowing full well the 

feelings of so many Saskatchewan citizens, that they would 

want to bring forward legislation that would allow each and 

every member of this Assembly to stand in his or her place 

with a clear conscience on these issues that affect so many 

people in such a strong moral and psychological way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the principles that were in the Bill of Rights, the 

principles that are in the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, are 

ones based on strong individuals working collectively when 

faced with those issues. And when those strong individuals 

exercise their individual rights, Mr. Speaker, they will truly 

have protection against discrimination on any basis. 

 

And I think that it's important in this debate, Mr. Speaker, that 

not only members of my caucus, the government caucus, the 

independent member from Greystone stand on their feet and 

express their views on how Saskatchewan people will express 

their democratic rights and will express themselves on issues of 

discrimination against their fellow citizens. 

 

It is an ideal opportunity, Mr. Speaker, for this province, as the 

Minister of Justice is wont to say the other day, to once again 

take the lead, a lead that was provided by Tommy Douglas, a 

lead that was provided by John Diefenbaker, but also a lead 

that says: your assurances have been listened to, your concerns 

have been listened to, and that no one in our society has any 

more rights than anyone else. 

 

And because we don't have any more rights than anyone else as 

individuals, Mr. Speaker, we will 

continue to grow and build and have a place that we and our 

children will be very proud to inherit. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

am pleased to rise today in support of the proposed 

amendments to The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. 

 

First of all, I would like to commend and congratulate the 

Minister of Justice for the very fine speech he made on second 

reading in explaining the contents of the Bill and the intent of 

the Bill. And I want to take this opportunity to congratulate 

him for the very fine job that he did. 

 

My remarks will be brief, Mr. Speaker. And I'd like to preface 

my remarks with some comments about my personal 

background, my beliefs, and my convictions. Mr. Speaker, I am 

the son of immigrant parents who moved here from the Soviet 

Union in 1925. I grew up in a family of 10 children. My 

parents were farmers, and my father was an ordained minister 

in a rural Mennonite Brethren church in south-west 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In our household we were diligently taught the teachings of the 

Scriptures, and in the mind of my father issues were pretty 

much either black or white. He had very strong convictions and 

attempted to impart to his families the values that he cherished. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in spite of what I considered some narrow views 

held by my parents, I always sensed sincere understanding and 

tolerance towards people who held different views. There was 

a tolerance to different viewpoints but not a compromise of 

beliefs and values. 

 

I was taught that all human beings are created equal. Each 

person has worth and has the right to be treated with respect 

and dignity. The differences that exist among us do not 

diminish us as a society. Diversity adds to the uniqueness and 

multifaceted aspects of our communities. 

 

During my lifetime, and particularly as a young child, I was the 

victim of discrimination on the basis of religion, the language I 

spoke, and the fact that I was the son of an immigrant who 

spoke differently, dressed differently, and was poor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hated discrimination. But unfortunately, I didn't 

learn too well because I admit, to my shame, that I was also the 

perpetrator of discrimination. I did not enjoy being 

discriminated against, and likewise found no pleasure in 

practising it, even if it was only to get back at those who 

treated me badly. 

 

I believe we all need to be more tolerant. In my view tolerance 

implies that either individually or collectively, we will not 

discriminate against individuals or groups who are different. 

People of 



1396 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

different sexual orientation are included in this category. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I personally do not agree with the homosexual 

lifestyle. I believe this because of my religious background, 

based on the teachings of the Scriptures as they were taught to 

me and as my church interprets them. I acknowledge however 

that neither I nor my church have all the wisdom necessary to 

ascertain the will of God in the Scriptures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the critics of this Bill maintain that the 

homosexual lifestyle is a sinful lifestyle, and on this basis it is 

all right to practise discrimination. I find this reasoning 

unreasonable. I could quote the Ten Commandments. The 

violating of one or all of these commandments is sin. Is it 

logical or reasonable to say that discrimination should be 

condoned on the basis of someone violating any of the Ten 

Commandments? Would you deny someone access to public 

housing or education because that person has told a lie or has 

stolen something? 

 

Most of the opponents of the amendments base their opposition 

on the beliefs of the creed of their church. I have read many 

creeds and statements of principle of different religious 

organizations and churches. I have not found one that has a 

statement in their creed that either promotes or condones 

discrimination. 

 

I have spoken to strong opponents of the amendments, and 

every one of them maintains they are opposed to 

discrimination. If these people are sincere in their opposition to 

discrimination, then they will have a great deal of difficulty 

voting against these amendments. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments that are proposed do not provide 

special rights or status to individuals of different sexual 

orientation. Individuals of different race, creed, religion, 

colour, or sex do not have special rights or status just by the 

very fact that they are listed in the original Human Rights 

Code. Neither will people of different sexual orientation 

receive or expect special rights or status. 

 

The amendments of this Bill have nothing to do with one's 

views on the homosexual lifestyle: whether I think it's wrong or 

right; whether I think it's sinful or not; whether I condone it or 

condemn it. These amendments deal exclusively with a matter 

of discrimination. If you believe discrimination is acceptable, 

then vote against these amendments. If you are opposed to 

discrimination, then vote in favour of these amendments. 

 

The way members of this legislature vote on this issue will 

speak loudly and clearly as to their level of tolerance and 

compassion. Many people have sacrificed their lives to protect 

the views and issues of minorities. Today in Saskatchewan we 

are taking a step at amending legislation to prohibit 

discrimination. 

Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendments to Bill 38. 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill 38. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 46 — An Act to amend and repeal The Farm 

Purchase Program Act 

 

The Chair: — I would ask the minister to please introduce the 

official who is with him here today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The 

official with me is Harvey Murchison. He's the director of 

administration. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: — Just a few questions. One of the questions, 

Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, are there any issues 

outstanding as it relates to payments to be made or 

disagreements between clients and banks, and banks and the 

department? Are there any of those issues outstanding on the 

farm purchase program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, there are several, probably in 

the neighbourhood of 15 or 16 which are still overpayments or 

underpayments and some settlements to be required. I believe it 

allows till October 31 to . . . There's one payment still to be 

made and 15 that are overpayments that we have to collect 

back at this time. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Would you be able to tell me roughly how 

many of those kinds of individuals there were in the program? 

Were there quite a few of them that you had to go collect on or 

that had overpayments or underpayments on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — There were relatively few. I think 

there were 6,900 participants in the program and as I say, there 

are 15 overpayments that are still outstanding. And we don't 

have the exact number. There were others, but not a large 

number. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill 47 — An Act to amend The Farm Financial Stability 

Act 

 

The Chair: — I would ask the minister to please introduce his 

official. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, the official with 

me is Merv Ross. He's the manager of the program. 

 

Clause 1 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1397 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

would you explain one of the items that you raised in your 

address to the Assembly here. The procedure for issuing 

guarantees will be streamlined by eliminating the need for an 

order in council for each request for a guarantee. Will you 

explain what you're doing there and the reasons for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The present procedure, Mr. 

Chairman, is that each increase in loan guarantees or each new 

loan guarantee has to be approved by an order in council. There 

are a large number of these. It sometimes holds up the process 

because no increase can be given until it gets time on the 

cabinet agenda. So what we've done is move to allow the 

deputy minister, I believe, to make these guarantees and then 

approve them as a batch by cabinet. 

 

Mr. Martens: — So, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, if there 

was five of them come into your office for an increase of $5 

million on a guarantee, then you are going to just put them in a 

batch and put them in there so that the whole of the guarantee 

is increased by that amount? Or how exactly are you going to 

work that? I think I need more details on how you're going to 

handle that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, the procedure will 

be for the cabinet to pass an OC authorizing the Minister of 

Finance to guarantee loans from lenders that fit the prescribed 

terms and conditions and also a limit as to the total amount. 

And those will then be approved. When individual loans come 

in, they will not require an OC for each individual association. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Martens: — So, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, the 

process will be that your department and the program 

coordinator, Mr. Ross, will collect all of these. They'll send 

them over to the Minister of Finance as they come in, or are 

you going to wait for a batch of them to come in and then do it? 

 

Because I notice that when we were doing our annual meetings 

around the province with the feeders association, there were 

some concerns expressed about the fact that if the individuals 

and their associations gave up some guarantee money, that then 

if they had to have an expansion on the guarantee within the 

framework of their own association, if they gave up some, then 

they wouldn't get it back quickly enough if they all of a sudden 

had to have more. And that was a concern that was expressed. 

 

I wonder if you would confirm for me that this will be on an 

item-by-item basis, that it will go to the Minister of Finance 

and that they will then authorize that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, that's true. That's the 

purpose, really, of it, is to speed it up. 

 

You're absolutely right. We are asking the associations to 

reduce their total guarantees if they are 

not actively using them to keep our total guarantee exposure 

down. And this will hopefully streamline the process so that 

they will be able to get increases in it faster rather than slower. 

 

Mr. Martens: — The next point I want to ask about, it says 

that cabinet will be given the authority to establish a limit on 

the amount of the loans which may be guaranteed during the 

fiscal year. Would you give me an explanation of that? And I 

have some questions about that then. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Right. This just gives the cabinet 

the authority to put a limit on the total amount of guarantees 

out. I think the limits that have already been set this year is 30 

million for the feeder associations in total and 15 million for 

breeder associations. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Those limitations, Mr. Minister, are they on 

what the guarantee actually is, or is that on the volume of 

dollars lent through the banks to the associations? Or can you 

describe for me exactly what that 30 million represents and the 

15 million represents? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — What those limits will include is 

the total guarantees that are authorized to the various lending 

associations. So if an association has a limit of a million dollars 

that they guarantee, whether or not they're using it all, the 

million dollars would be what would be counted as part of the 

guarantee. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I'll rephrase the question. Is the $30 million 

the amount of money that is the guarantee portion, or is that the 

total volume of the lending that the bank does to the individual 

or the association? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, that's the guarantee. The 25 

per cent that we guarantee is $30 million. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Okay. So that actually in fact on the $30 

million, if that's 25 per cent there's outstanding volume of $120 

million in total. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — That's correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Okay. And on the $30 million at any given 

time, do you have a record of the volume of contribution that 

the farmer has made in the 5 per cent allocation to that fund, 

how many dollars that would be on hand at, let's say, an 

average on a month? Have you got that volume of dollars? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We don't have that exact number 

with us. The feeder associations, there's guarantees of just 

under $100 million. Most of the time there's about 60 per cent 

is about as high as it gets that are actually outstanding, and 5 

per cent of that would be the guarantee. 

 

So just using some rough calculation, it's probably around $3 

million of money in the insurance funds. We can get those 

exact numbers, if you like. 



1398 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

Mr. Martens: — So roughly there would be $3 million in the 

feeder. Does that include the breeder association too, or the 

cows, or just the feeder? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No. That did not include the 

breeder. The breeders have about . . . authorized about 48 

million. And I don't know what percentage of that would be 

outstanding. But there's a 10 per cent assurance deposit on that, 

so that would be in addition to the feeders. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I would take it then that it could be between 

four and four and a half million dollars roughly that would be 

outstanding or in the assurance fund by producers. Because this 

one works a little different than the other one, and it would 

likely be that the volume of dollars that you have guaranteed 

would be there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Right. Actually the closest guess 

we come is maybe three or three and a half, so probably six or 

six and a half in total in assurance funds. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Okay. Just so that the people listening will 

get an understanding of this, make the observation on this that 

the assurance fund put in there by the members is the first 

money at risk. The individual's money is at risk first and then 

the assurance fund of the individual and then the assurance 

fund of the feeder association, and then the risk is against the 

. . . guarantee by the provincial government. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — That's correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Then going on to the third item that I have 

here, and that is that lenders have approached the government 

to ask what procedures they are to follow if they foresee a loss 

in relation to a loan. The procedures were not spelled out in the 

previous legislation. In this amendment the procedures and 

guidelines are clear. These guidelines will minimize risk and it 

will ensure the guarantee is not jeopardized by a lack of action 

on the lender's part. 

 

Would you provide for me a scenario . . . or first of all, the 

amount of things that the lender has to go through in relation to 

delivering the program so that he is in the right position as it 

relates to collecting the guarantee if the individual reneges on 

his commitment to the bank. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — What is required in the process for 

the lending institution is that in the first instance to get 

financial statements and financial information from the 

members of the association before they advance money. 

 

Secondly, basically, is to monitor loans, and if there are 

difficulties, if they see difficulties, to talk to the association. 

And an obligation to realize on security if the loan becomes 

delinquent and before . . . it's their obligation to realize on the 

cattle that they have for security and then go through the 

process of talking to the association and then talking to us to 

get 

government guarantee. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Okay. So you spell them out and so that they 

will be required to have a financial statement, to monitor the 

association in dealing with the client who is the association, 

realize on the loan and the cattle. 

 

In what ways are you suggesting to the bank to do that? Are 

you making recommendations to them or are you asking them 

to follow their own lending pattern procedures? Because each 

bank will have more or less a procedure but they could be 

different. Are you establishing one for all of them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We're hoping to establish one set 

of rules whereby we will call in the lenders and representatives 

from the association to try to work out one set of rules for 

everybody. 

 

What we need mostly from the lending institution is monitoring 

the financial aspect whether or not the loan is paid. The way 

the program is set up, there's a local . . . the livestock 

association itself has a local supervisor who is responsible for 

checking cattle. We have a provincial person who checks. 

 

So from the point of view of the cattle and the security and so 

on, that is quite well taken care of through the program mainly 

by the associations themselves because they have the assurance 

fund at risk. And what we require from the bank is some way 

of keeping track of the financial progress that's being made and 

when loans become delinquent and so on. 

 

Mr. Martens: — In the area of the feeder association, that's a 

little less difficult to do because you have to zero out your loan 

every year. For the breeder association, it's a little bit more 

difficult. 

 

Would you think that you would have different procedures in 

dealing with the security and the questions that you would give 

to the bank to ask how their security or the risk is being 

handled? 

 

And I'll just give you an example. Because you have to zero out 

your loan on the feeders every year, that means that the bank 

has to renew that commitment every year basically to 

re-establish that individual on an ongoing loan basis. 

 

But on the breeder one where they take a five-year loan and 

then pay it down, the difficulty I see in this one is that an 

individual will have to pay down his loan 20 per cent per year 

on his cow loan; he then can choose to reinvest, if he wants to, 

that 20 per cent in some more cows to purchase. So that by the 

time he gets down to his fifth year where he's paid off his final 

one, he still could have $25,000 in loan that he has to buy down 

on a regular basis again. 

 

And each year he takes 20 per cent of, let's use the maximum 

of $25,000, he has to take that $5,000, he has to pay five off of 

that one. When he does the second one, he's got to take the 

second payment off the first five and the first payment on the 

second five. 



May 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1399 

Do you follow me? 

 

And how are you going to ask the banks to manage that? 

Because we're slowly coming into that process now where that 

is a difficult one to do, both for the bank and for the supervisor 

and, I suggest, perhaps from department standpoint too. 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The banks now have a yearly 

inventory, a yearly account by members, so they have each 

member . . . they will have, you know, the number of loans, 

when it was made, how many payments were made, and that. 

And the association will have . . . they will do a yearly 

inventory of the cows and whether or not the calves are there. 

So between them they should have a pretty good handle on 

what's happening and avoid the problem where loans go into 

default and members lose their insurance fund. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Okay. I'm asking these questions for a 

reason, Mr. Minister, and that is that I don't disagree with 

branding, but each one of these cows is going to have to be 

branded. You buy these, let's say 25 cows for $25,000, each 

one of them has a calf and each one of them has to be branded, 

so you've got 25 that come in the first year. Then you decide to 

buy . . . well you make the decision when you take the loan to 

buy down $5,000 off of that 25,000. 

 

You turn around and you borrow that again and put that 5,000 

back in there in five cows, so you got 30 cows on this loan 

program. Next year you're going to have 30 calves — well give 

or take — and by the time you've gone through this in five 

years, you're not going to have 25 or 30 cows or 40 cows 

branded, you're going to have all of these offspring branded 

besides that. And it conceivably could involve your whole herd 

by the time you get through five years of livestock. 

 

The bank only really should have a guarantee on the 25 cows 

you bought first and all the subsequent loans you took, but they 

in fact would have security on anything that's branded, right? 

And that causes a serious concern. 

 

Now where does anyone else come into the process if you want 

to go to the same lender and take as security some of the cattle 

that you have already branded with your own brand plus the 

association brand, and those are not under the legal authority of 

the bank or they're not a collateral for the bank. 

 

So there are many people who have this as a problem. And it 

doesn't fit on the feeder associations because they have that 

annual cut-off and the cattle go to market, but on the cow one it 

makes a significant difference as to how that's handled. 

 

So you could have the majority of your cows in the security of 

the bank and the government by the time you get the whole 

thing paid off, and that causes a serious concern in relation to 

the producers. I don't 

know exactly what the solution is, but I'd like to hear if you 

have a solution to that concern that is expressed to us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, that is a concern. You raised 

a good concern there. 

 

One option that we're looking at and we're recommending to 

lenders is — as you know the association brand is a shelter 

with something above it — what they're recommending is that 

when you buy cattle in '93, you would put a 3 under the shelter 

and that would identify those as being bought in '93, in '94, and 

so on. And when the . . . then the bank would be able to release 

those cattle as no longer being needed for security. So the ones 

with a 3 brand would then be released and be eligible for other 

securities. So that is one solution that seems to be workable for 

that problem. 

 

Mr. Martens: — The question I have then is: do the calves 

need to be branded with a 3 and the 4, the same as the cow in 

the year under review, if you want to put it that way, or do they 

just have to have the shelter brand? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No, we would not recommend 

putting the number on the calves. They would be branded just 

with the shelter brand. And once that payment is made, a 

portion of the payment is paid off, any calves remaining can 

then be transferred, albeit they would have this shelter brand on 

them. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Now, Mr. Minister, those calves are come to 

the fall and they come under the feeder program. Now what do 

we do? They really aren't identified under the feeder program. 

If you don't take a loan out for a feeder program, you don't 

have to make a loan through your association to have a loan 

financing those. But on every occasion the seller should in fact 

really identify whether in fact those calves are still coming 

through on the feeder association, even though they're not 

coming through on the . . . with the cow plan. And so that 

raises another concern that individuals have raised. 

 

And the reason I raise this is not to be difficult, but it is going 

to get very serious. In fact I heard one brand inspector say that 

it won't be long until all the cattle in Saskatchewan are going to 

have a shelter brand on them. And that is a serious problem, I 

think. 

 

And because it won't . . . Because then your guarantee is at no 

risk, because all you have to do is just take in all those cattle 

and you've got all your loan paid for over and above, many, 

many times, and yet they are not a part of the guarantee and the 

farmers maybe have a problem in how they can access that 

inventory for lending from a different lender on a different 

occasion. And so would you explain to us how you perceive 

that to work. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — What we're recommending where 

there's a possibility of confusion between cattle that are 

purchased through 



1400 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1993 

the feeder association and cattle that are on the farm from the 

breeder association, would be either branding in a different 

location or, again, branding with a number . . . an extra brand 

to identify them. But it certainly will become a bit of a 

problem. As an old brand inspector myself, I know that there's 

going to be some confusion surrounding it. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I'm going to go back to the banker here. In 

the event of a claim, this provision will ensure — the 

provisions that you have in there about the procedures — will 

ensure that lenders have followed appropriate procedures. Do 

you have your lenders being audited on an occasional basis to 

see whether they are following the procedures? Does your 

supervisor, provincial supervisor, go to visit the lenders in 

certain areas? Or what's the procedure there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — To begin with, the lenders are 

required to send in monthly reports to us. We also visit them on 

a regular basis to see that they set up the accounting properly 

and that they are monitoring the collection of the monies. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I am also a member of one of these 

associations, Mr. Minister, and we changed banks because of 

interest rates and better interest rates. But I've also noticed that 

better procedures . . . and I'm not going to ask you to identify 

banks that are better than others, but I've noticed that the bank 

that we have and are doing business with now has way better 

procedures than the other bank that we had. Are you finding 

this as well and is that a concern that you need to address when 

you're dealing with a guarantee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — There certainly are differences 

between banks. We have set minimum standards and most 

banks go above that; some do not. Some are not very familiar 

with the program or if there is a change in loan managers, you 

know, we'll find that they're not as familiar with the handling of 

it as some banks who've handled it longer and so on. But yes, 

there are some differences between lenders and we would like 

to streamline the routine as much as possible so that they have 

one policy for all lenders. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Do you have any credit unions at all who are 

involved in this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — There are 9 or 10 credit unions 

that are now involved. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Is this gaining public support? Or is this nine 

. . . have they been there awhile? or is this improving as it goes 

along? Because I think they had a lot of concerns as to how the 

program was working with respect to a provincial guarantee 

and a local guarantee and each individual. Could you elaborate 

on that for me a bit? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, I think that the number of 

credit unions that are involved is growing. The number of 

associations is growing; the program is growing. So I think 

credit unions are becoming more active. 

Mr. Martens: — Is each credit union based on its own 

provision for that loan to guarantee, or is Credit Union Central 

working through this, or is it the responsibility of each 

individual credit union to become involved in this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No. Each individual credit union 

has to handle this on their own, and that's one of the reasons for 

the downfall of some of the smaller credit unions. It's a large 

amount of money and a large amount of liquidity problems that 

they have to keep before loans that are not outstanding. If 

there's a large guarantee or a large approved amount and not 

that much used, it's a problem for small credit unions. So that's 

one of the problems with the credit unions. 

 

Mr. Martens: — The next question I have . . . to reduce the 

amendments are . . . of the legislation, to reduce the risk to the 

assurance fund and the government guarantee, the amendment 

insures that liens cannot be placed on such cattle. How are you 

going to do that so that others can't place liens on that or a 

caveat against it? 

 

The Chair: — Order. It being 5 o'clock, the committee will 

recess until 7 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


