




















































Hansard: March 08, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 193 

 March 8, 1993 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Stanger, seconded by Mr. 

Renaud, and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. Boyd. 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am just 

going to pick up on the debate on the throne speech from where 

my comments left off this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was speaking this afternoon on our major 

initiative when it comes to economic development in this 

province.  And as I indicated, it is very important that this 

particular document lead us into the next years and get us 

prepared for the 21st century, Mr. Speaker.  Some of the major 

initiatives that have been involved in this particular economic 

development strategy include the continuation of the 

community bonds development program.  Mr. Speaker, we've 

added and expanded to that program and certainly it is positive 

out in rural Saskatchewan and right across Saskatchewan.  

We've also, Mr. Speaker, in this particular document, got the 

worker-sponsored venture capital program which also will be a 

major stimulus, I believe, Mr. Speaker, to Saskatchewan and 

rebuilding our economy. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, we've added the Premier's action 

committee on the economy and, Mr. Speaker, the mandate of 

this committee, of course, is to look at the provincial economy 

and keep track of where we're heading, but also to look at the 

Partnership for Renewal document, and as I indicated, there 

are some very specific time lines in this particular document 

and we want to ensure that we will meet those guidelines and 

those time lines as established in this particular document, and 

the PACE (Premier's Action Committee on Economic 

Development) committee will certainly ensure that that is 

brought to fruition. 

 

I think an important area of economic development in this 

province certainly has to be the value added industries in this 

province.  Certainly we're seeing major interest in value added 

activities in this province.  In fact, I met this past fall with some 

people from the Saskatchewan Food Processors Association, 

which indicated to me, Mr. Speaker, that their activity in this 

particular area had increased by about 100 per cent, and their 

membership had climbed by 50 per cent.  Mr. Speaker, this 

demonstrates that Saskatchewan people, again with the 

ingenuity for coming up with these creative ideas, are looking 

at all sorts of programs and ideas to rejuvenate the economy 

and we're very pleased to see that and again this document 

speaks to that, and continuing to stimulate that area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- We're also very pleased to be looking at regional 

economic development authorities in this province.  Now what 

these authorities will do in the 

province is to coordinate and streamline economic 

development in the province.  And that is very important.  We 

have to look at what the federal government and what the 

provincial government is doing in areas, in a particular region 

of this province, and try to bring some coordination and some 

planning to economic development.  I firmly believe that the 

regional economic development authorities are going to play a 

significant role in streamlining economic development and 

guiding us into the 21st century as far as Saskatchewan 

economic development, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to talk a bit about the impact that federal economic 

policies have had on this country and in particular as it relates 

to this province.  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the 

Free Trade Agreement and the proposed North American Free 

Trade Agreement.  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that 

when you see people like Simon Reisman and Gordon Ritchie, 

who were major architects and major negotiators on the federal 

government when it came to free trade agreements, saying that 

the North . . . or the Free Trade Agreement . . . And in 

particular, the United States of America is breaking the letter -- 

if not the spirit -- of this particular agreement in many areas, 

I'm telling you this is a serious indictment of this particular 

agreement, and we should be asking ourselves, Mr. Speaker, 

we should be asking ourselves as a government in this country, 

but as a government in this province, and we should be asking 

the opposition in Ottawa . . . or the government in Ottawa to 

not move ahead with a North American Free Trade Agreement 

until we have renegotiated some of the sections of this Free 

Trade Agreement that are so offensive to Saskatchewan and to 

the rest of this country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Now we realize, Mr. Speaker, that Canada and 

Saskatchewan needs trade -- absolutely.  And in particular in 

Saskatchewan, exports are a significant portion of our 

economy.  We do not deny that. 

 

But what is offensive to us is that we are seeing a regular . . . a 

breaking away of the agreement by the United States of 

America.  And one area that I find very offensive and the one 

that I think is not working is the whole area of the dispute 

settlement mechanism in the Free Trade Agreement.  Because 

what is happening, Mr. Speaker, is that we are seeing . . . and 

in particular, in the whole area of the pork industry, Mr. 

Speaker, what we are seeing is that the United States of 

America is placing duties and is going after the Canadian 

industry, but by the time it goes through all the steps in the 

dispute settlement mechanism, you have the possibility of 

breaking a particular industry in this country.  And that is 

unforgivable and it must be stopped, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I want to ask the federal government to not proceed with the 

North American Free Trade Agreement until we can settle the 

provisions in the Free Trade Agreement that are hurting 

Saskatchewan, and in particular, Canada as a whole.  And until 

we . . . and I might add they should wait until we have a federal 

election in this country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



194 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1993 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to talk now to a very 

important subject -- one that should deserve a major priority 

and which this government is addressing -- and that is a 

significant industry in our economy, and that is agriculture, Mr. 

Speaker.  I want to take the members opposite on a little 

journey back in history because obviously they have forgot 

what national agricultural policy is all about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, right from the start of agriculture in this country, 

the responsibility, under the Constitution of Canada, falls in 

large part on the federal government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, that's not to say that the 

provinces do not play a role in agricultural policy.  They do.  

But not a significant role.  The responsibility has always 

resided in the federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan has nearly 50 per 

cent of all the arable land in this country.  It has less than 

one-fifth of the population.  Mr. Speaker, there is no 

conceivable way that the taxpayers of this province can hope to 

finance a major industry like agriculture.  This is why it's 

always been a national responsibility. 

 

Now there's a perception out there, Mr. Speaker, that the 

agricultural crisis has somehow came up overnight.  Mr. 

Speaker, it's always been here.  Agriculture has always had 

problems.  If you go right back to the early 1960s, we have lost 

1,400 farm families each and every year through the good 

times and the bad times.  Mr. Speaker, that tells me that 

agriculture has been going through a major rationalization 

process since the 1960s.  But I want to go back to agricultural 

farm policy and in particular federal agriculture policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a document here that's called Growing 

Together.  It was put out in 1989 by the federal government -- 

November, 1989 to be precise -- by the then minister of 

Agriculture, the Honourable Don Mazankowski.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, when it comes to farm safety net support programs, 

this particular document tells us that the first line of defence in 

the agricultural industry is the market-place.  Farmers go out on 

their farms, grow their crops that are best suited to their 

particular farm, try to find niche markets for their crops 

irrespective of what other farm programs are telling them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the second-line programs in this particular 

policy paper were GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

and NISA (net income stabilization account); those were the 

second-line programs.  And, Mr. Speaker, what they said -- and 

it's right in that document; everybody should read it -- that the 

first line of defence, which is the market-place, would not be 

adequate enough especially in light of the major trade war 

between the Americans and European Community. 

 

Now what they said is that GRIP and NISA would fill in some 

of those income gaps over those years.  But they also admitted 

in that document that GRIP and NISA would not be adequate 

to fill in all those income gaps.  And that is why they put in 

place a third line of defence program. 

And what this third line of defence program does, Mr. Speaker 

. . . And I might add that the federal government, in conduit 

with the provinces, put together a federal third line of defence 

committee that would monitor how much farm income was 

going into each province.  Remember -- the federal government 

put their own committee together to monitor.  Now in 1990 

crop year, Mr. Speaker, the 1990 crop year, their own 

committee identified a $500 million shortfall -- $500 million 

shortfall.  Has that money been paid out?  It has not.  And I'm 

not here to ask 1.5 billion; I'm not here to ask 2 billion; I'm 

asking the federal government to follow its agricultural policy 

which is set out in this document and pay the $500 million that 

their own committee has identified for the 1990 crop year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- I want to tell you again, and especially the 

members opposite, the fact is we're asking for $500 million that 

their own committee identified.  The cost overrun on the 

helicopter contract being proposed right now, the cost overrun 

is $1.4 billion, by Kim Campbell I might add. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely reprehensible.  They are going 

to allow $1.4 billion cost overrun on the helicopters, but they're 

not even going to put their $500 million which their own 

committee identified.  And where are the members opposite, 

Mr. Speaker?  Where are the members opposite?  They're 

looking in thin air, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am telling you, that is unforgivable.  But I want 

to tell you that the federal offloading in agriculture is consistent 

and relentless and we have to take a stand on that.  We've just 

seen lately with the $80 million chopped off the Western Grain 

Transportation Act -- unforgivable again, Mr. Speaker.  Again 

another $80 million that has been put on the backs of the 

provinces and a province like Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you another area that farmers out in 

my constituency are telling me that is very important is the 

cash advance program. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the former premier, the member from 

Estevan, when the cash advance was terminated by the federal 

government, what did that member say, Mr. Speaker?  He said 

it is short-term pain for long-term gain.  That's what he said, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they stand up now and say they're sympathetic with 

farmers.  What a charade.  Mr. Speaker, I can't believe that they 

would stand up and make those kind of comments. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to ask everybody out there, and in 

particular the farmers of this province, if you think once the 

next election is over and the Conservatives or the Liberals -- 

the Liberals have been very silent on this particular program . . 

. Mr. Speaker, I believe that this program is going to be toast. 

Mr. Speaker, they're going to terminate it.  And farmers are 

very concerned about that.  It 



March 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 195 

is a very good program and one of the finest we've had for a 

long time. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, in closing, I do not subscribe, I do not 

subscribe to all the gloom and doom and pessimism that 

surrounds the agricultural debate today.  Mr. Speaker, I believe 

that agriculture will play a fundamental role, a significant role 

in the rejuvenation of the Saskatchewan economy.  I can stand 

up here, Mr. Speaker, because I am an active participant in the 

agricultural industry.  And I can tell you that there is plenty of 

farmers out there, despite this serious financial strait-jackets 

they're facing, despite all the major hurdles that they have to 

overcome, they are looking at agriculture in a bright and 

optimistic note, and they're willing to work with the 

Government of Saskatchewan to ensure that they will be here 

tomorrow, and they will contribute significantly to the future of 

this province. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to turn a little bit now to the 

area of health care reforms in this province, and I want to tell 

you that I believe in my heart of hearts that this is one of the 

most important decisions and initiatives that this government 

has undertaken. 
 

It's important, Mr. Speaker, because we realize how important 

health care is to the people in the province of Saskatchewan.  It 

is something that is rooted deep in the very fabric of 

Saskatchewan society.  And let me tell you that this 

government takes this very seriously.  And what I hear out 

there, Mr. Speaker, is people telling me that if anybody they 

wanted to reform health care they want it to be a New 

Democratic government. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, we've worked with the stakeholders 

in the health care.  We've told them that this is a 

developmental, evolutionary process.  We want them to take a 

look at all their options in their particular districts and their 

areas, to take the time.  But, Mr. Speaker, we also want to 

emphasize that we are going to be setting a time line and that 

that time line, hopefully, will be achieved for the formation of 

health care districts. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we firmly believe as a government that the future 

of health care will be significantly improved.  We will have a 

better, more efficient, in particular most cost-efficient program 

after the implementation of this particular initiative, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 

M. le président, mes chers collègues dans la Chambre, je 

voudrais vous dire un couple de mots en français dans ma 

langue natale.  Certainement c'est un grand plaisir pour moi de 

me mettre debout ici ce soir pour vous parler de la condition de 

la province, et en particulier, le problème des finances dans la 

province. 

 

Je peux vous dire que la situation, le défi en avant de nous, 

pour les gens de la province, c'est un gros défi, M. le président.  

On voit que le montant dette publique qui a été accumulé 

durant les derniers 10 ans par les chers membres opposés, M. le 

président, est rendu à un niveau inacceptable.  Il faut prendre 

contrôle de cette situation; il 

faut reverser le fait qu'on continue comme gouvernement à 

accumuler des déficits chaque année.  C'est impossible, M. le 

président. 

 

Comme j'ai dit ce soir, on parle de renouveler l'économie dans 

la Saskatchewan.  Mais comment qu'on va renouveler une 

économie si on continue à créer de la dette puis on est rendu un 

point, M. le président, que les investeurs mondials, tout autour 

du monde, ils vont regarder avec chagrin sur le Canada parce 

que pour eux, ils veulent avoir un ambiance qui vont donner du 

pouvoir et qui vont confortable de venir investir ici dans la 

province. 

 

Alors c'est très important; je suis très encourageant et je 

supporte mon gouvernement pour les initiatives qu'on a prit.  

Certainement c'est difficile pour les gens et je pense qu'on s'en 

va dans bonne direction et je suis fier de dire qu'à la fin de la 

journée je pense les gens de la Saskatchewan vont nous 

supporter et nous dire oui, vous avez fait les bonnes décisions. 

 

M. le président, je pense on a tout vu les taux d'assimilation à 

qui arrive tout autour du Canada et certainement dans la 

province de la Saskatchewan.  Les taux sont les plus hauts dans 

le Canada.  C'est inquiètant pour moi, comme francophone, 

parce que je vois que notre langue, notre culture continue à être 

assimilé.  Et je veux vous dire, comme député francophone, 

mes chers francophones en province, qu'il faut essayer de 

prendre des contrôles pour reverser ça. 

 

Nous le gouvernement reconnaissent ça et on a dit dans notre 

discours de trône qu'on ne fait un commitment pour essayer 

d'amener la gestion scolaire.  Certainement on veut essayer de 

pousser le gouvernement fédéral pour faire certain qu'il nous 

aide la province pour financer cette programme, parce que pour 

nous la province, avec le dette comme j'ai dit, avec le déficit, 

c'est très difficile.  Mais on a fait un commitment à la fin de la 

journée, je suis optimiste que le gouvernement de la province 

vont avancer avec ce projet-là. 

 

Alors, M. le président et mes chers homologues dans la 

législature, je vous dire que ça me donne un grand plaisir d'être 

capable de me monte . . . de me mettre debout ici pour 

m'exprimer dans ma langue natale. 

 

(Translation:  Mr. Speaker, hon. colleagues in the Assembly, I 

would like to say a couple of words in French, my mother 

tongue.  Of course it's a great pleasure for me to be standing 

here this evening to speak to you about the condition of the 

province and in particular, the financial problems in the 

province. 

 

I can tell you that the situation, the challenge before us, for the 

people of the province, is a great challenge, Mr. Speaker.  We 

see that the rising public debt which was accumulated during 

the last 10 years by the hon. members opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

has risen to an unacceptable level.  We have to take control of 

this situation.  We have to reverse the trend for the government 

to accumulate deficits each year.  It's impossible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I said this evening, we have to revive the economy in 



196 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1993 

Saskatchewan.  But how can we renew the economy if we 

continue to create debt to the point, Mr. Speaker, that investors 

around the world look to Canada in sorrow, because they want 

to have an atmosphere which will enable them to feel 

comfortable investing here in the province. 

 

So it's very important.  I'm very encouraged and I support my 

government for the initiatives they have taken.  Of course it's 

difficult for people and I think that we're going in the right 

direction.  And I am proud to say that at the end of the day I 

think that the people of Saskatchewan are going to support us 

and say yes, you've made the right decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we've all seen the rate of assimilation of 

those who arrive all around Canada and certainly in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  The rates are the highest in 

Canada.  It's disquieting for me as a francophone, because I see 

that our language and our culture does continue to be 

assimilated.  And I tell you, as a francophone member of the 

legislature, fellow francophones of the province, that we have 

to take control and reverse that. 

 

As government we recognize that and in our throne speech 

have made a commitment to try to establish francophone 

governance.  Certainly we want to try to push the federal 

government to make certain that they help the province finance 

this program, because for our province, with the debt that I've 

mentioned, with the deficit, it's very difficult.  But we made a 

commitment at the end of the day, optimistic that the 

government will go ahead with this project. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker and hon. counterparts in the legislature, I do 

say to you that it gives me a great deal of pleasure to be able to 

stand here today to speak in my mother tongue.) 

 

Mr. Speaker, and, fellow members, I want to end my 

presentation, my debate, in saying that I believe that the 

initiatives and the steps that the Government of Saskatchewan 

have taken are the right decisions.  I firmly believe that.  I think 

we cannot continue on this path. 

 

We have close to an accumulated debt of 14-point-some billion 

dollars.  How are we going to create a climate of confidence for 

investors to come and invest in this province if they know that 

the finances of this province are nearly over the financial 

precipice?  And I think that is absolutely important.  We can 

talk long and hard about economic development, but unless we 

take the tough, difficult decisions to reverse our financial 

situation, we will never be able to attract the kind of investment 

that we as a province need, and our children need, and future 

generations need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this really is a journey of renewal for us all.  

We've taken the right path.  The future is just ahead of us.  We 

just have to strive for it and we will achieve it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you very much 

for this opportunity to respond to the Speech from the Throne.  

My remarks, Mr. Speaker, will be brief and I'll touch only 

briefly on the many fine and important 

instances of legislative or program and policy change promised 

in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Before I do so, though, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate you 

for the very fine and even-handed job that you are doing in 

bringing order and civility to this House.  I have been 

impressed, Mr. Speaker, with how you have conducted yourself 

in your tenure as Speaker and how you have asked the 

members of this House, on all sides, to conduct themselves.  I 

recognize that you do not have an easy task, but I think you are 

to be commended for your patience and your persistence in that 

task.  Thank you. 

 

I also want to acknowledge the mover and the seconder in the 

debate from the Speech from the Throne.  They have 

commented eloquently, passionately, and caringly upon the 

many significant trends that are set forth in the speech and I 

thank them for their contribution. 

 

For me, Mr. Speaker, one of the more important reasons for 

letting my name stand for election to this House was the 

opportunity to be able to participate in a direct and meaningful 

way in the process of change -- change from a selfish, 

inner-directed, grasping, and greedy approach that 

characterized the '80s and the Conservative government; 

change to a process that emphasizes the social democratic 

values that I cherish. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, upon listening to the Lieutenant Governor 

read the Speech from the Throne, I was impressed with how 

strongly the approach that our government intends to chart over 

the next few months is guided by strong and clear social 

democratic principles.  Critics may complain that we're not 

moving fast enough, but they can hardly complain that we're 

not moving at all. 

 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the clearest example I can give of the 

embodiment of social democratic principles in the throne 

speech is the whole question of tolerance and respect for others 

that is inherent in many of the pieces of legislation promised 

for the upcoming session.  It doesn't require the wisdom of 

Solomon or the genius of an Einstein to be aware that the vast 

majority of the legislation that we will be introducing this 

session would never, ever have seen the light of day under 

either a Tory or a Liberal government. 

 

No, Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne and the 

legislative action promised within it is clearly the work of 

strong and dedicated, fair-minded and community-oriented 

social democrats.  I point out, for instance, our plans to expand 

the employment equity program in the public service to make 

sure that fair employment opportunities are available for people 

of aboriginal ancestry, women in management and 

non-traditional roles, persons with disabilities, and members of 

visible minorities.  This latter addition, members of visible 

minorities, is very important and is a clear recognition by our 

government that we must actively ensure that all people, 

regardless of country of origin, have opportunities without 

discrimination or racism to contribute meaningfully in the life 

of this province. 

 

I am also very proud, Mr. Speaker, that our proposed 



March 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 197 

Occupational Health and Safety Act will include a special 

framework for dealing with sexual harassment.  The underlying 

social democratic principle guiding this and other pieces of 

legislation, it seems to me, is that of respect; respect and 

tolerance and celebration of our differences in this country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- This is very important, Mr. Speaker, and it's a 

clear indication of just how different -- and how values-driven 

-- our government is from the opposition parties.  We have as a 

value and we have as a practice a clear recognition of the need 

to enhance social justice for all people.  And we will do that, 

Mr. Speaker, despite the pettiness, the narrowness, and the 

fearmongering of individuals who wish to retain their special 

positions of privilege and their racism and sexism and 

intolerance.  Those things are unacceptable, Mr. Speaker, in a 

civilized country, and our government will be moving to 

correct the injustices that have been caused by these things. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1930) 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- I am proud, Mr. Speaker, that we will be 

introducing amendments to the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Code to prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual 

orientation, family status, or the receipt of public assistance.  I 

know that some people are running around this province right 

now predicting all sorts of doom and catastrophic gloom if we 

should happen to do this, and quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I'm 

more than a little irritated about the falsehoods and the hatred 

that's being generated over this issue. 

 

What we are aiming for in this legislation is not so catastrophic 

and it hardly ranks as special privilege.  We are not creating 

special rights for certain individuals; we are not encouraging 

people to run amok in the streets.  No.  What we are doing is 

saying very clearly that respect and tolerance for differences 

are important social democratic values that are necessary in any 

civilized society. 

 

The sky won't fall in when the legislation is passed, Mr. 

Speaker, but for thousands of men and women in this province, 

life will be just a little easier as they carry on their day-to-day 

existence knowing that they will not unjustly be denied a job or 

housing or public transportation simply because they happen to 

be different.  And society will not crumble because we protect 

their right to be different. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, a lot of heat and very little light has 

been generated by the smokescreen that has been thrown up 

about our government's plans to prohibit discrimination against 

gay men and lesbian women.  At the heart of it, I believe, is a 

basic fear and intolerance of difference that is unrealistic, 

hateful, and hurtful.  And as a proud and strong social 

democrat, Mr. Speaker, I reject the intolerance guiding this 

opposition to our legislation. 

 

I also want to point out that there are two other major areas 

where people have suffered discrimination that we 

will also be moving to prohibit with this legislation.  People 

sometimes say to me, well there really is no discrimination 

against gays, so why bother with this legislation?  When they 

say that, I know that they are ignorant of the many stories of 

pain and humiliation that gay friends of mine have 

experienced. 

 

And while I have never -- because of my sexual orientation 

which happens, by a quirk of birth, to be the majority one -- 

while I have never experienced the sorts of hatred and loathing 

that these friends have experienced, I am nevertheless 

completely convinced that we need to move, and move quickly 

on this legislation. 

 

And that is because, Mr. Speaker, I have personally and 

directly experienced the discrimination and biases caused by 

the typecasting in the other two areas that we will be moving to 

legislate on, that is family status and receipt of public 

assistance. 

 

I will give you two quick examples of the kind of needless pain 

and harassment that can occur for people.  When I was in my 

20's -- which was a long time ago to be sure -- I can still 

remember the experience indelibly that occurred to me when I 

applied for a job.  The man interviewing me leeringly asked 

whether or not he should hire me even though I had all the 

necessary job skills that were required.  His reason:  well I had 

recently married and he was concerned that I might end up 

pregnant on the job.  That, Mr. Speaker, is intolerable and 

unwarranted discrimination on the basis of family status. 

 

And while I was growing up, my widowed mother was forced 

to rely for a time upon public assistance to feed herself and her 

six children.  And how vividly I remember riding the school 

bus and having other children taunt me and smear bologna 

sandwiches in my hair and call me a welfare bum.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, is intolerable and unwarranted discrimination on the 

basis of receipt of public assistance. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, our legislative amendments to the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code will send out a very clear 

and strong message to the hatemongers of this world that it is 

not acceptable to indulge in such behaviour. 

 

I want to turn now, Mr. Speaker, to some general remarks 

about the experience of being in government for the past year 

and a half.  I meet people on the street and they say to me:  why 

would you do it?  Why would you want to be in government 

right now when you have to deal with such a crippling deficit?  

They seem to think that one can only enjoy being in 

government if one has largesse to distribute, and that being an 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) should be the 

equivalent to being a Santa Claus. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, this is a tremendously important and 

significant time to be in government.  No, it's not fun.  And no, 

it is not personally rewarding.  But it is tremendously 

challenging and stimulating, and it is very, very important. 

 

One only needs to look around the world at examples where the 

democratic process has broken down or was 



198 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1993 

non-existent to be inspired by the challenge and the honour that 

we have here in this House.  As I consider the alternatives, I 

have to say that I'd far rather be here in government, even in 

spite of our economic difficulties.  It is challenging and it's 

exciting to be in government at this time. 

 

It seems to me that almost any buffoon can govern when times 

are easy.  We certainly have had some sterling examples of that 

over the last 10 years.  But it requires an extraordinary 

dedication and commitment to democracy and to social 

democratic principles to govern in times such as these. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Asking leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 

and through to the members of the Legislative Assembly, 30 

Wells Division-83 Cub Scouts Regina, Saskatchewan.  They're 

members of Cubs and Scouts in my constituency, Mr. Speaker.  

And with them this evening are chaperons Gilbert Gech and 

Del Hammerlindl.  And I would ask all of the members of the 

Assembly to join with me in greeting them this evening.  We'll 

be getting together for a discussion shortly in Room 218 and a 

picture together with them on the steps. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would also 

like to welcome the Boy Scouts here tonight.  As an ex-Queen's 

Scout, I appreciated the scouting opportunities that I had and I 

wish them the best in their scouting. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, it is a privilege and 

an honour to be part of government during these exciting, 

challenging, and difficult times.  So I want to thank the people 

of Saskatoon Wildwood for giving me this privilege and 

opportunity, for it is indeed a tremendous opportunity. 

 

We are, in this province and in this country, on the 

threshold of major change.  For years people have talked about 

the developing and the developed countries and have divided 

things up that way.  What is becoming increasingly clear, Mr. 

Speaker, as we face the horrendous deficits created by 10 years 

of profligate spending by right wing, incompetent governments 

here and federally, is that a third category of country could 

potentially emerge. 

 

If we are not extremely careful and prudent and fiscally 

responsible, Mr. Speaker, we could add to the categorization of 

developing and undeveloped countries, a third category of 

undeveloping countries.  It is clear that we are at the threshold 

of a crisis now.  It is also equally clear that we have, through 

our budgets and our legislative agendas, initiated the kinds of 

solid, common sense, and compassionate actions that will 

prevent us from sliding into the status of an undeveloping 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- People may complain about our preoccupation 

with the deficit; however it is the means to a goal of financial 

freedom and dedication to social democratic principles that is 

extremely important if we are to maintain our status in this 

world. 

 

So it is challenging, and it is exhilarating to be part of 

government right now -- to be part of the process of making 

government more effective, more focused, debt free, and 

guided by the principles of compassion, caring, and tolerance, 

and of the careful balance of individual and societal rights. 

 

The purpose of government, it seems to me, is to provide a 

template of law and order that has been generally accepted and 

clearly developed from the general wisdom and acceptance of 

the people.  The purpose of government, it seems to me, is to 

work as legislators to leave things a little bit better than they 

were when we got here.  How I wish that the opposition had 

been guided by that very benign and minimally intrusive 

principle: to leave things a little bit better than they were before 

they got here. 

 

You know in preparing for this speech, I reviewed some of the 

statistics of the financial plunder and carnage visited upon this 

province by the hon. members opposite.  I won't once again 

recite the litany of the debt, the scandals of patronage and 

unjustified grants and pay outs to Tory friends that categorized 

the government of the last 10 years.  I won't talk about the 

dubious diversification strategies.  No, what I will do is simply 

remind members of this House of one very straightforward and 

important statistic: if the previous government had created jobs 

at the same rate as the rest of Canada, we would have over 

32,000 more jobs in this province right now . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- How many? 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thirty-two thousand more jobs in this province, 

and the population of this province would have been 1.1 

million people if they had created jobs at the same rate that the 

rest of Canada did. 

 

But that isn't what they did.  They gave the money away to 



March 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 199 

dubious schemes like GigaText.  They were free spenders.  

And what they did was they concentrated capital in the hands 

of a privileged few and they heaped a mountain of debt upon 

the rest of us. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, our government, our New Democratic 

government, must now come in and follow through on a very 

modest goal -- to leave things a little better than they were 

when we got here.  And to do that we've outlined a clear plan 

of action that eliminates the privilege that members opposite 

have tried to carve out for themselves and their cronies.  For 

that, Mr. Speaker, is surely the essence of what being a social 

democrat is all about -- the elimination of privilege and the 

creation of opportunities for equality for all people. 

 

We will, Mr. Speaker, through a careful plan of action, 

eliminate the privilege that had crept into the process of 

government.  Instead we will create, through consultation and 

strategic partnerships, a situation where everyone has the 

opportunity to participate fully in the rebuilding of this very 

great province.  Unlike the members opposite -- the Tories and 

the Liberals, whose slogans seem to be to deal with image 

rather than issues, to deal with privilege rather than principles, 

to work for entitlement rather than empowerment -- we will 

strive for a just and caring and compassionate and debt-free 

society in Saskatchewan. 

 

And that is why we have chosen the path of fiscal and social 

justice reform that we have.  We have chosen not to push the 

people of this province further into debt.  We have chosen not 

to throw our hands up in despair.  We have chosen to recognize 

the winds of change and to manage that change.  Like a kite 

that flies highest against the strongest winds, we will, together 

with the people of this province, work to eliminate unjustified 

privilege, to restructure government so that it is more effective, 

and to rebuild our financial affairs so that all of us together can 

enjoy the challenges and opportunities of that change. 

 

(1945) 

 

The decade of the '90s will be viewed by historians as a decade 

of change, where the people of Canada grappled with the greed 

and the excesses of the '80s and prepared their children for the 

next century. 

 

This throne speech and the upcoming budget are necessary 

building blocks in that process of change.  I welcome the 

change.  I'm stimulated by the challenges and I am confident 

that our social democratic principles will guide us successfully 

and compassionately through the changes.  Tomorrow will 

indeed be a better time for all of us together. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again it gives 

me pleasure to rise in this Assembly and ask the government of 

the day what happened to all the election promises that were 

made a short 16 months ago. 

 

And this time, Mr. Speaker, I stand in support of the 

amendment that was proposed by my colleague because 

obviously what we see in this throne speech means that if 

someone doesn't come along with an amendment that makes 

some sense, that adds some depth to the plan, we'll be bereft of 

anything at all.  And it behoves the opposition, as it did in the 

last session of this legislature, Mr. Speaker, to add something 

to a government plan that is big on words but very, very thin on 

details and implementation. 

 

It's a little bit like the performance that we've seen in this 

legislature from the government, a huge government, 55 

members of the Assembly.  And they can hardly get on their 

feet to support their own throne speech, Mr. Speaker.  It's like 

pulling teeth around here to get the government members up.  I 

think we'll be lucky if there's 20 of them speak before we're 

done this particular exercise in this House. 

 

Cabinet.  We've seen the cabinet grow from 12 to 14 to 15, and 

now up to 18.  We've seen two cabinet ministers, two new 

cabinet ministers entering into this debate.  I wonder if the 

Premier expanded his cabinet so that he would at least have a 

couple of them enter into their own throne speech. 

 

I mean this is the game plan, Mr. Speaker, the document, the 

plan that the folks of Saskatchewan are supposed to adhere 

themselves to as they charge off into the 1990s.  And what do 

we have?  Almost no one willing to stand up and speak to it, to 

defend it, to show the vision. 

 

And it's been very evident by their participation, Mr. Speaker, 

in this throne speech, that there is no enthusiasm by the 

government members.  They know that the campaign promises 

of '91 are beginning to ring more hollow every day; that voter 

after voter and taxpayer after taxpayer in this province is 

saying: you didn't tell me the truth in October of 1991. 

 

It's no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP (New Democratic 

Party) promises were on a card 4 inches by 8 or something, 

because they obviously wanted to keep it very simple and very 

small so that they hoped that no one would notice. 

 

But they did say a number of things, Mr. Speaker, about taxes 

and about the way they would handle the economy and how 

they would bring social justice to people.  And you know what, 

Mr. Speaker?  None of those things that I have . . . I thought 

would be coming, at least in the second throne speech because 

they didn't show up in the first, well it hasn't showed up in the 

second one either. 

 

And obviously the enthusiasm I've seen from government 

members tells me that it probably won't show up in the one 

after this because this NDP Party in Saskatchewan doesn't 

intend on keeping any of those promises made in the last 

election campaign.  They don't intend on keeping any of them. 

 

I've sat in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, now over the first week 

and a half of this session and listened to the feeble defence of 

this government's performance in agriculture, still the number 

one industry in the province of Saskatchewan.  And have we 

heard any one of them stand in their place and say that our 

vision, the confidence that 



200 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1993 

we will instil, as a government, in agricultural people in this 

province will get the crop planted in 1993, with the confidence 

that farm families need to have to go out and face the future? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Not one. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- As my colleague says, not one. 

 

And I've listened very intently.  I listened to the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg -- as my colleague says, the doc in the 

corner.  I've listened to the member from Shaunavon.  I've 

listened to the member from Humboldt who instigated the 

special debate.  And you know what, Mr. Speaker?  After about 

five feeble minutes of justifying what they have done to 

agriculture in this province, they quickly light up the blame 

thrower and go talk about other entities, about the federal 

government, about the lack of responsibility of everybody in 

the world except New Democrats.  New Democrats who told 

farm families in 1991 that we can do better.  We can do it with 

less and we will go to Ottawa and we will show farm families 

how we'll bring the money home. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we got the bill for the plane trip.  That's 

what they brought home.  They took their friends to Ottawa 

and got laughed out of town, and then they brought the bill for 

the plane fare home.  And you know what, Mr. Speaker?  There 

hasn't been a thing since, except more and more bills for 

Saskatchewan farm families and the rural communities, the 

rural communities that live with them and off them. 

 

These people, Mr. Speaker, these people are going into the 

spring of 1993.  It's warm out there, the snow is gone, the wind 

is blowing.  And those farm families were promised, they were 

promised by the Premier, Mr. Speaker, after he admitted in 

Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, after he admitted that he 

shouldn't have touched the GRIP program, they were promised 

that this spring New Democrats would go out and consult with 

the people and revamp the program so that the confidence and 

the vision would be there in the spring of '93. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it is now I believe March 8, and what have 

we heard from the government?  Nothing.  What have we heard 

from the government's friends?  Nothing.  We have a throne 

speech that talks about visions for the future.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, farm families are hoping they don't see visions of frost 

and drought and the things that they saw in '92 -- and an 

absolute ineptitude by this provincial government, an 

ineptitude to do anything about it. 

 

I don't know, Mr. Speaker, how any rural member of this 

government can go out and face the very constituents that 

elected them a short 16 months ago, the very constituents that 

they promised so much to and have been such a dismal failure 

to, and then have the audacity to come into this Chamber and 

present this throne speech, this throne speech that is so bereft 

of any hope or imagination or vision, and say to farm families, 

we've got it figured out.  Stick with us; we're going to do better 

in the future.  Well let's just hope, Mr. Speaker, as far as 

agriculture goes, that that particular vision of the New 

Democratic Party isn't the one that the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose brought 

into this Assembly last spring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can go through this particular document 

section by section, and it's almost sad to say that every section 

is treated the same way that agriculture is.  We get fancy 

words.  We get mouthing some . . . the New Democratic Party 

government saying that, well we've gone out and consulted 

with people and this is what we've told me.  But when you 

actually go through it, Mr. Speaker, you see that it is one 

betrayal after another. 

 

I've been very curious to hear some member of the government 

stand up and say, you know, a year later --- a year later after 

increases in personal taxes, a year later after increases in 

corporate taxes, a year later after increases in sales taxes, a year 

later after double increases in utilities -- that this government 

would come forth with a study that says that all of these things 

have been good for the economic wherewithal of this province.  

And this study will show that we've got tens of thousands of 

new jobs because of it, that we've got the economy turned 

around, that people are investing in Saskatchewan in 

ever-increasing numbers.  The rate of outflow has stopped, that 

people are coming back into the province.  There are fewer 

people on welfare.  The employment rate is the best in Canada.  

Because I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that very quickly after the 

last election, this same government had a study almost instantly 

picked out of the air saying what the downfalls of 

harmonization were.  It only took a matter of weeks, Mr. 

Speaker.  And there it was for all the world to see.  The jobs 

had left, people were leaving the province -- all of these things 

that the New Democrats campaigned against.  But have we 

seen a study from this government, Mr. Speaker, saying that 

these things have occurred, all of these wonderful things 

because of their record?  No.  We haven't seen that. 

 

The member opposite that spoke prior to me talked about a 

dubious strategy for economic development.  Well I say to you, 

Mr. Speaker, this throne speech is dubious on economic 

development.  This government's performance is dubious on 

economic development.  And I would suggest to the many 

ministers of Finance over there that perhaps they should come 

forward with a study, that perhaps they should lay out to 

Saskatchewan people exactly what raises in personal, 

corporate, sales, and utility rates have done to the 

Saskatchewan economy. 

 

And I think what they would find a year ago to today is that 

there is 10,000 less jobs, that there are more people on welfare 

today, that Saskatchewan no longer for the very first time in I 

don't know how long doesn't have the lowest employment rate 

in Canada, that we're much closer to the national average than 

these people care to admit, and that people are leaving this 

province by the tens and the hundreds and, I would suggest to 

you, by the thousands on a monthly basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we're going to be back to where we were in the 

mid-70s, the last time these people had power in this province, 

where Saskatchewan sank to 890,000 people.  And I would 

suggest to the many ministers of Finance over there that 

890,000 people in this province isn't enough to provide the 

safety net that we all enjoy, the education and the health and 

the policing and the social services and the reduction of the 

deficit that we all want to 



March 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 201 

be part of. 

 

Because as people continue to leave this province, we generally 

lose our best, Mr. Speaker -- the people with the get-up-and-go; 

the people that will work that extra hour in a day.  Those are 

the people who will leave this province because this 

government has no vision, because this government is simply 

taxing them to death without showing how they're going to 

bring about the economic wherewithal to pay for the things that 

we enjoy in our society. 

 

And once again, Mr. Speaker, do we see the plan in the throne 

speech?  No, we don't.  And my fear, Mr. Speaker, is that come 

budget time on the 18th, that we're simply going to see more of 

the same -- more taxes, more outflow of migration, more 

despair amongst the people of this province who we should be 

encouraging and helping to build our economy. 

 

(2000) 

 

And it's things like we see, Mr. Speaker, things that we see in 

the health care sector that tell you that this government is bent 

on covering up, not moving ahead. 

 

This was the government in the health care side.  This was the 

party that said we can always do medicare better than anybody 

else; we're the founding fathers of medicare; we know how to 

do it smarter; we know how to do it more efficiently; we're the 

only people that can manage medicare.  They promised that to 

Saskatchewan people in October of 1991. 

 

And what have we seen?  We have seen more people connected 

with the wellness model split apart from their health care 

system than in any decade probably since the 1930s.  We have 

seen chiropractors, we have seen optometrists, we have seen 

people faced with diabetes on a daily basis, people that take 

oxygen in order to maintain their life support, people all over 

this province who tried to stay in their home, people that tried 

to work within the system so that they could remain and be 

productive individuals, not use the hospital system, not use the 

heavy care facilities -- the very epitome of wellness, Mr. 

Speaker -- we have seen them all separated and driven from 

that system that New Democrats always said was theirs.  And 

now, Mr. Speaker, on top of that we see the New Democratic 

Party government in this province going to close down much of 

the infrastructure in rural Saskatchewan.  And they're going to 

do it by pitting community against community. 

 

The Minister of Health stands with pride in this legislature and 

says, no, I'm not the one that's going to wear the goat horns 

here.  I'm going to make the men and women, the volunteers, 

the taxpayers, the people that work so hard to keep many of our 

rural institutions a part of our community, they're the ones that 

are going to wear the goat horns because the responsibility I 

sought when I offered myself up to govern this province, I 

don't want any more.  I don't want to face some of the realities 

of change.  And because I'm a New Democrat -- I'm the 

founding father of medicare in this province -- I'm going to be 

able to do this to our rural communities, and I'm going to be 

able to get away with it. 

Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that this opposition and this 

party is not going to let them get away with it, that there's 

going to be many tough questions asked, and that people out 

there, people like the Victorian Order of Nurses and others, are 

going to stand up and fight this government for the 

wrong-headed moves that they are making to dismantle a 

goodly part of the health care system in this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as you go down through this document of 

betrayal, this throne speech that gives no hope and vision, the 

same things can be said in the area of education.  The quote 

that my colleague gave today in question period, the quote of 

the Premier of Saskatchewan when he was in opposition and 

campaigning so hard to become the Premier of our province, 

about how you can never short-change education, that you can 

always find the money no matter what -- we all remember 

those remarks; they were only 16 months ago. 

 

And what do we find in education today?  We found what 

came up in question period, with community being pitted 

against community, with the minister giving a commitment to 

just one figure in the House and then we find that figure tripled 

in reality. 

 

Now maybe the minister didn't know.  Let's hope for the 

communities for Loreburn and Strongfield that that minister 

now wakes up and smells the coffee and say there's been an 

injustice done here, that the promises made have to be kept, not 

more promises made and more broken.  And it's like that all 

across the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, community 

after community. 

 

I mean did the minister really believe, really believe that people 

were going to accept her story about a leaking roof, when there 

are communities all over this province that have got the fire 

marshall involved with their particular school.  Or they've got 

another problem that they feel is insurmountable, and they're 

looking for direction, and they're looking for leadership and 

they're looking for someone that will take hold of the agenda, 

and instead they find a government and a minister that simply 

tries to pit one group of taxpayers against another. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, how does that square, how does 

that echo with the words of the Premier who said, when it 

comes to the education of our children, you can always find 

enough?  I didn't hear him say anything about pitting taxpayer 

against taxpayer, community against community, school 

against school. 

 

And I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, that once again what that 

is is the betrayal, the betrayal of the Saskatchewan voter and 

the Saskatchewan taxpayer.  And there is nothing in here to 

give any hope or vision to the area of education  

_- any hope at all that it is going to change, that the policies 

espoused by the Minister of Education in question period today 

are going to change. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we come down to one of the great myths of 

this current NDP administration, and this is the whole area of 

the debt and the deficit and accountability. 



202 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1993 

 And there probably won't be enough hours in the night, Mr. 

Speaker, to run through the entire litany. 

 

But I can say to you, sir, and to the members of this 

government, that a lot of people are starting to catch on with 

what has been perpetrated on Saskatchewan people over the 

last year and four months.  A lot of people are starting to talk 

about this government and the stories that they've told in order 

to try and cover up the hypocrisy and the betrayal of the last 

election campaign, the fact that people were misled, and 

because those promises can't be met we have to find suitable 

excuses. 

 

I'd like to quote, Mr. Speaker, from a letter to the editor in the 

Regina Leader-Post of Saturday, March 6 and it says: 

 

 (it) is not correct in suggesting that if we are just strong 

enough to bear through enough austerity, the problem will be 

solved.  Deficit and debt problems have to be solved by 

means of economic growth and development in this province, 

along with strict controls on government spending.  The 

government's role has to be to encourage that growth and 

development; it cannot just be to demonstrate its commitment 

to responsible management by increasing taxes and cutting 

expenditures. 

 

The author goes on to say: 

 

 This administration has clearly suggested that it does not 

know how to put in place the tax base required over the next . 

. . years to pay off the debt. 

 

 The people, including businesses, in the province are already 

taxed to the limit of their capacity, or willingness, to pay for 

government programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was Isabel Anderson, associate professor of 

economics, University of Saskatchewan, responding to the 

former Minister of Finance, who took it upon himself to write a 

letter to the same paper some time ago with a bunch of these 

misconceptions mouthed in that particular piece. 

 

Ms. Anderson, who is a well-respected professor at the 

University of Saskatchewan, has taken great exception to some 

of the things that this government has done because what she 

says is they aren't telling the whole story, that we keep only 

getting part of the goods. 

 

And that was reinforced today, Mr. Speaker, reinforced today 

on a CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) talk show.  

And this was The Noon Edition phone in with Barry Burgess.  

And I hope that some of the government members took time to 

listen to it.  On there Mr. Burgess had a professor, Harold 

Chorney, who is the public policy and economist from 

Concordia University and the same Ms. Anderson from the 

University of Saskatchewan -- both people well qualified in 

their fields, both people who are trusted with educating young 

people in our society. 

 

And it was interesting, some of the questions that were given to 

the eminent professors today by Mr. Burgess's call-in phoners.  

And one of them quoted my colleague, 

my colleague from Wilkie who entered into this throne speech 

debate a few days ago.  And he used some numbers attached to 

the deficit.  And it was interesting to notice some of the 

government members pop out of their seat with a short 

response, not well defined, but obviously it had gotten under 

their skin, so somebody quickly went out and tried to dig up 

some material. 

 

And in his speech the member from Wilkie used a deficit 

number. 

 

So the person called in today from out at, I believe it was 

Vanguard, and asked the two eminent professors, one from our 

province, one from outside our province, given the numbers 

that they saw in the financial statements of the previous 

government leading up to 1982, if the member from Wilkie's 

numbers had any relevance. 

 

Well, lo and behold, Mr. Speaker, the responses from the two 

professors said, yes there was a great deal of relevance, that the 

member from Wilkie was probably a lot closer to the truth than 

any of the government members have been in this debate.  I 

mean these are people, Mr. Speaker, who simply take down 

what the actual numbers are and look at the debt.  They do it in 

an analytical process, Mr. Speaker.  They're not somebody 

that's out on any particular political agenda.  And they say by 

analysing the numbers that they come up with the same 

numbers as the member from Wilkie. 

 

Well lo and behold, the deficit of the province of 

Saskatchewan, all $15.7 billion of it -- and half of it rests with 

the same people who were governing this province in the 1970s 

and the 1980s, the same people who bought the used holes in 

the ground, the same people that got in the oil business and the 

uranium business, the same people that wanted to be in every 

business that was ever created.  And they did it with borrowed 

money, with American money at high interest rates. 

 

And yes, Mr. Speaker, we have a large deficit in this province.  

And some of it was the responsibility of the former PC 

(Progressive Conservative) administration.  And some of it was 

the responsibility of the former NDP government.  And it's 

time they accepted it.  And it's time that they told the people 

the truth, because you know what, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people 

out there, a lot of taxpayers, a lot of business people don't 

really give a darn. 

 

What they care about, what they care about, Mr. Speaker, is 

somebody putting in place a plan that will draw taxpayers to 

this province, that will say to the ones that are here, to the men 

and women of the business community, to farm families, to the 

creators of wealth in this province: that there is a plan in place 

to create enough wealth to pay on our deficit, Mr. Speaker.  

And at the same time there is a plan in place to cut government 

spending in a rational real way that doesn't destroy the 

infrastructure of either urban or rural Saskatchewan, that 

doesn't have the words rural revenge attached to each and every 

move. 

 

And it will be interesting, Mr. Speaker, it'll be interesting as 

this budget comes in, if there is some kind of a long-term plan 

that says that to people or will we get more of the same; and 

will we simply get from this government 



March 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 203 

a Bill brought into this House to redistribute the boundaries in 

this province in such a way that they hope they can get rid of 

enough rural members, that their betrayal of Saskatchewan 

taxpayers and voters won't be punished in the next election? 

 

(2015) 

 

That is my fear, Mr. Speaker: that this government that talks 

about being open and accountable, that talks about being on the 

leading edge of reform in this province will simply bring in a 

Bill to try and gerrymander themselves into a position to win 

the next election and not have to face Saskatchewan people 

with the betrayal of October, 1991.  Because I can tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, that more and more Saskatchewan people each day 

are catching on to what was perpetrated by these people on the 

province. 

 

It's like the member from Kinistino standing up and 

embellishing at great length on the Free Trade Agreement and 

saying how we have to change it.  We have to do the things that 

will make Saskatchewan a better place to export from and 

direct denial to the Minister of Economic Development who 

can come flying back from Cuba and Mexico and say we've got 

most to gain.  And then all of a sudden somebody jerks his 

leash and he's back, he's back spouting the party line. 

 

And why is he doing that, Mr. Speaker?  Well I quote from an 

article from the Leader-Post, Saturday, March 6.  Bruce 

Johnstone says: 

 

 Of course, the NDP's position on free trade is largely dictated 

by its friends in the labor movement, who oppose free trade 

with all the protectionist fervor of a U.S. industry lobby 

group petitioning the Department of Commerce for a trade 

ruling against a foreign competitor. 

 

 Since the NDP's trade union friends are bankrolling the party, 

when labor speaks, the NDP listens.  And what labor is 

saying very loudly is: NO DEAL! 

 

And the headline, Mr. Speaker, is: NAFTA bashing by NDP 

becoming a little tiring. 

 

And yet what do we get from the member from Kinistino 

tonight?  Instead of talking about the plan that is supposed to 

be in place, it's more of the same rhetoric, more of the same 

betrayal, the same mouthings that were there in October of '91.  

Mouthings that mean absolutely nothing to the reality of the 

world that we face today. 

 

And that is why, Mr. Speaker, that is why it was incumbent 

upon the opposition to bring forward an amendment to this 

hollow, hollow throne speech, this throne speech that has yet to 

prove to Saskatchewan people that this New Democratic Party 

government has earned the ability to govern this province in 

any shape, form, or way. 

 

And that is why, Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I will be 

supporting the amendment of my colleague and voting against 

the main motion. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 8:21 p.m. until 8:24 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Swenson Toth 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen t 

-- 8 

Nays 

 

Romanow Lautermilch 

Van Mulligen Calvert 

Thompson Hamilton 

Wiens Johnson 

Simard Trew 

Tchorzewski Serby 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Shillington Roy 

Koskie Cline 

Anguish Scott 

Solomon McPherson 

Goulet Kujawa 

Kowalsky Crofford 

MacKinnon Knezacek 

Penner Harper 

Upshall Keeping 

Bradley Kluz 

Koenker Langford 

Lorje Jess t 

-- 38 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's 

certainly a pleasure for me to rise today in support of the 

debate on the throne speech.  The throne speech, Mr. Speaker, 

is like a breath of fresh air for Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- It sets forth a new path for Saskatchewan, a 

path of recovery, a path of cleaning up the mess left behind by 

the former government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in the last week I had the opportunity of 

holding six public meetings in my constituency.  And the 

people of my constituency expressed to me the concern over 

the horrendous debt that we've inherited in this province. 

 

And at the meeting in Norquay, I think I heard it described 

best, Mr. Speaker, when one of my constituents referred to the 

situation that we have inherited as government in this province, 

as a situation when he was a young lad in his teens and his 

folks would leave home for the weekend and he would be left 

home himself.  Of course on Saturday night, being a young lad 

like he was, he would invite down his friends and they would 

have a party.  But Sunday morning he would wake up, head 

feeling not too well, and knowing he had to clean the mess up 

before 4 o'clock because his parents would be home then. 



204 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1993 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that's what we've inherited in this province 

is a mess, and now we're about to clean it up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- But more of that later, Mr. Speaker.  At this 

time I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 8:29 p.m. 

 

 


