




















































Hansard: March 04, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 113 

 March 4, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 

I shall on Monday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and 

the Department of Highway's recent increase to insurance 

premium rates and vehicle registration charges: (1) why are 

vehicle owners whose insurance expires in March of 1993 

being charged an additional 4.75 per cent on renewal despite 

renewing before April 1 when the increase is to take effect; 

(2) why are vehicle owners whose registration expires in 

March of 1993 being charged an additional 7.6 per cent on 

renewal despite renewing before April 1 when the increase is 

to take effect; and (3) what have the ministers responsible 

done to determine the extent of the above practice? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I give 

notice that I shall on Monday next give first reading to a Bill to 

protect municipal property taxpayers in the province of 

Saskatchewan through the repeal of The Hospital Revenue Act. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, Bert Brown 

of Alberta. Bert will be known to many members of this 

Assembly as the father of the concept of the Triple E Senate. 

Stand up, Bert, so they can have a look at you. 

 

We worked closely with Bert and his group and other similarly 

minded governments during the last constitutional negotiations 

and supported quite a strong version of Triple E right through 

to the end. I think that I'd like to have members welcome Bert 

to our House today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 

extend a warm welcome to Mr. Brown to the Assembly today. 

Bert was into my office and had the opportunity to meet 

members of the opposition caucus just after lunch. Bert and I 

were trying to remember if it was 1987 or 1988 when he sold 

me my first Triple E pin. But it was a ways back, and I've been 

happy to renew ever since. And I just applaud Mr. Brown and 

the efforts that he's done on behalf of western Canadians. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 

to join with the government and the official opposition in 

welcoming Mr. Brown. We've had interesting discussions on 

numerous occasions. The last 

of course was at Sask Place when 12,700 other individuals 

were present. And we really, I think, benefited not only from 

your work in Triple E Senate, but your ideas on agriculture as 

well. So welcome. 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce 

to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, some 

students from the Melville Comprehensive School in Melville. 

They're accompanied today by Len Ernst, their teacher, and Al 

Shotz, the bus driver. 

 

They're a group of Christian ethics students. Len is a Christian 

ethics teacher at the comprehensive school in Melville. I'd like 

all the Assembly to welcome them here today and I'll be 

meeting with them after question period. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to take 

the opportunity to introduce to you, and through you to 

members of the Assembly, a famous son of Saskatchewan, Eric 

Malling, who is in the press gallery with us today. Many of you 

will know Eric from his many programs, W5, and also to say to 

him welcome home. And we look forward to pleasant 

comments from you as a result of your experience here in 

question period. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The area around 

Swift Current has been a party to many well-known news 

media people and Eric Malling is one of the people that have 

been associated with the area around the south-west. Some of 

the very first people in the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation) were involved in Swift Current -- Mr. Minifie. 

And I think others will know that it has been a significant 

contribution by the people of the south-west to the whole of the 

Canadian broadcasting industry. And I want to welcome him 

here on behalf of the opposition. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- I would like to join with others in welcoming Mr. 

Malling to this Chamber. Eric and I . . . actually he may not 

remember me but we served on the University of Saskatchewan 

student union council many, many years ago. And we have 

both gone on in totally different directions in terms of public 

service. I'm not sure who's taken the best direction, but I do 

want to welcome you and wish you all the best in the future. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would be 

remiss in not extending a warm welcome to Eric Malling, 

whom I have known since early childhood. His mother was my 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- He is that old. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Yes, he is indeed. His mother was my 

Sunday school teacher. He is named after his uncle who was 

my father's very best friend. And I've had the 



114 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1993 

privilege of knowing Eric for many, many years, and I'm not 

going to tell anything more than that. So welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'd 

also like to recognize an old friend and a schoolmate of mine, 

Eric Malling. Eric and I went to high school together. I was the 

teacher and he was one of the students. But, Eric, it's nice to 

see you today and we hope to see you after the question period. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Are there any others up there? 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

District Health Boards 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I confess I don't 

know Mr. Malling at all. I'm just a local boy that needs a lot of 

help. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for recognizing me. Mr. Speaker, my 

first question today is to the Minister of Health. Madam 

Minister, yesterday you not only delivered a health Bill to the 

members of this Legislative Assembly, but you put out notice 

that you are delivering a health bill to every property tax owner 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Madam Minister, your Premier, your Premier declared before 

the full convention of SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association), that your assault on the health care 

system would not have any impact on property taxes. Will you 

today admit that the structure that you have proposed will lead 

directly to higher property taxes as you offload your health care 

funding onto municipalities? Will you admit that, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the Bill very clearly deals 

with issues such as taxation, and district boards do not have 

power to tax on the property tax base. So district boards do not 

have that power. What the Premier stated at SUMA is that 

district boards would not have the power to tax on the property 

tax base and that the status quo on an interim basis would 

remain in place, until we had an opportunity to work out 

alternative mechanisms and solutions to deal with the $23 

million that is now raised on the property tax base. 

 

Those discussions are in the process of taking place, and the 

Department of Health along with Community Services and 

Rural Development and with input from stakeholders, we'll be 

looking at how we deal with contributions at the local level and 

how we deal with the 23 million that is presently raised through 

taxation by union hospital districts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we should note here that union hospital districts 

have the power to tax. New district boards will not have the 

power to tax and therefore there's complete 

illogic in the member's suggestion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

during your lengthy speech there, what you're doing is 

basically fudging the issue. I would suggest to you, Madam 

Minister, that come out of the shadows, come into the sunlight 

so that the people and the taxpayers of this province can have a 

clear look at you. 

 

Madam Minister, your Bill specifically provides that 

municipalities can either use general property taxation or 

special health taxes, health levies on property. Are you saying 

now that that was all a mistake and that you will remove the 

possibility of jacking up property taxes before the law? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Under the present system $23 million a 

year is raised through union hospital districts levying taxes and 

through the municipal property tax levy -- 23 million. There is 

no intention on the part of government to remove the need for 

local contribution to capital construction; therefore district 

boards will have the right to go to municipalities and to ask 

them whether or not they could impose a special levy, for 

example, to deal with the issue of capital construction, which 

happens now, incidentally. 

 

Municipalities, for the first time, will have the right to say no. 

Under the former legislation under union hospital districts, the 

union hospital district board made the decision as to whether or 

not they levied -- the union hospital. Now municipalities will 

be . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. Order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, another new question to the 

minister. Madam Minister, you say they will have the right to 

say no; I suggest to you and the taxpayers of this province say 

to you, they will not have that option. What you're doing to 

them is forcing them into a corner. You've already announced 

that they are going to be taxed . . . cuts in funding for hospitals, 

in funding for health. You've already announced that. They will 

not have that luxury, Madam Minister, of saying no because 

you're forcing them into a corner. You are saying that it's a 

voluntary contribution and that is where the nonsense is, 

Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, what is your advice to the RMs (rural 

municipality) and municipalities of this province when the 

centralized health board approaches them and says, put on a 

special levy or we will close your hospital? What is your 

advice to the reeves, to the town councillors of the province, 

when your blackmail tactics come to fruition? Tell us that, 

Madam Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. I would just ask members not to 

use words that become inflammatory in the 



March 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 115 

question period. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There has been an enormous amount of 

consultation that has taken place with respect to health reform. 

The members opposite know that I have travelled the province 

at least three times this fall and winter talking to the people of 

Saskatchewan, the health care stakeholders, and municipal 

representatives. They know obviously better than you do that 

what the status quo is and the fact that this legislation improves 

the situation, from their point of view. They realize that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The members opposite talk in terms of cost cutting. Yes, there 

will be budget reductions in the health care budget this year as 

there were last year. There is no question that is true, Mr. 

Speaker. But what they fail to realize is that these reductions 

are taking place as a result of their ineptness, their 

mismanagement of . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Madam Minister. You were 

getting almost into that inflammatory rhetoric again, and that is 

always a signal to us that you are getting uncomfortable. 

 

Madam Minister, not only do you have provisions in your new 

Bill for offloading, you already . . . you already have a legal 

back door. There is no sense of volunteerism there. 

 

The Hospital Revenue Act gives the provincial government the 

explicit power to order municipalities to impose property taxes 

for health funding. Do you deny that you already have the 

power to force municipalities to collect property taxes to fund 

the health system your new Bill is establishing? Do you deny 

that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The hospital revenue tax has been there 

for years, years. It's there. There's no change in that. The status 

quo remains. It's the same as it was before. Even when you 

were in power the hospital revenue tax was there. 

 

The members opposite are a way off on a red herring here. 

What they should be talking about, what they should be talking 

about is the improvements to the health care system that are 

going to be delivered in the long term as a result of 

coordination and integration of our health care services. But 

instead they want to focus on a red herring for political 

purposes. And they refuse to acknowledge the fact that the 

budgetary reductions we're going through are as a result of 

their mismanagement and . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. Next question. Next question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps, Madam 

Minister, you are trying to tell us what to talk about. I'm telling 

you what I'm talking about is what the people of this province 

want me to talk about. They have a concern. The organizations 

within this province have a concern, Madam Minister, that you 

are basically going to use a back-door tactic to cover up what 

your Premier promised the people of this province -- maybe not 

directly. Maybe the Premier did say that the health boards will 

not have the power to tax. 

 

But, Madam Minister, we full well know the offloading that 

you are intending to do through the back door, and one of those 

back doors that the organizations in Saskatchewan have a great 

deal of concern about is The Hospital Revenue Act. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, will you agree, will you agree to do 

away with The Hospital Revenue Act as such, to remove the 

possibility of the Minister of Finance and your Premier to grab 

deeper into the taxpayers' pockets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I will say once again, Mr. Speaker, the 

status quo does not change. And the red herring the members 

are raising is exactly that -- it's a red herring and it's political 

scare tactics on their part. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that there are thousands of people 

across this province who are very pleased that we are coming 

forward with district legislation and moving with some 

coordination and integration of health care services. The fact is, 

Mr. Speaker, that this is going to lead in the end in the long 

term to much better quality health care services, particularly for 

rural communities, the communities that some of these 

members over here represent. 

 

For at least 10 to 20 years we've had a serious problem with 

distribution of doctors in rural Saskatchewan. And while those 

members were in power they chose to ignore it. They chose to 

ignore the duplications in service, the gaps in service, and they 

raised the provincial debt in this province by billions of dollars. 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister is getting into more and 

more political rhetoric. Madam Minister, you are clearly 

offloading funding onto the property tax base. Clearly. Clearly 

without a doubt, that's your bent. But worse, Madam Minister, 

you are now also offloading the province's debt onto the 

centralized boards. The centralized boards, not the province, 

will now borrow the money for capital projects. The boards are 

going to have to do that, according to your own document. 

 

Madam Minister, given the recommendations of the Gass 

Commission, and given your government's write-off of almost 

a billion dollars in hospitals and schools, can you explain to us 

how the debts these boards will incur on your behalf will be 

any different than SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation) incurring the debt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, under the status quo, union 

hospital districts have the right to borrow. This doesn't change 

the status quo. The members here are off on red herrings trying 

to create political issues that don't 



116 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1993 

exist. As opposed to being part of the solution, they are 

continuing to be part of the problem. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. There's just too much 

interruption. There's too much interruption when the minister is 

trying to answer her question. I ask the members, please -- 

there's no interruption when you ask your question, no 

interruption when the minister answers her question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, after years of neglect, years 

of neglect in this province by the members opposite, after total 

irresponsibility with respect to the finances of this province, 

when a government finally attempts to do something about the 

problems that are out there, instead of being part of the solution 

they want to continue to be part of the problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, I 

don't think I have to remind the public that is watching how 

you are evading every question. You're not answering it 

forthrightly and completely. You're getting into political 

rhetoric every time you don't understand a situation. Now, 

Madam Minister, you can't have it both ways. You first of all 

blow up the debt on the back of the previous administration and 

then you cook the health care system to hide debt under your 

own administration. The principle that your Premier used in 

writing-off all the hospitals in the province that . . . was that 

hospitals do not generate their own income and therefore the 

debt could only be paid for by grants through government. 

 

Since you are saying these centralized boards will incur debt 

and you say that they will have no independent revenue 

capacity of their own, is it not simply true that all hospital care, 

all hospital capital costs and debts must be written off against 

the provincial debt each time that it is incurred? Is that not true, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, district boards will have an 

obligation to provide the provincial government with an annual 

budget. And the legislation protects the public from deficit 

budgeting and indicates in effect that there will not be deficit 

budgeting. 

 

Now obviously if there's a situation where somebody has an 

overrun, the provincial government will be monitoring that and 

looking into it very carefully. But the legislation is designed to 

protect the public from deficit budgeting by the district boards. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister just 

said now that they can borrow but they are not allowed to have 

debt. Madam Minister, you are offloading funding onto 

property tax and you are offloading the provincial debt onto the 

centralized health boards. That is clear, Madam Minister. 

 

To cap it all off, you are not going to allow the boards to fully 

elect their own people. Instead, you will allow some 

to be elected and half as many again to be appointed by you 

personally. 

 

Madam Minister, is the fact of ensuring these political 

appointments not a clear admission by you that you do not trust 

the people to elect health board members who will do your 

bidding? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I have a hard time not laughing at some 

of your questions. They're absolutely ridiculous. If you 

understood and just took the time to try and understand what is 

taking place as opposed to trying to make political rhetoric out 

of what is occurring in Saskatchewan, you might understand 

why there is need for appointments. 

 

This morning in Saskatoon, for example, someone stood up 

from the College of Medicine, the Faculty of Medicine and 

wanted to know if it was possible for one of them to be 

appointed to the board. Mr. Cliff Wright said yes, they should 

be involved. 

 

The point is is that there will be situations where appointments 

should be made to the board. For example, if a person from 

outside should be appointed to another district board so that we 

get that coordination between two districts, that freedom is 

there. If we have an aboriginal community that was unable to 

elect a member to the board but still should have input into that 

process, there will be room for appointments. 

 

So the reason for appointments to boards is to make sure that 

certain interests and certain specialties and the process of 

coordination between districts can continue to take place. 

 

So if the members . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. Next question. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's interesting, 

Madam Minister, how you so sanctimoniously answer that 

question when you were the first one to condemn that very 

same recommendation by the Murray Commission. What a 

change of heart when it's convenient. And that, Madam 

Minister, is why we suspect your motives. That's why we 

suspect motives -- exactly for the example in the previous 

answer that you gave; exactly because of that. 

 

The fact is, Madam Minister, the fact is you take care of your 

politics and not the needs of the communities, and the people 

have full power to elect their boards. If they have that full 

power your politics will suffer, Madam Minister. That's what 

our concern is. 

 

The government is right in thinking it can no longer trust the 

people to blindly follow along. They're not going to do that. 

You rigged it so that you only have to win two wards to have 

full control over those boards. That's what you've done. I doubt 

that if you can win even the two wards, but that's easier than 

doing it the other way. 



March 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 117 

Given that you are playing along to rig the boards themselves, 

why do you find it necessary then, Madam Minister, to set 

election rules in the secrecy of cabinet, in cabinet meetings, 

rather than debate them in the Assembly? Madam Minister, by 

regulation in the secrecy of your compatriots in the cabinet, 

you are going to set regulations, not that they can be debated in 

this Assembly. Why is that, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Regulations can always be debated in this 

Assembly. You can ask questions about them; there's nothing 

stopping you from making . . . from asking questions. There is 

nothing being done in secret here. 

 

The fact of the matter is is I travelled the province and officials 

from the Department of Health travelled the province for 

several months and people clearly felt that an election process 

where there were elected boards, partially elected, partially 

appointed, was appropriate. There was a feeling throughout this 

province that that was appropriate, and we listened to the 

people. The people also told us they did not want district 

boards to have taxation powers on the property tax base, and 

we listened to the people. The people also told us that they 

wanted to have district board legislation as soon as possible 

and we listened to the people because it's the second Bill that's 

been tabled here in the House. 

 

The results of this legislation is a result of massive consultation 

and that consultation process with respect to the election 

process and how wards are established will continue. What you 

see . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, you talk about open 

consultation and travelling around the province. You travel 

around the province in picked audiences where you determine 

who's going to be there. The buffer of your officials are there. 

That is the type of open and free consultation. 

 

I ask you, please go out and have public hearings on this. You 

have refused to do that, Madam Minister. Why? Why don't you 

call public meetings throughout Saskatchewan so all people 

will have their say? You refuse to do that. So don't 

sanctimoniously get up and say what a wonderful consultative 

process that you have had, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, in summary you are offloading funds. You 

are offloading debt. And you are fixing the electoral process. 

Those are the three accusations that I'm making to you today, 

Madam Minister. 

 

Is it not clear that your policy is not about wellness; it's not 

about sound finances; it's not about communities having 

control, Madam Minister; but instead it is about you controlling 

communities. Is that not the real agenda, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't know what these 

guys have been smoking but this is ridiculous. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I don't think it's healthy, whatever it is. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- It's certainly not wellness, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The fact . . . This morning I had a meeting with some 800 

people. I had a meeting this morning of some 800 people, and 

the press was there and it was open to the public. It was not a 

closed meeting. I've had meetings throughout this province, 

Mr. Speaker, with many thousands of people. Some people 

were invited. The doors weren't closed to others. We wanted to 

make sure our planning group people came out. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, is there have been thousands of 

people -- thousands of people at these meetings, and none of 

them have been closed. And then again this morning some 800 

people. 

 

The members opposite have never engaged in this kind of 

community developmental process where we are asking 

communities and local people at the grass roots level to be a 

part of reform. They have never engaged in a process of that 

nature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Business Investment in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there's no 

question that the NDP government opposite is painting the 

worst economic picture possible in order to hide their ongoing 

betrayal of promises. 

 

Last week we saw an example of what doom-and-gloom 

strategy has done to businesses looking to locate in 

Saskatchewan. A major hotel chain decided to cancel plans 

rather than move to Saskatchewan, because of the efforts of the 

Premier and the member for Melfort. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we have an example of the kind of 

confidence your government is inspiring in the local business 

community. Sask Trends Monitor has recently released 

information that shows that the investment intentions are down 

9 per cent from the 1992 level, with virtually all of the decline 

in the new capital category -- 9 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Very simply, my question is to the Premier: will your 

government acknowledge that the ongoing political strategy is 

getting in the way of economic development to the tune of 9 

per cent drop in investment strategy? Will you admit, Mr. 

Premier, that your strategy has been a failure? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 

for the question. I point out to the hon. member that the Regina 

Chamber of Commerce in a statement just issued recently, 

having surveyed its members, said that 82 per cent of the 

member firms felt that the volume 



118 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1993 

would be up, 20 per cent expected to employ more, 22 per cent 

said they were going to invest more, and 37 per cent said that 

they were going to look forward to better economic times. 

That's the reality. 

 

I also say the following to the member, I say this, Mr. Speaker: 

we have a responsibility to deliver government services to the 

people in the most efficient manner possible. This province is 

on the verge of bankruptcy and we cannot afford to do 

otherwise. Have the economic and social benefits been fairly 

weighed against the costs? I'm not so sure. 

 

What I'm reading to the hon. member are the words of one Mr. 

Grant Hodgins, a member of your cabinet table, who described 

the true finances from the inside. He was telling the truth; it's 

about time that you started telling the truth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank you. What we 

just heard, Mr. Speaker, is the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

lighting up their blame thrower once again, lighting it up for 

everyone to see. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, the reality is 

investment may be up in Regina, but the rest of the province 

investment is going down 9 per cent -- down, Mr. Premier. 

That's the reality. Sask Trends Monitor believes investment in 

this province is going down. 

 

Will the minister . . . will the Premier admit that his economic 

strategy for this province has been a dismal failure, particularly 

in light of the information we see today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously the hon. 

member does not wish to be confused by the facts. I have in 

front of me here the Conference Board of Canada -- have you 

heard of it? The Conference Board of Canada in its latest report 

predicts for the province of Saskatchewan a growth of 3.2 per 

cent. Not the greatest, but I tell you it's going to be higher than 

Manitoba, it's going to be higher than Ontario, and it's going to 

be as good as most of the provinces in this country. 

 

And I want to tell you something, sir. The fact that that 

prediction is being made by the Conference Board in the face 

of a $15.5 billion debt that you and your colleagues saddled, is 

a miracle and a credit to this government's policies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's your point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I want an explanation or a ruling on why the 

opposition is being called to order for 

unparliamentary language and the Minister of Health was 

totally ignored. I'd like to have a ruling from you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- I'll take your comment under advisement and 

bring a ruling back to the House. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 4 -- An Act respecting Local Improvements in 

Urban and Northern Municipalities and to Effect Certain 

Consequential Changes 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that The Local 

Improvement Act be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 5 -- An Act to amend The Planning and 

Development Act, 1983 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend The Planning and Development Act be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

question no. 75 put by the member for Greystone, I would 

request it be converted for motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- For return debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- As it relates to the question put by 

the member from Moosomin, I would hereby table the 

response. 

 

The Speaker: -- Answer tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Stanger, seconded by Mr. 

Renaud. 
 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

definitely an honour to reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

Before the House was in session my family was watching 

television news one night and the reporter said that all of 

Saskatchewan's eyes would be on the Speech from the Throne 

because they were looking at the budget and they were looking 

for clues. My young boy said, dad, why are they looking for 

you? 
 

I want to take a moment to thank some special people in 



March 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 119 

my life. It's my wife and my three children who make a lot of 

sacrifices for me to do this job. I want to thank them for 

making those sacrifices. 

 

I want to welcome you back in the Chair, Mr. Speaker. It's nice 

to see that the decorum is going to be restored in this House. 

 

I think back when I was first elected, I talked to some of my 

high school principals that told me that I don't know why we 

even went to the legislature; the conduct there was unbearable. 

I don't think we will go back. I suggested to them, they go back 

once again and they will find that the decorum is restored and it 

is once again a respectable institution. 

 

Our government is going to restore sound financial 

management. We're going to have a better future for our 

children. And what that means is that there's going to be no 

more vote-buying and no more pork-barrelling. Those days are 

over, Mr. Speaker. We're returning to open, honest, and 

accountable government. 

 

When the member from Arm River talks about there was a debt 

of 3.5 billion in this province prior to '82, well that may be true. 

They should look and see where that debt was. That debt was 

in the Crown corporations. We had a fine province; Crown 

corporations who carried a debt that was self-liquidating. 

 

We saw those Crown corporations disappear; they were 

privatized. Sask Minerals, Potash Corporation, for example. 

We also saw our highways equipment sold off. For the tune of 

something like 40 cents on the dollar it was auctioned off. Most 

of the machinery left this province, and the RMs and the towns 

didn't even get a chance to bid on it -- 40 cents on the dollar, 

it's gone. 

 

For every year that the past government was in power, they 

added $1 billion to the deficit -- $1 billion a year. That amounts 

to $2.8 million a day, $2.8 million for every day they were in 

power, they added to the deficit. I can't even imagine that 

amount of money. And for each year that 1 billion they added 

totals 15 billion now because the Crown corporations are gone. 

We're paying interest charges of $760 million a year-plus, or 

$2.1 million a day or $24 a second -- $24 for every second of 

every day -- interest on the public debt here in Saskatchewan. 

And you wonder why our hands our tied. 

 

I'm asked many times by my constituents, what would the 

Conservatives have done if they were re-elected; how would 

they have run this province.  Well there's no doubt in my mind, 

no doubt in my mind whatsoever that they would have 

privatized the rest of the Crown corporations: SGI, SaskPower, 

SaskTel, and SaskEnergy would have been privatized. They 

would have sold everything and we would have probably been 

20 billion or God only knows how much in debt with no public 

utilities or Crowns at all. And at the same time they would have 

lined their pockets. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you wonder why I'm saying they 

would have lined their pockets, I've got an article here in my 

hands, Toronto Globe and Mail, Saturday, February 6, 1993. 

It's entitled: "How the gravy train went off the 

rails." 

 

 Saskatchewan. The '80s were the province's time for 

expansive deal-making. Indeed, it sometimes seemed as 

though everyone was striking it rich. But today, with the 

province $15-billion in debt, it's time to pay the piper. 

 

I'm going to quote some articles from this paper because I think 

it has to go on the record and the people of this province have 

to know what went on here in the last 10 years. It says: 

 

 A number of well connected developers grew fat from 

long-term government leases on their buildings . . . "The 

developers had 14-year mortgages and 15-year leases." What 

this means is that they would use the security of these 

government leases to borrow money to finance their 

buildings, then enjoy ownership of the building even before 

the government lease ended. 

 

And I've got in my hands here the annual report from Sask 

Property Management Corporation, and if you look at the 

schedule of payments, it's full of these contracts. And I'm not 

going to list them or disclose any of the individuals that took 

on some of these contracts. If you want to look, contact any 

member of the government or get a copy of the Sask Property 

Management Corporation annual report and take a look for 

yourselves. 

 

(1445) 

 

And all of these leases at the same time, Mr. Speaker, all of 

these leases are much higher than comparable leases in 

adjoining areas, and sometimes 75 per cent higher. And we 

wonder, we wonder why our province is broke. 

 

Some more quotes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 In 1991 directors of Roberts & Poole and Dome worked 

together as directors of Blue Wave, which put together the 

Tories' advertising campaign for the provincial election. A 

provincial commission found that Dome was paid thousands 

of dollars by the government for no apparent reason. Dome 

also funnelled $500,000 over two years into a third unrelated 

agency, Strategy West, run by a close Devine friend, Cy 

Macdonald. There was no mention of contracts to him in the 

public-account books. 

 

No mention. Where did this money go? Was it used for an 

election? -- I have no idea. But there is no record of it 

whatsoever. 

 

And another quote: 

 

 GigaText. In 1988 Tory party pollster Ken Waschuk 

introduced Guy Montpetit, owner of Montreal's GigaMos 

Systems Inc., to the Saskatchewan cabinet. With help from 

Montreal Senator Michel Cogger (who comes to trial . . . on 

charges of influence-peddling in relation to GigaMos), Mr. 

Montpetit sold Saskatchewan on a new computer system for 

translating government 



120 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1993 

statutes into French. Deputy premier Eric Berntson arranged 

a $5-million grant to set up GigaText. Mr. Montpetit loaned 

$150,000 of it to Mr. Waschuk, who put it in a new Bermuda 

holding company. Mr. Montpetit also spent $2.9-million on 

$39,000 worth of second-hand computers he already owned; 

they were unable to translate more than a few words. 

 

He went and took 2.9 million from the province and bought 

$39,000 worth of useless equipment he already owned. It's a 

shame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another one: 

 

 Rafferty-Alameda dams. Built in Grant Devine's riding (and 

I'm quoting, Mr. Speaker), these two dams were supported 

with 155 million . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. If the member is quoting, he 

must do the exact quoting. He can't say, I refer to the member's 

riding, then name the member and now I'm going to quote. It 

has to be in the quote. And I just want to direct that to the 

member's attention. 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Okay, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will start again. 

I'm making a direct quote here: 

 

 Rafferty-Alameda dams. Built in Grant Devine's riding, these 

two dams were supported with $155-million in provincial 

money, but government investigators say they will never 

generate enough revenue to cover their cost. Two new 

worries: There is not enough runoff and the Alameda dam 

seems to be shifting, suggesting a possible structural 

deficiency. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is a national paper, the Toronto Globe and 

Mail. It's a non-biased report and I urge everyone to read this. 

Get a copy of it and read it. It lets you know what happened to 

this province the last 10 years. 

 

Also on this front page there's some cost-cutting tips that were 

implemented by our government. It says: 

 

 The Premier's office stopped serving free booze to cabinet 

ministers. Savings last year: $19,285. 

 

In talking to one of my colleagues, they have said that, you 

know on a $4.5 billion budget, $20,000 is not a lot of money, 

but I tell you it sure is a lot of booze. And it kind of wonders, 

the way they ran this province, were they consuming that stuff 

while they're making some of these decisions? One sure has to 

think about that. Sure question it. 

 

One more quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 SaskTel gave up its season's tickets to Roughrider games. 

Savings per year: $6,172. 

 

I'm going to shift now to talk a little bit about agriculture. You 

have to realize that this province has roughly 50 per cent of the 

agriculture land, 3.7 per cent to this nation's population, and 

roughly 2 per cent to the nation's taxpayers. That is why, Mr. 

Speaker, that Saskatchewan 

should not stand alone in this ag crisis. The crisis demands a 

national solution. 

 

I have many of my constituents and neighbours near 

foreclosure. Their loans are being called. And it's not of 

immediate happenings. It's what has been happening to 

agriculture over the last 10 years. And now the projection of 

net farm income per family farm is someplace around $3,000 

of annual income. 

 

The member from Arm River yesterday was talking about land 

bank and how so proudly he stood up in this House and said in 

1983, I believe it was, they got rid of the land bank. Well I can 

tell you, Mr. Speaker, those same farmers that maybe were 

happy at that time, during the last couple of years I had talked 

to them and told me they certainly wished that land bank was 

around and maybe they could have continued farming instead 

of losing their farm. I want the members of the opposition to 

know that. 

 

So we're talking that this is a federal responsibility. We only 

have 2 per cent of the nation's taxpayers. We need some money 

from the feds. They say there's no money. But somehow they 

find money for buying helicopters -- billions of dollars. 

 

And Minister McKnight when he was minister of Agriculture 

kept telling us there's no money, no money for agriculture, but 

four days after he changed portfolios, found 6.7 billion for 

Hibernia. I'm not saying that they don't need economic 

development there. I'm happy that Hibernia is getting some 

money and we'll see some economic development in this 

country. But if they have money for one area of this country 

they should have money for every area. 

 

We talked about some of the farm support programs. It's 

interesting to note that Manitoba has a sunset clause on their 

safety net and it states, if they do nothing different, January '95 

they'll be out of the program. 

 

And I'm going to read some of the Alberta press release. And 

you keep in mind one thing about Alberta. They have half as 

many farmers as we have and they have more than twice the 

population. Yet Alberta is saying they can't afford these 

programs. 

 

Some of the excerpts from this press release: 

 

 A two-year-old farm subsidy program, that governments 

claimed would be self-funded, has already piled up a 

$400-million deficit in Alberta. 

 

 . . . I don't think it (GRIP) will ever be sound, said Isley. 

 

Probably is saying that because of the sliding prices. 

 

Mr. Isley also said, 

 

 There will have to be increases in premiums . . . 

 

Increases in premiums. 

 

 Manitoba Agriculture Minister Glen Findlay told a farm 

group last month that the plan was designed 



March 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 121 

as an interim measure that would not be necessary after 1995. 

 

When you think about how the program was set up, Mr. 

Speaker, back in 1991, Saskatchewan was the first one out of 

the chute under a Tory administration to sign this safety net 

proposal. And then when you think about it, when they signed 

it so fast, I don't think there was any consulting with any 

farmers or any farm groups. 

 

And all governments of the day, all governments of the day, 

had said it has to be actuarially sound. And after two years the 

prices are going to go up, we won't have to be paying out to the 

farmers any more. They'll be paying premiums, and they'll pay 

back all the money that we gave them. 

 

What it turns out to be is it's like another loan, another loan for 

the farmers because they've got to pay back the deficit through 

higher premiums. It's like the ACS (Agricultural Credit 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) production loan or the spring 

seeding loan that many of my constituents are still paying back. 

 

When I explain this to many of my rural councils -- the last 

one, by the way, does not view things the same way I do 

politically -- but when I explain this to them, they said they 

would never, ever vote Conservative again. They also said 

there won't be a Conservative government in Saskatchewan for 

30 years. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Fifty. 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Some of my colleagues are saying 50. I agree -- 

30 years is much too soon. 

 

We need a national program. Think about why we need this 

national program. 

 

Before 1988 this province funded the administration of Crop 

Insurance in relation to farm support programs. That's all this 

province funded. Today we're paying around 43 per cent all 

farm support -- 43 per cent and we have 2 per cent of the 

nation's taxpayers. How can that be, Mr. Speaker? How could a 

government of the day set something like that up? 

 

They also promised 500 million when the safety nets were first 

signed. They promised 500 million. We haven't seen it yet. 

 

We also had a two-price wheat system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. Could I ask the two members -- 

the member from Shellbrook-Torch River and the member 

from Wilkie -- if they have a conversation, to go behind the 

rails and not interfere with the member who is trying to speak. 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At least I can 

see that we are restoring decorum and some of the members 

must be paying attention to the speech. 

 

When they promised this 500 million, we haven't seen it. We 

lost our two-price wheat system. A cheque was promised equal 

to one year's lost revenue. None of my 

farmers have seen that cheque that was promised. 

 

We've lost oats off the Canadian Wheat Board. And what have 

we seen? Lower oats prices. And one of the new 

commissioners from Alberta that's appointed to the Canadian 

Wheat Board is totally against barley being on the Canadian 

Wheat Board. So obviously the government in Ottawa, and I 

think the members opposite feel the same way, that they don't 

want to see the Canadian Wheat Board there at all. 

 

The Crow benefits were changed. And now we're going to lose 

another $80 million over the next two years on the Crow 

benefit. 

 

Just look at all the comments I made about the money lost from 

federal farm support programs over the years, that happened 

while the previous administration just sat by and let every one 

happen because their Tory cousins were in Ottawa. Let it 

happen, indeed they did. And maybe they did support it. No 

doubt in my mind they did. That is why again, Mr. Speaker, 

that we need a national program to benefit this country as a 

whole. 

 

I'll move off now into some of our new national goals. And one 

of them, Mr. Speaker, is a new national government -- little 

excerpt from the throne speech -- new national government. 

We know there will be a federal election sometime this year, 

and let's hope that we have a government that listens to the 

needs of this nation as well as western Canada. 

 

And if you think back, if you think back when Mr. Mulroney 

was first elected, he had a choice at that time. There was a huge 

deficit racked up by the Trudeau administration over the years. 

The Auditor General had said that Trudeau's spending was out 

of control. And when Mr. Mulroney came on the scene he had 

a choice, and that choice was to take the hard line and pay off 

that accumulated debt, which at that time would have been a lot 

easier than it is today. 

 

(1500) 

 

But instead of making that choice he piled up the deficit, which 

is out of control. Look at the situation Canada is in today. If he 

would have taken the hard line, paid off that deficit, think of 

how things would look in this nation today. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we're facing the same thing here in this 

province. We have a huge debt of $15 billion. We have no 

choice and we do have the courage, Mr. Speaker, to turn this 

thing around and make this once again the best province in this 

nation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Are you done? 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- No, I'm not done yet, hon. member. We talk about 

renewing health care. It's a milestone in this province, 

something that Tommy Douglas recognized as a second phase 

in medicare, the phase he also recognized is going to be the 

more difficult part to do. We're going to empower communities 

to make decisions 



122 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1993 

that serve them best. 

 

And when I go to health care meetings I talk to the delegates 

and I address them, and I go back to some of my roots when I 

was a reeve of the municipality. And I tell them when the 

government of the day would come up with a decision and tell 

us this is the way we have to do it, we would yell back and say: 

no, we know what's right for us, let us make that choice 

ourselves. The next time around when they would let us make 

that choice, we would say: well you have the bureaucracy that's 

on salary, why don't you make that choice for us so we don't 

have to let our volunteers do that? So what I tell them is no 

matter which way, no matter which way the government goes 

or which direction we go, it's not going to be viewed as the 

right decision by local governments. 

 

But in this decision, Mr. Speaker, there's no doubt in my mind 

it is the right decision because the communities will have a 

choice to make the right decisions for themselves which serves 

their area the best. And at the end of the day we will have a 

revised system which will have much better health care. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that goes along with our wellness model. 

And when you talk about the wellness model, I believe I am 

living proof that that system does work. As many of you will 

recall, the last legislative session, towards the end I took ill, I 

developed pleurisy. I was excused from the House for some 

time. And I realized that I had to change some of the things I 

do. I've changed my lifestyle, I've changed my diet, I do some 

exercises now, I've lost 30 pounds. I feel fit as a fiddle. And 

there is something to that wellness model, Mr. Speaker. I feel 

great and I'm sure I'll be here for this whole session and I'm 

looking forward to it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- When we talk about some of our boundaries, this 

session we're going to introduce The Constituency Boundaries 

Act, and it's going to eliminate political influence. And being a 

rural member who has seen his population decline, I would 

hope that we do have provisions in there to look at cases of 

large area and low population to make sure that some of our 

numbers are equal, and I have a couple boundary commissions 

that come to my mind. And one was back in 1991 where there 

was countless money spent on a boundary commission that was 

supposed to be in place for the 1991 election, but it never 

happened. And I don't know why it didn't happen. 

 

Maybe it had a lot to do, that it didn't have a chance to get 

passed in this Assembly, and maybe that is why, because it 

didn't have time because the House was prorogued for some 

strange reason. I don't know what that reason was. I don't know 

if it was because Grant Hodgins had resigned and walked 

across the floor, or if it was because the government of the day 

was running before they passed the budget. I'm not sure what it 

was, but there was a boundaries commission that money was 

spent on and didn't see the light of day. 

 

There's another one that comes to my mind back in 1969, 1971 

-- I believe it will be 1971. In the election prior to 

'71 in the constituency of Kelvington-Wadena, many of you 

will recall that Brian Bjarnason, the Liberal member, won by a 

slight majority. But due to some circumstances that the ballots 

weren't counted in the hospital polls -- they disappeared -- and 

it was that close that it was ruled there would have to be a 

by-election. I don't know why the ballots weren't counted -- if 

they were lost or what happened -- but there was a by-election 

ruled in 1969. 

 

And at that time the New Democrats campaigned on the new 

deal for people, the new vision for Saskatchewan, and in '69 

Neil Byers won that by-election. And they always said at that 

time, if we win Kelvington-Wadena we're going to win the 

province. So 1971 come along, the general election. There 

were some boundaries changes and I remembered very 

explicitly what happened in Kelvington-Wadena. There was 22 

corners around the polls of Kelvington. They would take and 

draw a line . . . they would pick out a Liberal farm family and 

if there was a New Democrat they would go around a few 

corners so that they could vote in another constituency, just for 

the fact they wanted to win Kelvington-Wadena. There was 22 

corners around the polls in Kelvington. 

 

And sometime back when Walter Smishek was one of our 

honourable ministers, I was at a meeting with him in 

Saskatoon. And when we were in the hotel in the evening, we 

had run across Senator Steuart. He invited us up to his hotel 

room. And through some conversations of old times and 

reminiscing, Mr. Steuart had said, we may have done a lot of 

things when we were the Liberal government, but we did them 

all by the book. 

 

I said, Senator Steuart, I disagree with you because I was 

working the Kelvington-Wadena election in 1971 and we had 

22 corners around Kelvington. That was a gerrymander. You 

guys gerrymandered those boundaries. 

 

And he looked at me and he said, that wasn't a gerrymander; 

that was a daveymander. 

 

So I'm glad to see, Mr. Speaker, that we're going to take the 

political influence out of the new boundaries commission. 

We're also going to restore faith to the electorate with our new 

initiatives. We're going to let the people know that that light at 

the end of the tunnel is not no longer a freight train like it was 

under the previous administration. There is light at the end of 

the tunnel. 

 

We're going to do what's right. We're going to restore open, 

honest, and accountable government, and once again, Mr. 

Speaker, restore the faith the people have in their elected 

representatives and this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I'd like to 

say that I'm proud to be able to represent the constituency of 

Kindersley. I thank the good people of Kindersley for having 

the confidence in the Progressive Conservative Party and in 

myself, Mr. Speaker. 



March 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 123 

In preparing my response to the Speech from the Throne, I took 

a moment to peruse the last session's speech -- NDP 

back-bench cheerleaders saying how wonderful they have 

done; farmers going bankrupt; health care boards fighting 

amongst themselves. Your government's incompetence is 

becoming legendary. 

 

Members of this Assembly may recall that speech and its 

commitments to the people of Saskatchewan. We are dealing 

with some of those promises this session, Mr. Speaker. The 

same promises made in 1992, and again they're being made in 

1993. 

 

The NDP have a problem fulfilling promises no matter where 

they were made, on the election trail or in the Speech from the 

Throne. Of course some of the promises made in the 1992 

Speech from the Throne were controversial, so they were 

shelved. 

 

Before I go too far, Mr. Speaker, about the government's 

broken promises, I'd like to just briefly touch on some other 

broken promises, promises made by the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader, the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone, is more interested in her media profile or 

media-appointed superstar status, than governing this province. 

She presents a reform package that consists of vague notions, 

and trendy and lofty goals, but no substance. 

 

Beyond the proclamation that "I'm different," I think she 

should present a little more to that. She says that she represents 

a party that's committed to reforming this institution, and yet 

we see her federal counterpart, Mr. Chretien, not allowing 

people to run in nominations, appointing people in 

nominations. Some commitment to reform, Mr. Speaker. That's 

the kind of party she represents. 

 

Her record in this House, if anyone cares to take the time, just 

take the time to have a look at her record. How has she voted in 

this House on the various occasions? 

 

Let's talk about her record with respect to the referendum 

question of abortion funding. Does anyone remember how she 

voted on that? Does anyone remember that, Mr. Speaker? I'm 

sure the people of Saskatchewan would be interested in 

knowing how she voted on that important question. 

 

Let's talk about how she will vote on the changes, the 

upcoming changes that we're anticipating in the Human Rights 

Code. We're all interested to know how she's going to vote on 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let's talk about her proud pronouncement that she sits on more 

standing committees than anyone else, and how hard she 

works. But then let's examine, but then let's examine her 

attendance record at those standing committees. 

 

Let's talk about her plans to close rural hospitals. I wonder 

which ones she had in mind, Mr. Speaker -- the one in Eatonia? 

Dodsland? Eastend? Beechy? Macklin? Perhaps Gull Lake? 

Let's talk about her ideas to cut down on the 

number of rural seats and the real reason that she suggests that. 

 

Let's talk about bringing in the Liberal leader . . . Let's talk 

about her bringing in the Liberal leader from British Columbia 

in the last election campaign, in the dying days of that 

campaign, and where he is today. 

 

Let's talk about the Liberal Party that solely consists of bitter 

infighting between the likes of Tony Merchant and the former 

Liberal leader, Ralph Goodale, and the bitter infighting 

between the member from Saskatoon Greystone and anyone in 

that party that disagrees with her. 

 

As the NDP House Leader has correctly pointed out, correctly 

pointed out, she made the promise in this legislature that she 

was going to present one new economic development project 

per week. That was her promise -- one per week. And now, Mr. 

Speaker, we see her large deficit in ideas piling up in front of 

us all. 

 

(1515) 

 

Her term of office has been some 68 weeks now and she has 

brought forward I don't think any. I stand corrected on that. She 

may have brought forward one or two new economic 

development projects. If her promise of newness can be 

believed, it's time to get started, to address that economic 

development deficit she has run up. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, thank God she's never had the 

opportunity in this province to govern because of those kinds 

of things. If for once, if for once the media and general public 

could turn their magnifying glass and attention her way, 

everyone would see vote after vote falling by the wayside; 

promise after promise falling by the wayside; lofty principle 

after lofty principle falling by the wayside; vote after vote with 

the NDP; important question after important question left 

unanswered. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, she may aspire to superstardom but 

until each and every one of these questions is answered, she is 

exactly where she is today -- an independent, insignificant 

member of this legislature who receives far more attention than 

she deserves, far more attention than she deserves. And only 

one thing I can . . . It's time someone in the media took the time 

to check her record on a number of these issues. And I'd 

eventually hope that one of the media gurus of this institution 

will do that, take the time to check her record. 

 

The Liberal leader has consistently complained about other 

parties stealing her ideas. Well well, Mr. Speaker. We now see 

the Liberal leader proclaiming for all to hear that Saskatchewan 

should have an ethanol standard. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I remind the Liberal leader that the ethanol 

standard in Saskatchewan was part of the former Progressive 

Conservative's commitments to this province in the last 

election campaign, and that the member for Thunder Creek last 

session presented a draft Bill with respect to an ethanol 

standard. Who's stealing whose ideas in this House? 



124 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1993 

I can, though, have sympathy for her in one area, in one area. 

The NDP did pick up on one of her promises, that's to close 

rural hospitals. That's the one idea that the NDP have taken 

from her. That was originally her idea. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we'll move our attention a little bit more 

back to the throne speech and what was in there and what 

wasn't in there. Mr. Speaker, I refer to one thing that I noticed 

in the throne speech debate -- the commitment of the 

government to amend the Human Rights Code, amendments 

which are very, very controversial, as I'm sure everyone in this 

House knows, and many residents of this province strongly 

disagree with. 

 

We have been getting letters on a daily basis; in my office in 

Kindersley, three to five letters a day, Mr. Speaker, on this one 

issue. On this one issue. I can only imagine what the 

government members must be getting on that issue, Mr. 

Speaker. Our province's residents are not only opposed to this, 

they vehemently are opposed to any changes in that code. 

 

I understand that you're . . . I understand, Mr. Speaker, that our 

neighbours to the west of us in Alberta are putting this question 

to the people; asking in a referendum if the people of Alberta 

agree with changes in that area. 

 

Homosexuals are protected under the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms. It's not necessary to change or amend the Human 

Rights Code provincially. We have more pressing things on the 

agenda of Saskatchewan than that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One clear example of that is economic development. Last 

session, your government told us in the Speech from the 

Throne that there was 700 companies that were expressing, 

 

 . . . an interest in either relocating in Saskatchewan or 

expanding their operations here. If these businesses proceed 

with their plans they will have the potential to create or 

maintain more than 16,000 jobs. 

 

Being the opposition member for Economic Development, this 

statement was of particular interest to me. I'm sure that the 

unemployed of Saskatchewan are also very interested in this. 

We in the opposition attempted to find out a bit more about 

these companies, Mr. Speaker -- for example, identifying them, 

Mr. Speaker. Regrettably, we still have no idea who those 700 

companies are or where they're going to be relocating in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I asked, Mr. Speaker, for a list of these companies in question 

period. I asked in estimates, Mr. Speaker. We asked and asked 

and asked. The media asked as well, Mr. Speaker, and they too 

were refused that information. I don't think the NDP have 700 

companies who want to relocate in Saskatchewan. I think it's 

just another example of the NDP misleading the public of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Just last Friday, if everyone will recall, in question period I 

asked the minister responsible for Economic 

Development in this Chamber to give me a copy of his 

long-touted list of these companies. And he referred to a few of 

them; he went on a couple of them. And if you'd care to check 

the record on that, Mr. Speaker, it clearly shows each and every 

one of the ones he talked about were initiatives brought to the 

province of Saskatchewan by the former administration, not 

his. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when asked about that list, the Economic 

Development minister said we could have the list; call his 

office up and he'd give us a copy of it. So, Mr. Speaker, last 

week -- or earlier this week, sorry -- earlier this week I called 

his office and asked for it. He promised it; I asked for it. I was 

refused. 

 

The Economic Development minister promises it. His staff 

says no, can't have it; there is no such thing; we haven't made 

up any kind of lists like that. But yet a promise again broken by 

the Minister of Economic Development. 

 

I don't think there's 700 companies wanting to relocate in 

Saskatchewan. I think there's a whole bunch of companies that 

are looking at Saskatchewan, but the moment they hear the 

kind of stuff that comes out of the Premier of this province or 

the member from Melfort saying that the province is on the 

verge of bankruptcy, that sure creates a lot of business 

confidence in this province. Seven hundred probably want to 

leave is more like it; that's for sure. 

 

The hotel chain in Melfort is just a clear example of that, Mr. 

Speaker, wanting to come to Saskatchewan, hearing the 

doom-and-gloom message, and then backing away as fast as 

they possibly can, relocating into either Alberta or Manitoba -- 

good Conservative provinces. 

 

And the members there opposite are still saying that there's that 

many companies that are interested in relocating it. How can 

you believe that kind of stuff that comes from these people? 

 

I think it's a lot like the Piper deal. Do any of you remember 

Piper? Your minister standing up, your minister standing up in 

a news conference and saying: she's signed, sealed, and 

delivered; Piper Aircraft will be building aircrafts in 

Saskatchewan within a few weeks. That was his statement. A 

few weeks, Mr. Speaker. Haven't seen it. Haven't seen it. No 

one has seen it yet. 

 

I don't think that it's going to happen, Mr. Speaker, and neither 

do any of the other members of this legislature. That's why we 

never hear anything about Piper Aircraft any more. It was a 

clear bust. That's what it was, an absolute, clear bust, the Piper 

deal, as far as Saskatchewan residents are concerned. Piper 

hasn't relocated anywhere. It's doubtful they will relocate 

anywhere, no matter what the Minister of Economic 

Development has to say. 

 

The only thing that seems to be relocating in the province of 

Saskatchewan is the population base -- relocating to other 

provinces. That's what's happening in Saskatchewan today. 

 

The only two areas, the only two areas, Mr. Speaker, in  



March 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 125 

the throne speech that were positive were with respect to the 

AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) agreement and 

community bonds. When the NDP had their convention I was 

pleased to see our agenda being advanced; pleased to see that. 

The Tory agenda, they finally realized, in those two areas was 

right on the money, right on the money. The AECL agreement 

-- and I'm glad to see that they're endorsing it roundly, member 

after member endorsing it at their convention. 

 

We're just proud to see that that was something that you people 

agree with. Members like the member for Regina Rosemont, 

happy to see that he's onside with AECL, Mr. Speaker. The 

member from Saskatoon Broadway, we're happy to see she's 

onside with AECL agreement; proud to see that. The member 

from Regina Albert North, happy to see that he is onside with 

the AECL agreement. The member from Regina Lake Centre, 

very nice to see she endorses AECL now. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What about the rest of us? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- The rest of you, yes, absolutely. We in the 

opposition give you high regard in this question alone, the 

AECL agreement. We're very pleased to see that our agenda 

has been advanced by the NDP Party. Nice to see, Mr. Speaker, 

that finally they are coming around and endorsing our agenda. 

 

AECL and community bonds. I commend these former 

anti-nukes for putting behind their unfounded opposition to 

nuclear development and trying to do something finally to help 

this province. Congratulations to them. 

 

Our labour force however, Mr. Speaker, has decreased by some 

2,000 persons in Saskatchewan from 472,000 in 1993 . . . from 

474,000 in 1992, Mr. Speaker. There were 47,000 people 

unemployed in Saskatchewan during January of 1993. An 

increase of 4,000 from December of 1992 -- 8,000 more than 

the number employed in January 1992. These figures were 

extracted from the Saskatchewan Bureau of Statistics labour 

force statistics, February 5, 1993. 

 

Even more shocking statistics come from the government's 

statistical review, February 1993. For example on page 2, Mr. 

Speaker, the total unemployed labour force in Saskatchewan is 

now 425,000 . . . was 425,000 in 1991. Now it is 435,000, Mr. 

Speaker. A shocking increase -- 10 thousand more unemployed 

people. 

 

In agriculture alone 2,000 jobs have disappeared. The statistics 

read as follows: In 1993, 70,000 people were employed in the 

agriculture industry in Saskatchewan; in 1991 there were 

72,000. Two thousand jobs evaporated in that sector alone. 

 

I ask the member from Regina Elphinstone, where are these 

16,000 jobs you promised last April? Where are they? They 

sure aren't in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The evidence is 

clear. We need those jobs in Saskatchewan. It's time he came 

up with the 26,000 jobs that he has promised -- 16,000 that are 

gone and the additional 10,000 that he promised . . . that were 

lost in Saskatchewan. 

The only unemployment . . . or the only area of employment 

that is increasing in Saskatchewan is his cabinet. And if you 

recall, Mr. Speaker, when he was elected as Premier of this 

province he made the commitment to the people of 

Saskatchewan that he would have a cabinet that was very 

small; 10 cabinet ministers until the province could afford to 

have more. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't think the province, after one year of 

NDP government rule, is in any better economic shape. In fact 

we're in a whole lot worse of a mess. And yet another promise, 

another promise broken, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Remember the statement, and I quote: my government will use 

Crown corporations to stimulate economic development. 

 

What happened to that promise, Mr. Speaker? The throne 

speech that contained some . . . also contained some harsh 

words about not only the North American Free Trade but the 

FTA (Free Trade Agreement) and the GATT (General 

Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) as well. 

 

Consider the following, extracted from that throne speech, and 

I quote: 

 

 . . . the (promised) North American free trade agreement, 

with the United States and Mexico, offers Saskatchewan few 

benefits and much cause for concern. 

 

Now I want to emphasize, it specified "offers Saskatchewan 

few benefits", Mr. Speaker. Compare that statement with the 

following, and I quote: 

 

 "Western Canada and agriculture probably have much more 

to gain from (the) . . . North American Free Trade Agreement 

than any other part of Canada." 

 

That quote was made by the Minister of Economic 

Development in the Star-Phoenix, February 9, 1993. 

 

How do those two statements come together, Mr. Speaker? 

How can they reconcile those two kinds of things? On one 

hand, in the their Speech from the Throne they say it offers few 

benefits. The Economic Development minister says it's great; it 

provides all kinds of opportunities in Saskatchewan. I think 

perhaps the minister from Elphinstone forgot Saskatchewan is 

part of western Canada. 

 

(1530) 

 

Few benefits or more benefits -- which one is it? The Speech 

from the Throne says few; he says, lot of benefits. I'm sure the 

people of Saskatchewan would be interested in him making up 

his mind on this issue. Is it good for Saskatchewan, in his 

opinion, or is it not good for Saskatchewan in his opinion? 

 

The member from Elphinstone's ears are probably still ringing, 

Mr. Speaker, from the phone call I bet he received from the 

federal Leader of the NDP. I'll bet she 



126 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1993 

straightened him out in no uncertain terms about her 

contentions about the North American Free Trade Agreement. 

 

And then the machinery of government was sure put into gear 

in a hurry to try and correct his misquote, as he calls it -- his 

misquote. What a joke, Mr. Speaker. Everyone knows he said 

it. Everyone knows what he was meaning when he said it. But 

now he said, oh I didn't say that; they took me out of context, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don't think so. I think he's back-pedalling as fast as he can to 

get out of jam that he has with his federal counterparts. That's 

what the people of Saskatchewan believe. No one was 

surprised about their flip-flop on that. No one at all. 

 

The NDP hasn't changed its tune since they formed 

government. Do the members opposite recall the outrage each 

and every time a government minister would go on a trade 

mission of the former government? Every time one of the 

former ministers would go on a trade mission these people got 

up and just spoke in volumes about how terrible it was that 

these people were flying all over the . . . flying throughout the 

world trying to bring jobs and opportunities and investment 

into Saskatchewan. 

 

And now what do we see, Mr. Speaker? Now what do we see? 

This world traveller, Dwain's world is not too small any more. 

He travels the world, thinks nothing of it. What are the 

destinations? It would be interesting to see what the 

destinations he has gone to over the last year and a half, Mr. 

Speaker -- all over the world, all over the world. And we 

wonder why was it bad when the Conservative government was 

trying to attract jobs and opportunity and investment into 

Saskatchewan, and now it's okay. 

 

Why is that, Mr. Speaker? Well, Mr. Speaker, it's because 

when in government they say one thing; when in opposition 

they say another thing. It's clear. These people cannot be 

trusted. They will say one thing and do another every single 

time, Mr. Speaker. The member from Elphinstone went on a 

European vacation just before Christmas and a winter holiday 

in January. It's clear. Check the record yourself. 

 

Nice little cosy vacations that he took at taxpayers' expense 

under the auspices of creating jobs and economic development 

in Saskatchewan. Perhaps someone should send him on an 

economic development mission to his own constituency, own 

government's constituency of Canora, to open their eyes with 

regard to the GRIP program and the plight of Saskatchewan 

farmers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of your government's election promises was to improve 

the GRIP program. They're going to improve it, Mr. Speaker. 

That was their promise: going to get more money; we're going 

to get the cost of production; we're going to do everything we 

can for farmers. You've done nothing for farmers. If we could 

turn back the clock, Mr. Speaker, to 1991, the best thing that 

could ever happen is if this government was never elected as 

far as farmers are concerned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order. Why is the 

member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- To ask leave to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you. In the west gallery, Mr. Speaker . . 

. or the east gallery, I guess, Mr. Derek Wichorek, University 

of Regina student and a fellow from the Weekes district in my 

constituency is visiting. He's very interested in politics as his 

parents Stan and Justina, and I would like the House to join 

with me in welcoming Derek to the House this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We would also extend a 

welcome to the guests in the gallery. 

 

Now let's get back to agriculture for a little while, shall we, Mr. 

Speaker. Something that they don't like to hear about but 

unfortunately whether you realize it or not it's kind of an 

important area of our economy in Saskatchewan. Fairly 

important. But what's happened to it? What's happened to it, 

Mr. Speaker? Three rallies later and your GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) program is still a disaster, a disaster that 

can be directly, directly attributed to your government and the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose and all of the support that he 

had. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I could not believe it -- could not believe it 

-- when the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg stood in this 

legislature in this debate and said that GRIP '92 was the right 

thing to do. That's what he said, Mr. Speaker. Go back and 

check the record. It was the right thing to do. 
 

This Rolls-Royce socialist up in the corner over there 

obviously didn't pay too much attention to what his Premier 

was saying. Can you believe it, Mr. Speaker? The member 

from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg still believes '92 GRIP was 

better. Oh my God! In a constituency like 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, one of the hardest impacted 

constituencies probably in this whole province with the 

possible exception of Shaunavon over there, and he still 

believes . . . Where has he been over the last year, Mr. 

Speaker? Can you believe it? 
 

And not only that, Mr. Speaker. We absolutely couldn't believe 

our good fortune on the very first day that we thought there 

was going to be a debate, throne speech debate, that the 

member from Humboldt rises in his place and said, we want to 

debate agriculture. We couldn't believe our good fortune, 

absolutely couldn't believe it, just absolutely . . . And then not 

only that. He proposes it but he wasn't prepared to speak to it. 

Could you believe  



March 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 127 

that? He got up and had a few little comments about it, and 

then the member from Shaunavon chimed in afterwards. 

 

They weren't even prepared to speak on agriculture and they 

proposed on the very first day, the very first day, an emergency 

debate on agriculture. These two lightweights in agriculture, 

the member from Humboldt and the member from Shaunavon 

-- the Mickey Mouse and Daffy Duck of agriculture in 

Saskatchewan -- standing up and telling farmers that they're the 

spokespeople for agriculture. Could you believe it? Could you 

believe it? You two, along with the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose and the member for Canora, have done more 

to destroy agriculture in this province than anyone in the 

history of this province, done more to destroy it than anyone in 

the history. 

 

And what does the Premier have to say on this topic? What 

does the Premier have to say on this topic, Mr. Speaker? He 

says it was a mistake; that's what he says. Doc up in the corner 

believes it was the right thing to do, but the Premier says it was 

a mistake. You ought to pay attention, Mr. Member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, to what your Premier is saying. Do 

you even realize that he thinks it's a mistake now? I don't think 

he does, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Premier wishes he never touched it, he said. You people 

are a deceitful, arrogant, unrepentant bunch of laughing stocks 

that the farmers of Saskatchewan will never forget -- absolutely 

never forget you. I predict, Mr. Speaker, in the next election 

you won't win one rural seat -- not one rural seat. The farmers 

of Saskatchewan will kick you out of office. 

 

The farmers of this province would like to storm this Chamber, 

Mr. Speaker, and give you people a collective kick in the butt 

like you've never got before. And probably on top of that they'd 

hang the member from Rosetown-Elrose if they ever had the 

opportunity. 

 

Almost 13,000 farmers rallied in Sask Place in Saskatoon -- 

13,000 farmers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And what did they say? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Because they were suffering from the NDP's 

government to change GRIP. That's what they said, Mr. 

Speaker -- that's what they said. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Standing ovation. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Standing ovation, can you . . . Swift Current, we 

hear from Swift Current now. He says they gave him a standing 

ovation. I recall the place practically coming down in boos for 

your Premier. That's what they were doing. They roundly 

booed him from start to finish, his comments. When they 

talked about . . . when he brought up his GRIP program, what 

did they do? They booed him like no Premier in this province 

has ever been booed before. And the paper recorded it, and the 

media scribes were all there and they recorded it for history. 

 

I wonder what the Premier of this province thought when that 

happened to him. I wonder what was going through 

his head at that moment. It was absolutely incredible to see him 

just booed roundly by probably as partisan a group as you 

people could collectively put together that day. 

 

Here's what the Premier said, and I quote, Mr. Speaker. This is 

up at P.A. (Prince Albert) not too long ago, January 13, a quote 

CKBI Prince Albert, radio station in Prince Albert: The 

changes we made to GRIP '91 and GRIP '92 were not . . . 

Sorry. I'll start again on that, Mr. Speaker: The changes we 

made to GRIP '91 and GRIP '92 were not the answer, that's for 

sure. They added to the problem in some ways. I think that if I 

had to do it all over again, I wouldn't have touched it. 

 

That's what he said -- I wouldn't have touched it. I can imagine 

that's . . . There's never been a more truer statement than that 

one. Along with the former minister of Agriculture, the one 

that he turfed out . . . We all realize he had to do that. I'm 

surprised he still is in the cabinet. And the farmers of 

Saskatchewan are surprised too. 

 

One farmer at the rally stated, the first step is admitting the 

mistake; the second step is fixing it. Where's the fix? Where is 

any kind of help for agriculture from this administration? 

Where are these two lightweights, Mickey Mouse and Daffy 

Duck, when it comes to speaking up for agriculture in caucus, 

in the NDP caucus? I wonder what they say. Not a word. 

 

The member from Humboldt probably stands up and says, why 

don't we debate agriculture on the first day? Gee, there's a 

brilliant idea. And they all look around and say hey, let's all 

click in on this great idea to debate agriculture. And they . . . 

Sure. Okay. What the heck. Got nothing to lose. We're so 

screwed up in agriculture now, maybe we could talk about it a 

little bit and it will get better. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it isn't getting any better. No help from this 

government. None whatsoever. Not a red cent for farmers. 

You've been in their pockets since the day you became 

government, sucking more and more dollars out of their hands 

every time we turn around, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the member from Humboldt stands up and says, I'm a 

spokesman for agriculture. Shaunavon the same way. Oh, man. 

Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker? If it wasn't for the salary they 

collect as an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), 

their farm would be broke -- long gone, broke, dust, out of 

here. That's what would happen to their farms. 

 

And it's not surprising. It's not surprising, Mr. Speaker. 

Because every farmer in this province took a collective hit of 

about 10 to 20,000 bucks because of their changes in '91 GRIP. 

That's what they took. 

 

Hey, I mean, look it up yourselves, guys. Figure it out on your 

own farm, if any of you have the capacity to do that. Take it to 

an accountant maybe. They can tell you. Take it to your 

accountant, Mr. Member from Humboldt. Find out what the hit 

cost you. Find out what the hit cost you back there, Mr. 

Member from Shaunavon, and Mr. Member . . . Oh, no, it 

didn't cost the Rolls 



128 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1993 

Royce socialist anything; he doesn't farm. Forgot about that. 

The Rolls Royce socialist up there in the corner, it didn't cost 

him a nickel. It must have been easy, it must have been easy for 

him to put his hand up in caucus and say, let's get rid of this. 

 

Must have been easy for that member, the member from Biggar 

over there. Same thing. Your farm would be dust, broke flat, if 

you didn't have your MLA's salary to prop it up. You know it 

and I know it too. I know very well what would happen to the 

farms of these members had they not had a salary to help prop 

it up. 

 

You people promised farmers all over this province that you 

would provide more help for agriculture, more help in every 

way. You would go down to Ottawa and you would extract 

some money from the Prime Minister down there. And what 

did you get? Not one red penny; not one red penny you didn't 

get. And it's clear why, Mr. Speaker, it's clear why. The 

farmers in this province know why. You don't deserve a cent. 

 

You made changes in a program that farmers believed had 

some very, very strong potential. You absolutely gutted it, 

absolutely gutted it, and then . . . Doc up in the corner says, it 

was the right thing to do. Can you imagine? You've kicked, 

absolutely kicked agriculture at every turn, every turn, Mr. 

Member from Swift Current, every single turn. 

 

(1545) 

 

Utility rates. Are you aware that out on the farm, out on the 

farms of Saskatchewan they use the odd little bit of gas, they 

use the odd bit of electricity, they use the odd bit of insurance 

for their vehicles. Telephones, they use that. Every single 

opportunity your government has had you've increased the 

taxes on everybody, increased the taxes on agriculture. And 

then you stand up and say, we're the spokespeople for 

agriculture. Can you believe it? 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . that's 

for sure. That kind of spokesmanship we don't need in this 

province. 

 

Who broke the contract, Mr. Member from Swift Current? 

Who broke the contract? Retroactively came in and ripped off 

agriculture like it's never been ripped off before. Came in to 

this legislature . . . You had to ram it down the throats of the 

opposition and every farmer in this province. It's no wonder 

you're in court, it's no wonder you're in court. If you weren't the 

government, you guys would be in jail over those kinds of 

changes. That's where you'd find yourselves. Contract law 

would put you folks away for good. 

 

In the province of Saskatchewan, the farmers would like 

nothing more. For what you did to the program, for what you 

did to the changes in that program, you deserve to be behind 

bars. That's where you deserve to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the speech from the throne also mentioned recent 

events at Eston, my home town, with respect to farm 

ownership. Mr. Speaker, I predict that the government will 

move to restrict farm ownership and will have the final say 

when a farmer decides to sell his or her farm -- government 

heavy-handedness at its worst. 

You can't sell your farm. No you can't buy that farm. No you 

can't sell this farm. We decide from now on who's going to buy 

and who's going to sell in this province. Is that what we're 

expecting to see? Is that what we're expecting to see? We've 

got an ageing farm population, and we're going to have a 

government that stands up and says, we don't think you should 

be able to sell your farm. That's what we're expecting. 

 

Not only do the farmers of this province contend that the 

problems associated with '92 . . . have to contend with the 

problems associated with '92 GRIP, they also have to contend 

with all your tax increases. And it's just becoming unbearable 

on agriculture, absolutely unbearable. 

 

I'll quote from another farmer at that rally in Saskatoon: you 

can't continue to milk the cow without feeding her. Maybe you 

should be aware of that. 

 

The member from Rosetown-Elrose, he knows all about 

feeding hogs, or lack thereof, lack thereof, lack thereof of 

feeding them. 

 

I ask the members across the floor, particularly the member 

from Canora, please, please consider the federal government's 

offer of assistance. Absolutely look at it. The farmers of 

Saskatchewan are counting on you people to take a look at that 

offer. It's been on the table for something in the order of seven 

or eight months, I believe now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill McKnight, former minister of Agriculture, made the 

commitment last Thursday in Hazlet that the offer is still on the 

table. Still there. I ask you people to support farmers and quit 

blaming others for your incompetence. Absolutely quit that. 

 

The farmers of this province need some help. There's an offer 

on the table and you say no, we're not going to do it, not going 

to touch it. Can't touch that. 

 

What makes more sense than for the provincial government to 

put up their money and the federal government to put up 

money and actively cooperate and share the financial 

responsibility, Mr. Speaker? For every tax dollar Saskatchewan 

raises, 17 cents goes towards servicing the provincial debt. For 

every dollar the federal government takes in, over 40 cents 

goes towards servicing the federal debt. 

 

We're all in the same boat here, Mr. Minister. We're all in the 

same boat. Who pays the taxes? We all are in the same boat 

here. 

 

Our farmers need some help and they need it before spring 

seeding. And these folks opposite . . . there's an offer on the 

table and they won't even talk about it. Won't even talk about it. 

 

It's no wonder the Premier was roundly booed in Saskatoon, 

Mr. Speaker. No wonder. There's an offer on the table for help 

from the federal government and they say no. 



March 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 129 

An Hon. Member: -- Since December. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Some time now, that's for sure. And yet he won't 

look at it. 

 

There was a survey, if any of you recall, there was a survey 

going around at that rally in Saskatoon and it clearly showed . . 

. did you see the results of it, any of you? We could send you a 

copy if you like. The results clearly showed farmers wanted to 

return to a 1991-style GRIP program. That's what it showed. 

That's what it showed. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Ask Alberta. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Ask Alberta. Can you imagine that, Mr. Speaker? 

The member from Swift Current says from his seat, ask 

Alberta. Ask Alberta. Ask the Alberta farmers what they think 

of '91 GRIP in Alberta and '92 GRIP in Alberta. Ask the 

farmers of Alberta what they think. They like it. They're happy 

with their program out there. 

 

You don't give a . . . you couldn't care less about agriculture. 

And it's clear evidence when the member from Swift Current 

says from his seat, ask the Alberta people. Ask the Alberta 

people. The farmers of Alberta believe in their program 

because it's working for them. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- 400 million. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Yes, 400 million. Right. That's quite a shame, 

isn't it, Mr. Member -- $400 million right straight into the 

pocket of agriculture. What a shame. What a shame, $400 

million goes into the pocket of farmers in Alberta and the 

member from Swift Current says it's bad. 

 

Every business and every store and every farm implement 

dealership and everybody associated with agriculture in 

Alberta. It's booming out there if you ever took the time to 

drive out and have a look. Do you know what's happening in 

agriculture in Alberta? You don't, do you? They don't. They 

look at it and they say, it's costing $400 million in Alberta. 

That's right. We recognize that -- $400 million it costs there. 

 

But where did the $400 million go, Mr. Member from Swift 

Current? It went straight into the hip-national of every farm 

family in Alberta. That's where it went. 

 

And the member from Swift Current, I can't believe he would 

chirp up from his seat: it's bad; it's bad. Doc up in the corner 

thinks it's bad too. Daffy Duck and Mickey Mouse think it's 

bad. The member from Shaunavon and the member from 

Humboldt, they think it's bad. Four hundred million dollars 

goes into the pockets of agriculture and these two spokesmen 

for agriculture say, can't have that; can't have that; that's bad. 

Can't have that; it's bad. 
 

But the member over here in the corner from God knows 

where, he says it's bad too, bad too. Farmers all over the 

province of Saskatchewan are going broke and this member 

over here says that's fine. Didn't cost anybody any money 

though. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No there won't be anybody to make 

anything too. 

Mr. Boyd: -- That's right. The tax base in this province is 

evaporating before our eyes and these people say we can't give 

anything to agriculture; can't help in agriculture. What's 

happening in Alberta's bad. 

 

Well it's no wonder. It's no wonder your Premier was booed in 

Saskatoon about agriculture. It's little wonder to me. The 

survey showed at that rally in Saskatoon farmers wanted to 

return to '91-style GRIP. That's what it said. Take the time to 

check the record on that. It said they want to return to a 

'91-style GRIP. But everyone recognizes and we've said time 

and time and time again in this legislature '91 GRIP wasn't 

perfect, but it's a whole heck of a lot better than what you guys 

come up with. 

 

You get a good crop, you get a good crop, you get high-grade 

wheat, you get the best payment. You get a poor crop, 

low-grade wheat; when you need the help the worst, you get 

the least payment. Ho! That's insurance at its best -- NDP-style 

insurance, NDP-style insurance. When the house burns down 

you don't pay them. When the house burns down you don't pay 

them. When you're building the house up and you add another 

room onto the house, you get a payment. There's a . . . what a 

program! What a program. Can you believe it? The farmers of 

Saskatchewan are just absolutely laughing at you folks about 

that. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Where is the member from Rosetown? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Yes, that's a good question. The farmers of 

Saskatchewan would like to have a little visit with that 

member, the member from Rosetown-Elrose. It'd be interesting 

to know the kind of telephone calls and letters he gets. Oh, can 

you imagine? He's probably under police guard, Mr. Speaker. 

He's probably under police guard. And if the member from 

Swift Current and a few of the rest of you continue to say in 

Saskatchewan that '92 GRIP was better, you'll need police 

guard too. 

 

You couldn't go into a rally in Saskatchewan . . . It would've 

been interesting if the Premier would've stood up in Saskatoon 

and said, we did the right thing. He wouldn't have got out of 

there. That's what would have happened to him. Everyone 

knows that. You make a promise on one hand to improve a 

program and then you absolutely destroy it. 

 

And the frost that hit Saskatchewan in the latter days of August 

last year just absolutely confirmed it in everybody's mind. Can 

you imagine, Mr. Speaker, what would have happened to the 

farmers of this province had we had a 1988-style drought? Can 

you imagine what would've happened? Farmers would have 

harvested five bushels to the acre. In my constituency that was 

a pretty normal yield in 1988. Absolute crop failure, disaster. 

That's what it was. 

 

They got five bushels to the acre, $2, 2.50, maybe even three 

bucks a bushel. Who knows, you might get $15 an acre. You 

might've got another 45 or 50 from Crop Insurance, and you'd 

have got zero, you'd have got zero from a '92-style GRIP 

program. And yet Doc up in the corner says it's good. Your 

Premier says it's bad. No 



130 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1993 

willingness whatsoever to change the program though. Hard to 

imagine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk a little bit about the NDP's 

plans to reintroduce harmonization. Or at least what we will see 

in the upcoming budget, I predict, we will see a reintroduction 

of harmonization only it'll be selective harmonization. That's 

what it'll be: selective harmonization. Selective harmonization, 

that's what it'll be called. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Selective pain. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Selective pain, there's a good term for it, selective 

pain. Somebody will have to pay the tax; another group won't 

have to pay the tax. The input tax credit thing, I predict, won't 

be part of it, won't be part of it. Business and the chamber of 

commerce, Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, business 

groups all over this province are saying, for God's sake if you 

do it, bring in the input tax credit side to it, and for God's sake 

broad-base it on everything right across the board. 

 

But no way, can't do that, can you, Mr. Associate Finance 

Minister from Swift Current? Can't do that. Because we've 

broken too many promises already. Holy . . . You wouldn't 

want to break any more just lately anyway. You've broken so 

many promises that this one would be a little too hard to 

swallow for the people of Saskatchewan, the ones that you 

haven't already kicked in the butt. 

 

Well, explain to us . . . It will be interesting, Mr. Speaker, what 

the explanation will be of selective harmonization when they 

get the opportunity. It will be interesting to hear what the 

Finance minister and associate Finance minister have to say 

when it comes to selective harmonization. How will you justify 

it? I'll bet the speech writers in your office are working 

overtime trying to figure out some clever little phrases to 

disguise what you're doing. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Just like we've seen in Health. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Yes, absolutely. Just what we've seen in Health. 

Why is selective harmonization better? Simple question. 

Maybe the member from Swift Current will put his mind to that 

for a little while. You guys are the most blatant hypocrites in 

the history of this province. 

 

(1600) 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- I've listened with great interest to the 

member's remarks. And I'm concerned with the words that the 

members is using, the last being the word "hypocrites." The 

member uses language that . . . Well I would refer the member 

to Beauchesne's citation 491 and read in part: 

 

 . . . that language used in the House should be temperate and 

worthy of the place in which it is spoken. 

 

And although I don't want to go through all of the member's 

speech, I want to just advise him of that, that he should search 

for words that are temperate, worthy of the place, and in 

particular invite him in this case to retract 

the word "hypocrites." 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize for that 

inflammatory comment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to refer people in Saskatchewan to a 

couple of things that happened over the course of the last year 

in this province. They say they listen, they're open and 

accountable, willing to listen to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, last session . . . In the last election there 

was a plebiscite. One of the plebiscite questions was with 

respect to funding of abortions in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

And the Health minister stood up and said we couldn't do it. It 

would be contravening the Canada Health Act. 

 

You could have referred it to the Court of Appeal for a 

decision. Everyone knows that. Everyone in the province of 

Saskatchewan recognizes you could have done that. But you 

didn't; you refused to do that. And the people of Saskatchewan 

are asking now, why? Why when you can deny chiropractic 

and optometric services in Saskatchewan, why won't you look 

at de-insuring another area? The people wanted it. The people 

of Saskatchewan overwhelmingly endorsed it. And yet you 

won't look at it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's an absolutely grave error that the 

government has made in that area, another area like that. The 

people of Saskatchewan want it; they said they wanted it. The 

Premier of this province stands up and says, we are an open 

and accountable government, that we will do the things in this 

province that the people want. And yet they wouldn't touch it. 

Every one of their members, when we presented the 

amendment to the Act last session, every one of their members 

stand up and voted no to that question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now people of the province of Saskatchewan realize that 

this government will not listen to them. They're going to boldly 

go about doing their plans in every area. They have no regard 

whatsoever for what . . . the wishes of the people of this 

province. No regard whatsoever. 

 

Rural people are living in complete fear of losing health care -- 

absolutely complete fear of losing their health care facilities. 

The people in my constituency, the good folks at Eatonia and 

Dodsland, absolutely are living in fear that their hospitals are 

going to close. And we'll do everything we can, Mr. Speaker, to 

fight in this province to see that those hospitals are maintained. 

 

At the SUMA convention I had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, 

to talk to the mayor of Macklin, Saskatchewan. Any of you 

familiar with it? It's not far from Cut Knife-Lloyd constituency. 

Anyway, he said they had $1.2 million in the bank and they 

want to build a hospital. 

 

He also pointed out that Macklin, whether you believe it or not, 

is the fastest growing community in Saskatchewan. It had the 

most housing starts on a per capita basis of any place in this 

province, more than Regina, more than Saskatoon, more than 

any other community in Saskatchewan. Macklin, 

Saskatchewan, is 



March 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 131 

the fastest growing town in our province. And yet he believes 

this government will deny them the opportunity to build a 

hospital. 

 

Well you know what he told me? He said, I don't care what that 

government says. We're going to build a hospital in Macklin 

and we'll fund it ourselves if we have to. That's what he said. 

He doesn't care what this government says.  He said they don't 

listen to the people of Saskatchewan. We need a new hospital 

here in Macklin, and we're going to build it. 

 

These health care changes are not fair. That's what it comes 

down to. They're not fair. Everyone knows that. It's clear. 

You've got community against community fighting out there 

right now, big communities fighting against small communities 

because they're all afraid that they may lose their hospital. 

 

The bigger communities realize that there's an opportunity for 

them, and of course they would realize that. And the smaller 

communities realize that they're going to take it right on the 

chin. They're going to lose their hospital, and it'll all be done 

under this clever, little, veiled way that they're working towards 

right now. The promise that the Premier of this province made 

at the SUMA convention -- it wouldn't be thrown on the tax 

base of property -- now we see the Health Act, it isn't going to 

deal with it in that way. It's clear, Mr. Speaker, that they are 

indeed going to do it that way, that it will fall onto the backs of 

the taxpayers of property in this province. It's clear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think Tommy Douglas would be rolling over in 

his grave if he knew what was happening today in this 

province. I think he'd expel each and every one of you from the 

party for what you're doing to health care. I think he would. I 

think he'd expel each and every one of you. 

 

Saskatchewan's residents are being treated differently, 

depending on the kind of illness they have and where they live. 

If you life in rural Saskatchewan, can't have a hospital. That's 

what you're telling them. Or you're a diabetic, too bad. The 

member from Regina Lake Centre stood up here the other day, 

Mr. Speaker, and told us all about diabetic strips. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, those used to be covered, those used to be covered. 

And now they de-insured them. The diabetics of this province 

realize that they've been betrayed. The people who require 

chiropractic services in this province realize that they've been 

betrayed. The people who require optometric services in this 

province realize they've been betrayed. 

 

How many groups haven't you betrayed? Is there any? Let's 

just go down the short little list. You betrayed farmers. That's 

clear. Everybody knows that. Betrayed health care workers. 

You betrayed the support that you have in the SGEU 

(Saskatchewan Government Employees Union), or used to 

have. You betrayed people who require health care services. 

Even talked about, for a while, about tearing up the highway 

network and betraying every motorist in Saskatchewan. You've 

betrayed everybody that has electricity in their home or a 

telephone or natural gas. 

You've betrayed everyone. Every single person in this province 

has been impacted by your betrayals. 

 

Hospital administrators have publicly denounced your most 

recent attack on health care in rural Saskatchewan. It's no 

wonder, Mr. Speaker, it's no wonder. They see clearly now 

what is happening in health care. One only has to wonder how 

many jobs will be lost as well. How many rural hospitals will 

be closed, and the people that work in those hospitals will be 

thrown out of work? They'll be bounced. 

 

What will happen, Mr. Speaker, as I say, it's fairly clear in my 

constituency. The people have already figured it out. If the 

hospital in Eatonia closes, there are some people, nurses there, 

that have worked a long time so they'll be moving over to 

Eston . . . they'll be driving over to Eston, I should say, about 

35 miles, and taking the jobs of the people that are at Eston. 

And the people that are Eston, if they don't have enough 

seniority, will be going somewhere else. We'll have health care 

workers driving all over this province trying to seek a job. 

That's what's going to happen. 

 

And what happens in the interim? Other issues that are of 

specific interest, Mr. Speaker, to my constituency are -- and all 

of Saskatchewan -- the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. In the last 

session, absolutely destroyed that program.  They were going 

to cut it off completely -- absolutely close it, shut her down, 

done like dinner. That was what was going to happen to it. 

 

But now after a considerable amount of pressure from the 

people of Saskatchewan and the opposition, you restored it in a 

skeletal form, Mr. Speaker. That's what they did. And now, the 

people of of Saskatchewan . . . We get calls on a daily basis 

about this as well. They're saying to us: what do you think we 

should do? Should we leave our money in the pension plan or 

should we take it out? 

 

We can't trust this government, it's clear. Farm families look at 

it and they say, well they changed my GRIP program. They 

took money out of my pocket there, so could they . . . do you 

think, do you think as our elected representative, do you think 

that they might, might just touch a little of that money too? 

Maybe I should get it out of there before . . . while the getting's 

good. 

 

That's what they're saying. They look at it and they say: they've 

betrayed us in every single area in this province. I'm worried. 

I'm worried sick that you'll perhaps confiscate that money. 

That's what they're saying to us and I'm sure that's what they're 

saying to you, too. Do you have any designs on that money? Is 

the Finance minister and associate Finance minister . . . have 

they any designs on taking that money? 

 

Well I sure hope not. But the residents of Saskatchewan, the 

ones that have money in that Saskatchewan Pension Plan, 

believe that that's a very real possibility. And I tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, we are counselling those people to stay in the 

program. We are saying to them: at some point in time, in 

about two years from now, after this one-term government is 

thoroughly trashed in the next election, maybe the plan would 

be reinstated by a Conservative administration. And we're 

saying to them, we're saying to 



132 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1993 

them, Mr. Speaker, stay in the program. 

 

I'm not sure, we'll see. The deadline date for withdrawals isn't 

all that far away. I believe it's March 29; I think it is. It's not 

that far away, Mr. Speaker. We're hoping that the plan will still 

be able to be kept in place. The people are worried about that. 

 

If you close the pension plan in my constituency, 15 good jobs 

will be lost. That's the direct impact in Kindersley. 

Saskatchewan residents will lose an opportunity to contribute 

to a pension. 

 

Everyone realizes the importance of pensions. As MLAs we 

have pensions. We all realize the importance of that. We all 

realize the importance of school teachers having pensions. We 

also realize the importance of nurses having pensions. We all 

realize how very important it is for providing for yourself and 

your family when it comes to your retirement years, Mr. 

Speaker. But yet the government won't reinstate the program as 

it was. 

 

Home-owners, home-makers, people with small businesses 

around this province had, for one time, they had an opportunity 

to contribute to a pension plan and they liked it. It was clear. 

Thousands and thousands of residents of this province 

contributed into that plan and they though it was good; they 

thought it was safe. But now they're worried about the safety of 

it. I don't think this government even would go that far, but 

who knows? Who knows, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I want a commitment from the Minister of Finance that the 

people of Kindersley and all plan participants can rest easy that 

she will not force a quick demise of the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan. A simple commitment to this House, Mr. Speaker, that's 

all we're asking. Keep the plan in place; keep the jobs in 

Kindersley in place; keep the opportunity for people to 

contribute to a plan. 

 

Another fear, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency, is what your 

plans are for the oil industry. What are your plans? It won't be 

long, we'll find out. Sometime mid-March we're anticipating 

the budget. What are you going to do? What are you going to 

do to the oil industry? Are we going to see oil revenue taxes 

increase? That's what they're asking me. What do you think, 

Mr. Member? Are we going to see that? Are we going to see a 

well-head tax? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to tell you a little bit about our oil 

patch in the Kindersley area. It's a very marginal field -- low 

production. Four to six barrels a day is average. They can't 

stand any increases in cost right now, absolutely can't stand it. 

The oil industry out there right now is going through a 

relatively good time. And the reason is quite simple. All of the 

major oil companies have pulled out and the smaller companies 

are buying them up. The people who have a direct stake in 

local jobs and employment, the local independents, are the ones 

that are doing it. They want the jobs and investment to stay 

there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they have lower costs. That's why they're 

able to make a few dollars out there right now in the oil patch. 

That's why they're able to do that. But, Mr. Speaker, we are 

very, very concerned that in the 

Kindersley constituency and other relatively marginal oilfields 

around this province, that we'll see an oil well-head tax. 

 

(1615) 

 

And if you look at the industry, just take the blinders off for a 

minute and look at the industry, you'll realize that the industry 

can pull up stakes and be out of here in 24 hours. And that's 

what they tell me they'll do. You just walk in, turn the valve, 

shut down the pump jack, and we're out of here -- goodbye, 

adios, I'm into Alberta. That's what they're going to say and 

that's what they're going to do. She's only a short little hop 

from Kindersley, Saskatchewan, to Red Deer. It's only a short 

little hop and they'll be moving, rest assured of that, if you jack 

the taxes too high on that. Mr. Speaker, they can slam the oil 

industry into neutral so fast that Kindersley will virtually be 

devastated -- absolutely devastated -- and other oil 

communities around this province, the same way. 

 

Hopefully the member from Battlefords realizes that -- the new 

Minister of Energy and Mines. Hopefully he's taken the time to 

consult with the industry. Hopefully he's done that. But I'm not 

so sure, Mr. Speaker, whether he has. But it's our hope in the 

Kindersley constituency that he will, before the budget, take 

the time to call up some of the people in the industry and find 

out what the impact would be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we measure this government, on every 

account it's been an abysmal failure. Agriculture, taxation, 

health care, highways, Crown corporations, taxes are all up 

right across the board. It doesn't matter what it is, it's up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can only conclude by saying I hope the people 

of Saskatchewan can hold on for a couple more years so the 

people of this province can boot this bunch of socialists out of 

office. And it's clear, Mr. Speaker, they are indeed a one-term 

government. You're the biggest bust of a government in the 

history of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an amendment to the motion 

presented by the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. And 

the motion reads as follows: 

 

 That the following words have been added to the motion: 

 

 but regret that the government continues to engage in a policy 

of betrayal, exemplified by such things as: increased SaskTel 

rates; increased SaskPower rates; increased SaskEnergy rates; 

increased vehicle registration insurance and motorists' licence 

fees; increased E&H tax; a new 10 per cent surtax on 

personal income tax; increased fuel tax; user fees for 

chiropractic services; user fees for optometric services; triple 

deductible for prescription drug plan; de-insurance of insulin; 

increased air ambulance fees; increased resident income 

charges for seniors in special day care homes; de-insurance 

of oxygen; cancelled rural natural gas distribution program; 

attacks on municipal autonomy; offloading of funding and 

debt to the local 



March 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 133 

 governments; increased breeder fees; increased pasture rental 

fees; increased farm fuel taxes; reintroduction of purple gas; 

destruction of GRIP; ignoring all plebiscite results; 

cancellation of senior citizens' heritage program; increased 

unemployment; sustained out-migration; crippling the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan; failure to deliver a workable 

economic strategy; and a general unwillingness to accept 

responsibility for real public policy in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move this motion, seconded by the member 

from Moosomin. Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- I have received the amendment by the 

member for Kindersley, seconded by the member for 

Moosomin. I find the amendment in order. And as is the 

practice for the debates on the motion on the Speech from the 

Throne, the debate will be concurrent on the amendment and 

the main motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to make a few 

comments today in regards to the throne speech. And also a bit 

of introductory reference points to the amendment. And more 

particularly to some comments, you know, implied in the 

amendment by the member. 

 

And in my comments I will be covering topics relating to 

economic development and jobs, as well as health care reform, 

education, social justice, our special action in relation to Indian 

and Metis people in the province of Saskatchewan. And then I 

will make some concluding remarks. 

 

First of all, in response to the member's comments and a lot of 

the members from opposite, I was indeed thoroughly 

disappointed. I was thoroughly disappointed because ever since 

I was elected in 1986 when I was a member of the opposition 

and now a member of the government, I was thoroughly 

disappointed because I heard the same old story. And the same 

old story is this, that the government . . . the members opposite 

are always talking about the politics of division. Whenever 

they raise something in the legislature, it's always things having 

to do . . . rural versus urban. When they first came in office, 

they didn't even know the North existed. So I could hardly even 

say whether they were against the North in the very first time, 

you know, when I was in office. So there was this politics of 

division. 

 

And then I heard the member talk about community against 

community. Not very different from what I heard, you know, 

from '86 onwards when I was in opposition. And now they're 

even talking about community against region and region 

against province. They're always talking in the negative of the 

politics of division in this province. 

 

What we're trying to do in this throne speech is provide some 

hope and opportunity for people. And here we're stuck with the 

politics of division by the members opposite. When you look at 

the politics of division, one of the other aspects that is very, 

very important in regards to their comments is this: never, ever 

do they accept 

anything, any wrongdoing in the past since 1982, since they 

were in office. 

 

When you look at the $15 billion that we're in debt in this 

province, not once will they take responsibility for it. Not once 

will they say: yes, it was because of massive give-aways or 

because there was massive increases of dollars that were either 

given to the GigaTexts, you know, across Canada or to a few of 

their friends, you know, at the community level. 

 

They will never, never really talk about that. They will never 

talk about the massive incompetence, the likes of which we had 

never seen in the province's history. You will see them 

squirming around on a daily basis at question period or in 

response to the throne speech and blaming absolutely 

everything on what has taken place in the past one and a half 

years. 

 

And what this one and a half years has presented was a new 

hope for Saskatchewan people. And we are seeing for the first 

time that the essence of any organization when a lot of people 

present the government through various forms, you know, their 

incomes so that we can run good government, you will never 

see those Tories admit for once that it was also their mistake. 

They will never admit any wrongdoing on all those years. 

 

And a lot of people are out there, having a certain degree of 

apathy in regards to politics and governing, one of the reasons 

is the great instability in the world, but the other thing is that 

that great instability that has been caused by PC (Progressive 

Conservative) government action since 1982. They can 

absolutely come to the legislature on a daily basis and have no 

remorse at all, no compassion for what the people have had to 

face in the past nine years, and also today. 

 

And wherever we look in this day and age, and we're trying to 

look for signs of hope, all we see are these two things: the 

politics of division and the refusal to take any responsibility. 

And they keep on playing off people one against the other. 

 

I think that enough is enough. I think that the people of 

Saskatchewan need to join together, whether it is business, 

whether it is labour, whether it is the unemployed, people that 

work in the farms, people that work on the trapline, people that 

work in the mines, people that work at the universities -- 

people from all over this province need to get together to create 

a new sense of hope and direction which this throne speech 

provides. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- When you look at this throne speech, 

there are many challenging items that are out there. We have 

produced a document that will be a very important part for our 

development in the next year. And what we have done is an 

important item -- we have built on what took place in even one 

year in office. We are continuing what we said we would 

continue during this period in time, even when we were in 

opposition. We said we would open the books and we would 

deal with our finances in this province. And a lot of the people 



134 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1993 

presented that challenge to us, and we are proceeding with that 

challenge. 

 

When you look at the situation in 1982, we were looking at a 

situation where this province was $139 million to the good. 

Eleven straight years of balanced budgets. Eleven straight years 

of balanced budgets by the NDP government. And when you 

look at the record of the Tories, every year the budget 

increased. Now when you look at it, the budget increased and 

the deficit increased all through those years. We kept seeing the 

expenditures go up and there was absolutely no way that they 

were looking at any form of reality in regards to their 

predictions. 

 

When I was running for the first time in 1986 and I was going 

through those years prior to then, I was trying to deal with this 

issue and we were raising this question at that point in time in 

history. We said, the Conservatives at that point in time in 

history were stating that we were going to be in a hole by 

approximately $375 million. When the facts came out, when 

they tried to buy the political vote of the province of 

Saskatchewan at that time, the record showed very clearly it 

was $1.2 billion. That was $800 million in the hole in one year 

-- $800 million. 

 

The minister from Lumsden area who got knocked off in the 

last election kept on telling us that indeed we were close to 

target at approximately $400 million, but they were $800 

million out. And a lot of the people, when you look at this 

record, still find it in disbelief. 

 

When they were accidentally elected again with a $1 billion 

promise by a person who knows when to resign -- you know, 

the Prime Minister -- a lot of the people thought that things 

were going to change in '86. But things didn't change. We kept 

on going in the hole and further and further in debt. 

 

(1630) 

 

And there was the continuation of this thing until we pretty 

well, by the time we're taking office, we're over $14 billion in 

debt. Last year when we looked at the budget, it was in 

enormous proportion in comparison to what people were 

capable of earning in this province. And a lot of people have 

been asking me: how big is this deficit and this long-term debt? 

Well the debt is about $15 billion now and last year we were 

looking at about $760 million just to pay for the interest 

payments -- $760 million. 

 

When you look at $760 million, we could do a lot in the many 

areas, of whether it's in the health field, in paying for the many 

services that we have out there in need, and also in educational 

change items that we are talking about -- whether it's in 

curriculum and instruction -- and in many areas. And we can 

pay for a lot of those things if indeed we didn't spend that 

money on the Conservative deficit and debt. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I listened to the members from 

opposite, we saw them talking about their politics of division. 

We heard them talk about trying to blame the people and not 

taking, you know, their share of what has 

happened. 

 

But the people have been very happy in relation to the new 

government because we have taken responsibility for what we 

ran on. We ran on the fact that we would be moving towards 

balancing our budget. But because of the situation we're in, it'll 

take us a long time. It took them nine years to destroy this 

province, and it will take us, you know, probably a shorter 

period of time to bring it back up. But I'll tell you, it is a real 

mess. 

 

One of the things I would like to talk about in regards to the 

throne speech is this. We look at the throne speech and most of 

the most important questions people raise is this issue of 

economic development and jobs. 

 

I look at the budget in relation to my own area, my 

constituency, Cumberland constituency in the North. And I 

look at the developments that we've had, you know, prior to 

1982 and what happened between 1982 to '91 and what we're 

trying to do now. And even in relation to a specific sector like 

mining, our record shows that we were proceeding on the road 

to success till this government came in. We were employing 

people on the new mining developments in the early '80s at 

about 50 per cent rate of employment. 

 

When the Conservatives took over, of course, they brought out 

their new strategy which did not even consider the North. And 

I still remember this. I was utterly amazed, but maybe after 

knowing this government I am no longer amazed because they 

absolutely said that the North didn't exist, even in their 

highways map. 

 

You know, I've been saying this for a few years now that in 

their highways map they said that the North was populated 

with full of beautiful lakes and rivers, but no people. And they 

said in their highway map, that '93 highway map, it said the 

North was populated with full of beautiful lakes and rivers, but 

no people. And a lot of the people were very, very disappointed 

at that time in northern Saskatchewan when the Conservatives 

were really following up with their strategy and treating the 

North as purely a resource exploitation area, and that they did 

not have any people. 

 

When we looked at that situation, Mr. Speaker, the members 

showed a great devastation in regards to the North. 

 

Sometimes when I look at it in historical terms, some of the 

members from across will wonder what am I talking about in 

regards to the concrete public accounts reality in regards to my 

comments. I would like to put forth these figures -- and I'm 

taking it in broader strokes in regards to the historical terms -- 

and I go back to the previous government prior to us in 1971, 

the Thatcher Liberal government. 

 

And when we look at the Thatcher Liberal government, Mr. 

Speaker, they did a lot of positive changes for that time in 

history in regards to having an Indian/Metis department. They 

did some changes, but when I looked at it in comparative 

historical terms although there was a little bit of an 

improvement in regard to establishing a bureaucracy in the 

province, that the amount that really 



March 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 135 

actually got down to the level of expenditure at the public 

accounts level was to the tune of 2 per cent for all of the North 

and also for Indian/Metis people in the province. The amount 

of money that was there in the budget was $8 million. 

 

When we were in office in 1982 the amount of money that we 

spent in northern Saskatchewan and for Indian/Metis people, 

and the programs from economic development to social 

development dealing with the whole area of political structures 

as well as in cultural development, we were spending at that 

time in 1982, $128 million for Indian/Metis people in the 

North. And that accounted for over 4 per cent of the budget. 

 

When the Conservatives were around, by the time they had not 

only devastated this province, they also devastated the North. 

From $128 million and over 4 per cent of the budget, the 

Conservative government by 1989 was spending $58 million 

and approximately 1 per cent of the budget. To be precise, this 

was about 1.2 per cent of the budget. 

 

In other words, they had devastated not only this province, but 

they had devastated the North. The North had been cut back a 

place where there was the highest unemployment rates. The 

province had cut back by $70 million. Over half of the money 

had been cut in the North by 1989. 

 

They were not fooling people when they said that there was 

only lakes and rivers in the North and no people. They lived up 

to that basic premise. 

 

So when we look at the record, Mr. Speaker, we are looking at 

a record now and trying to fight back with people in the North 

and trying to get people in the areas of employment. Because 

the basics of any development is being able to put food on the 

table, you know, for your own children and have a sense of 

responsibility to feel proud of what you are doing. And in 

many cases, you know, this very basics of a person's existence 

was taken away through nine years of Tory rule. 

 

So when I look at the situation, Mr. Speaker, and when I hear 

the people over there talking about the politics of division and 

having absolutely no remorse -- having absolutely no feeling, 

no compassion -- when I look at my own area in northern 

Saskatchewan and the devastation that they have caused, and 

now that they have put us in debt, and when I want to stand up 

and fight for jobs, I know I can only do it in sectoral strategies 

even in the area of mining. 

 

When they were in government, on mining alone, Mr. Speaker, 

the record in employment shows that there was a 50 per cent 

employment rate when we were in power. It dropped to about 

12, 15 per cent by 1983. 

 

They did away with everything in the North back in '82-83 

period. They did away with the Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan, they did away with the monitoring committee. 

Absolutely no involvement of people. They completely 

disregarded the people in the North and they proceeded to 

implement their own plans and strategies. The employment rate 

dropped from 50 to 

about 12, 15 per cent during that period. 

 

When we were in government in a short period of time and 

when we were in opposition, we kept on bringing up this issue 

and it slowly started improving. And I must say right now, Mr. 

Speaker, we are now at a percentage point of 42 per cent of 

Northerners being employed in the mines. 

 

There's 42 per cent now, Mr. Speaker, being employed in these 

mines. Out of that a lot of people ask me, well how many 

Indian/Metis people are employed in this new strategic effort 

by the provincial NDP government. And a lot of people are 

starting to realize that it's very important to look at this 

question in this fashion. 

 

And I must be very proud to report, Mr. Speaker, that the 

record now in the mining industry and in our cooperative, you 

know, approach with mining, is that there's now 37 per cent of 

Indian/Metis people working in the mines in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This is very important, Mr. Speaker, because now the people 

can put food on the table for their children at good paying jobs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, when we were looking at it, 

the Conservatives put a lot of people into welfare. We are 

trying to fight back to get people into the job capacity. We are 

trying to put people in good paying jobs. The paying jobs on 

most of the people in my constituency on those mines is from 

$15 an hour to $24 an hour. With the high costs of living in 

northern Saskatchewan, there was a recognition in the mining 

industry that those salaries had to be properly paid at the same 

level as any place in northern Canada. 

 

And we have recognized that fact, Mr. Speaker, and we have 

produced where a lot of Indian/Metis people worked besides 

their other brothers and sisters, you know, from across southern 

Saskatchewan and across Canada, and they're being paid at the 

same good wages that they're earning in those mines. 

 

So when I look at this, Mr. Speaker, we're looking at a new 

hope, you know, for the people in the North. We're improving 

and working along with the mining companies to produce a 

new phase in the history of mining development in the North. 

 

You know, many times when I look at the longer history, we 

used to be employed at a 2 to 5 per cent level. We are now 

approaching at a 40 per cent level. And the mining companies, 

as I said, they will be with us in moving toward a 50 per cent 

hiring level by 1995. 

 

And this is the type of strategy that people want to hear and 

listen to, rather than the politics of division that the other 

members always talked about. And this is the type of strategy 

that we are pursuing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, alongside the development, of course, we are 

proceeding to work with the federal government as well as the 

people of northern Saskatchewan in making 



136 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1993 

sure that the development is on a sustainable level. A lot of 

people talked about sustainable economic development and 

now sustainable environment. And we are trying to proceed 

along that path. And many of the members, many of the 

communities that I've talked to, you know, have raised this 

issue, not only in mining but in forestry. 

 

And we are proceeding, you know, with cooperation of course 

at the two levels of government as well as the local 

communities to try and come out with a new phase of 

development wherein we can combine economic development 

with sustainable environmental development. 

 

And I think that's very important in looking at our new 

developmental record, Mr. Speaker, because we have to update 

ourselves from time to time in history. We know that we were 

the best in the world when it come down to the 1970s and the 

strategies at that time. But now as a government we're saying, 

we still even have to improve that; we're moving along and 

progressing along in that fashion. And I'm very pleased, you 

know, to see the direction that we're moving. 

 

Many times on this strategy I recognize the strong positions 

taken by people in the environmental field, whether in regards 

to uranium or whether in regards to forestry operations or 

whether even in trapping. I know that as a person who was 

raised in trapping, we always used to have a tough time in 

regards to the animal rights people. Every time that we tried to 

do certain things . . . I know that when I was raised on a 

trapline I didn't have to rely on welfare. 

 

(1645) 

 

We lived off the land and we went out, and that's how we 

survived. Sometimes we took our . . . when I was a child 

growing up we took our books out and kept up with our math 

assignments and so on during the time that we were out on the 

trapline, and we made a good living. We didn't have to survive 

on welfare. We went and worked and lived in harmony with 

nature, and took what was necessary from there and left some 

for the following year. We practised, you know, proper 

sustainable environmental procedures before the word came 

into vogue as we now know it today. 

 

So there was many things that I learned through the process of 

being born and raised on the trapline, and learning to deal with 

the issue. But at the same time we recognized the problems of 

price fluctuations. In many instances I recognize and I can 

empathize with the issue related to many people in farming and 

when I see a lot of people in trapping because in many cases 

we both live off the land. And in many cases the weather would 

hit us bad in some years and it was a devastating thing for us, 

but we kept on standing up and fighting for our ground and 

fighting for our jobs, and we kept on going. 

 

And that's the type of spirit, you know, that I'm talking about, 

which I have seen talked about in farming which I've seen 

discussed in the trapline. And this is the type of spirit that we 

are talking about in the context of this new government and this 

new throne speech, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I want to talk about this thing on the 

environmental question, Mr. Speaker, because it is very 

important. On the trapline . . . I'll give you a little bit of history 

on what it's like to be on receiving, and we knew that we had to 

improve. We tried to on the trap line . . . on the level traps we 

tried to change to what we call stop-loss traps with strings in 

them. And then we later on changed to different types and also 

to what they call the cony bear traps. 

 

We tried to move step by step in history towards what people 

now call humane trapping methods. And we have progressed. 

And last time I went to the trappers' convention just a couple 

weeks ago, they were mentioning that to me and they were 

bringing brand-new ideas on new ways of establishing more 

humane trapping. 

 

And of course there is still a big resistance out there and I 

understand, you know, the importance of the concern for 

animals because I myself was raised in being concerned with 

animals. It's very interesting how the belief system was. And I 

would like to share a little bit of the belief system in that 

regard, as a person having been raised in that section. 

 

We had a belief where if you left an animal that was injured, to 

die, it was wrong. The belief was whatever sickness that that 

animal would befall, whatever that sickness that animal would 

get, they said . . . the belief in our community was that you 

would get that sickness. And that was the belief that we had. So 

there was a very strong belief that you don't injure animals 

unnecessarily, that you had to be able to live in harmony with 

nature and to be able to partake in the animals and partake in 

the taking of animals; and being able to clothe yourself from it 

and also to put food on the table, you know, for your own 

children. 

 

So it was a controversial thing, you know, when I was being 

raised in the '50s and also later on in the '60s. It's still a 

controversial issue today. And so it continues and we try and 

keep making improvements in that area. And I see some of the 

animal rights people have changed their position and have 

recognized the fact that trapping as a way of life is important 

for people, that it's important. 

 

And some of them have backed off and said yes, we agree with 

you. We know how hard it is to try and be put on a dependent 

position of welfare and the destruction, you know, that it 

causes in the long run; and the fact that a lot of the alcoholism 

and so on comes through a form of dependency and that we 

have to fight this dependency. And trapping in many ways is a 

person standing up for themselves and learning to survive and 

make a good living. 

 

So when I looked at it, there was many other items in the 

budget which I thought that were very good . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- In the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- On the Speech from the Throne. 



March 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 137 

There was the importance of the health care budget and the 

formation of the health care districts which we saw come to 

pass here yesterday. 

 

One of the things that was important in the development of 

northern Saskatchewan was involvement of people in decision 

making that affected their lives. It was a very important 

principle, a very important, democratic principle, Mr. Speaker. 

Because when we were doing a lot of the development in the 

North, we saw the initial stages of elected municipalities in 

northern Saskatchewan. We did that in the '70s. We saw . . . 

(inaudible) . . . development for the first time where we had 

elected school boards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to announce today that in our 

throne speech we would proceed with health care districts, and 

we passed that legislation on first reading the other day. And 

we are progressing forward to give a new voice to the people, 

not only in the municipalities area or the areas in relation to 

education, but now in health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- So, Mr. Speaker, when I hear the people 

talking about it, all I hear is community against community, 

community against region. All this plays divisional politics. 

 

And here what we are trying to do is give greater power to the 

people that affect their lives. We are giving them power into 

the health districts. And we are doing it in the fashion that is a 

true representative aspect of Saskatchewan history, and that is 

in the cooperative forum -- communities joining communities, 

communities working together. And that is the basis of the 

context on the formation of this new health districts that the 

members from across fail to realize. 

 

So when we look at this, Mr. Speaker, all we heard from the 

Tory government of the past was studies. I mean in northern 

Saskatchewan we had study this and study that. They even had 

a study in the heath care field that said the North was 

third-world medicine. But when it comes down to the facts, Mr. 

Speaker, they didn't do anything about it. They kept cutting 

back the North in regards to health. 

 

When we look at the record last year, we made some 

improvements in health, Mr. Speaker. And we are proceeding 

to work with people in developing a more improved health 

system for the North. So I'm proud of the throne speech in that 

regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- When I look, Mr. Speaker, at the concept 

of education, we had done many improvements when we were 

in government. We had done a lot of improvements in northern 

education and in Metis education, the development of the 

community college system in this province. We saw the 

development, you know, later on on different levels of 

curriculum, you know, the Directions report, and then later on 

the . . . a lot of the developments that were . . . now we're 

starting to 

see being talked about and raised on quality of education. 

These are the things that we worked on, you know, when we 

were in power before, and will continue to work on, you know, 

at this time. 

 

You will notice, Mr. Speaker, that we have done a quick 

review in this year, and this year we will be finished with the 

reviews because we feel you always have to have a continuous 

process of consultation with the people. You have to keep up to 

date with the people to know exactly where you're going. And 

that is exactly what we are doing in the processes of review in 

the questions of education and the quality of education 

improvement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I look at the question of social justice, I see 

this issue as an important question. Many times when I looked 

at the Conservative government in the nine years they were in 

power, complete disregard, you know, for the area of social 

justice. 

 

I was pleased to report, Mr. Speaker, that we are going to go 

ahead with an action plan for children. When they were around, 

children were forgotten. We are not scared to mention children 

in regards to our development and our approach. We are 

approaching this in a new direction and trying to find new 

ways, especially on dealing with, you know, working parents, 

and especially, you know, the ones that cannot get welfare but, 

you know, are in low levels of salaries and so on. So we are 

trying to proceed to a new direction in that sense. 

 

Also, I was very pleased in regards to the area of the workforce 

that we are going to deal with the question of Workers' 

Compensation Act and there will be changes on The Workers' 

Compensation Act as well as The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act. 

 

In many cases, you know, when we look at working together 

with workers of the province of Saskatchewan, we had to do it 

not only on a daily working basis, but in regards to the 

legislation that are required from time to time. So I'm pleased 

to report, you know, that development in that sense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to report in the area of aboriginal 

peoples. Indian/Metis peoples in this province have become, 

you know, not only . . . have become very important in the 

modern day likes with our constitutional practices, but in 

relation also to the mining development in the North and being 

part of the workforce. But also being, you know, part of the 

new entrepreneurial activities that are taking place in this 

province. 

 

Many of the bands, many of the Metis communities, have 

become entrepreneurs in their own right. I might say, Mr. 

Speaker, that from straightforward historical terms, that the 

first entrepreneurs in Canada, you know, were related to the fur 

trade, and those would have been Indian and Metis people. 

 

And you know, the basis of the fur trade, you know, was an 

important part of our Canadian history. And I'm very proud to 

say that, you know, as a person of aboriginal ancestry, that 

indeed we have made this recognition known in our action in 

just a year and a half. I'm pleased to report this year that we 

will be moving ahead with the 



138 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1993 

treaty land entitlement legislation. 

 

In many years when you look at the history of land in this 

province and the fact that of a lot of farm lands are being lost, 

you know, to the financial institutions, and we look at the 

whole history of land, a lot of people don't know the 

development of land history. And I might say that the Indian 

people in regards to the outstanding land entitlement were very 

pleased when we finally get . . . when we finally resolve it. 

 

I might say, Mr. Speaker, that this land entitlement issue was 

matched in regards to other moves in regards to the Metis 

people of the province. The tripartite agreement a few days ago 

with the federal government and the province shows our 

dedication also to the Metis people, and recognizing the 

strengths that they have from the past and that we're also 

building in the future and that we will be working with them in 

this regard. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to say that I support the throne 

speech. I know that it presents many challenges, but I think it 

also presents a hope. It presents a hope for all the people in the 

province to work together, presents a new vision for the 

province of Saskatchewan against the division, the politics of 

division and fear, that we have seen in the past. 

 

We want to move forward and say, here is a new direction for 

not only the people in the rural areas but in the urban areas and 

in the North. Let's move forward and say yes to the throne 

speech and no to the amendment that was done. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, seeing that it is close to 5, I beg leave to 

adjourn the debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 

 


