




















































Hansard: June 15, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2519 

 June 15, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, on behalf 

of residents of Saskatchewan I'd like to present some petitions 

this afternoon.  I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from Regina, Tisdale, 

Arborfield, Nipawin, and Maryfield areas of Saskatchewan.  I'll 

present them now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I, as well, 

have some petitions to present to the House, and I'd like to read 

the prayer. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by individuals 

from Maryfield, Moosomin, Wapella, Spy Hill areas -- 

south-east part of the province -- and from Fairlight as well.  I 

so present them. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have several 

petitions to lay on the Table today, Mr. Speaker, and I will read 

the prayer. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These, Mr. Speaker, come from the area of Assiniboia and 

Lafleche and Swift Current, down in that country.  I would like 

to lay them on the Table now. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a 

number of petitions to present today.  The prayer reads: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from North Portal, Estevan, 

Alameda, Lampman, Frobisher, Kincaid, Woodrow, 

Assiniboia, Rockglen, Mossbank, Codette, Nipawin, Wood 

Mountain, Willow Bunch, Bengough, Limerick, Melaval, all 

across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to present these 

now. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I as well have 

petitions to present on behalf of people of Saskatchewan.  The 

prayer reads as such: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. governance and 

financing arrangement. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

From the communities of Rama, Invermay, Buchanan, Vonda, 

Ebenezer, Cudworth, Prud'homme, and Saskatoon.  And I'll 

table these now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

add the voice of many, many Saskatchewan residents to those 

that my colleagues have brought forward in a petition which 

states, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people have signed up coming from such 

diverse areas as Mossbank, Grandview, Moose Jaw, Chaplin, 

Chamberlain, Central Butte - 

_ page over there, another page from Central Butte, Elkhorn, 

Moosomin, and indeed quite a number here from Saskatoon as 

well, Mr. Speaker.  And it gives me pleasure to lay these on the 

Table on behalf of the petitioners this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My petition today 

reads this way: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



2520 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 1993 

I have petitioners here from Rocanville, St. Lazare, Tantallon, 

Weyburn, Moosomin, Maryfield, and Weyburn.  I present them 

to the Assembly today. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure 

today to bring to this Assembly the names of many 

Saskatchewan people who . . . and I'll only read the petition, 

Mr. Speaker, read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have citizens from many communities 

around the province -- Bracken, Saskatchewan; Orkney, 

Climax, Admiral, Frontier, Eastend, Claydon, Admiral, 

Ravenscrag, Moose Jaw, Mortlach, Caron, Parkbeg -- citizens 

from all over the province that I present today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a 

petition, but this is regarding the Condie to Queen Elizabeth 

power line. 

 

 We the undersigned landowners, renters, and persons 

affected by and interested in opposing the construction of a 

230 kV transmission line from Condie to Queen Elizabeth 

humbly pray that our signatures to this letter signifies our 

opposition to the said line construction. 

 

And there are the signatures of 25 people from Saskatchewan. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province praying that the Assembly cause 

the government to reverse its decision to single out diabetics 

in the drug plan; 

 

 Of citizens of the province praying that the Assembly cause 

the government to reverse its decision to discontinue funding 

for health care facilities; 

 

 And of citizens of the province praying the Assembly 

postpone consideration of The Health Districts Act. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Special Committee on Regulations 

 

Deputy Clerk: -- Mr. Toth, chair of the Special Committee on 

Regulations, presents the committee's 

second report. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's my 

pleasure to present today, seconded by the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton, the second report of the Special Committee on 

Regulations concurred in. 

 

I just want to indicate that your committee has reviewed a 

number of by-laws and regulations regarding the Assembly 

process.  And what we've found, Mr. Speaker, in a number of 

cases . . . in our most recent meeting we took the time to try 

and do some follow-up on a number of requests that had gone 

forward, and would add that in some cases we've had good 

response and good support from ministers responsible for 

different areas of regulations and by-laws and other areas.  

We're still waiting for a response and we will continue to 

follow up, but at this period of time we're pleased to present 

our report to the House. 

 

And I want to thank all members for their work and diligence 

and their involvement in the process of the committee. 

 

I therefore move, seconded by the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton: 

 

 That the second report of the Special Committee on 

Regulations be concurred in. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to concur 

with the motion and I would just like to make a couple of 

remarks.  The work of the Special Committee on Regulations is 

a function of the legislature which is rather important in the 

sense that it serves as a watchdog and double-check on all of 

the regulations that are made by the members of the cabinet 

and passed subsequent to any Act.  And quite often the work 

that is done is a result of follow-up requested by people who 

are affected by the regulations.  And usually it's a matter of 

clarification. 

 

During the work of the committee and also work of the cabinet 

this year, they tried to introduce . . . made several attempts to 

introduce new efficiencies.  And one of the things that this 

committee was able to do was result in a saving of about 

anyplace from 12,000 to $20,000 over this year as a result of 

transferring the work from an outside hired legal firm to asking 

the Legislative Law Clerk to do the work for the committee. 

 

This was done by eliminating some duplications right within 

the government.  I'm very pleased that the $750 a day that it 

used to cost us for outside help, we are now able to do inside.  

And it shows that the government's . . . another step, small step, 

but put them all together, Mr. Speaker, they all add up to a 

savings for the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 



June 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2521 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the other members of the 

legislature, 27 grades 7 to 10 students from the Prud'homme 

School.  Prud'homme is on the southern boundary of my 

constituency and it's a very, very nice community.  The people 

there are comprised of people from many ethnic backgrounds, 

and certainly they've come together to form a very vibrant 

community.  Mr. Speaker, the students are accompanied here 

today by their teachers, Mr. Stephen Kemp and Mr. Larry 

Bodnar; as well, their chaperons, Mr. Gilbert Leray and Mr. 

and Mrs. Ken and Lucy Miskolczi; also the bus driver Sandra 

Bodnar. 

 

I will be meeting with the students and the teachers and 

chaperons after question period to have some refreshments 

with them and to discuss some of the activities that happened 

here today.  I would ask all members to welcome them very 

warmly here today.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

introduce through you, and to you, to the members of the 

Assembly two constituents of mine from Eston, Blaine and 

Loreen Ilott.  They are here to enjoy the proceedings this 

afternoon, as well as take in the Farm Progress Show.  Mr. and 

Mrs. Ilott are good friends and neighbours of mine, Mr. 

Speaker, and I'd wish all members of the Assembly to give 

them a warm welcome to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Whitespruce Youth Treatment Facility 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

would like to say to anybody listening that if this session has 

proven one thing, it is that the NDP government opposite will 

say anything at any given time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the opposition asked about rural health care 

the Minister of Health told Saskatchewan people that there 

would be no hospital closures.  None, she said.  Scare tactics, 

she said. 

 

Well the truth has finally come out.  Mr. Speaker, I take you 

back to March 10 when the member from Moosomin asked the 

Minister of Health about the future of the Whitespruce Youth 

Treatment facility.  She said, and I quote: 

 

 . . . the Department of Health will be doing a paper on 

institutional services within the province and how it should 

break down in the future.  And that's going to be coming out 

very soon, within a few weeks. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of Health. 

Madam Minister, three months later I have yet to see any study, 

paper, or announcement about what you intend to do with 

Whitespruce.  Madam Minister, was the March 10 answer just 

another ploy to avoid the question?  If there has been a study, 

will you table it today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 

minister who's attending the rural health conference in Prince 

Albert today, Mr. Speaker, I can inform the member that the 

Department of Health, officials of the Department of Health, 

now are working with each of the institutional facilities that are 

funded by the Department of Health.  We are conducting a 

review.  Mr. Speaker, I do look forward personally to travelling 

and visiting those institutions myself as soon as the legislature 

finishes its sitting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We will have to 

settle for the associate minister then.  Mr. Member, your 

answer on March 10 of your minister was unequivocal.  She 

said, and I quote: 

 

 . . . information with respect to institutions and institutional 

sector in Regina and across the province will be forthcoming 

in the weeks to come . . . 

 

That's what she said on March 10.  She promised that a study 

on the future of Whitespruce and other institutions would be 

coming out within weeks.  And of course today is June 15.  So 

the answer is obviously going to be different, right?  Mr. 

Minister, your department employees seem to be willing to tell 

the truth when they are asked.  Your department has informed 

us that your NDP government plans to cut the beds available 

for addiction treatment in Whitespruce in half -- in half, Mr. 

Minister.  Mr. Minister, is that the rest of the story?  Will you 

confirm that that is what you have planned for Whitespruce, 

that you have had this plan in the makings all along? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, again we have an example 

in this legislature of members of the opposition, certainly not 

deliberately, but misleading this legislature.  In March the 

member from Moosomin comes into this legislature and says as 

if it were fact, you people are closing the Whitespruce 

treatment facility -- closing; he said that.  Now today, these 

weeks later, the member from Rosthern comes in and says, 

well your plan . . . now we know for sure your plan is to cut the 

beds in half at Whitespruce. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I will explain to the member the plan.  The 

plan is to review all of our in-patient facilities, all of them 

across the province; that includes Whitespruce and the 

programing at Whitespruce.  As part of that review I will be 

visiting each of those facilities over the course of the next few 

weeks. 



2522 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 1993 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- First of all, Mr. Speaker, in response, this is 

what your department is telling us and the workers out at 

Whitespruce.  This is the information that we're getting from 

them.  So, Mr. Minister, you cannot be believed any more.  

You've given too many wrong answers in this Assembly.  

You've been too anxious to provide inaccurate and misleading 

information.  You have no credibility, Mr. Minister. 

 

Your department, I would suggest, does have credibility.  They 

tell us that in spite of a waiting-list at Whitespruce you are 

taking half of the beds away for treating Saskatchewan children 

and that part of that facility now is going to become a detention 

centre for delinquent youths.  Mr. Minister, is that accurate?  Is 

that it?  Are you taking half the beds used to treat and 

rehabilitate young adults and turning them into jail cells?  Is 

that the case?  Or are you saying that your department is not 

telling the truth?  Which is it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I will repeat for the 

member from Rosthern and for all members of the Assembly 

the current situation.  The current situation is that we are -- 

Department of Health officials together with myself -- are 

reviewing all of our institutional in-patient facilities for 

addictions treatment across the province.  Mr. Speaker, on the 

basis of that entire review, we will then be making 

recommendations and making decisions.  To this point there 

are no decisions made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you 

will admit that review is a euphemism for saying things are 

done but we don't want to tell you the results of what the 

decision that we have made.  Mr. Minister, that's the record of 

your government. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, will you admit that placing juvenile 

delinquents with youths being rehabilitated for substance abuse 

and addiction is not an ideal situation?  Mr. Minister, what of 

the treatment space that will be lost?  This is the only treatment 

of this kind in western Canada and it has a waiting-list.  Taking 

those beds away will surely mean even longer waiting-lists and 

a deterioration of services of those teenagers and young people 

suffering with that illness. 

 

Mr. Minister, it seems you will be content in jailing them rather 

than treating them, probably because it's cheaper.  Is that what 

your wellness model is all about, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure that that kind 

of a preamble to a question deserves much serious response. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I repeat again for the member, we are conducting 

a review of all of our in-patient treatment 

facilities.  We need to maximize the limited resources that are 

available to us in all aspects of health care to provide health 

care to the needs of Saskatchewan people, young and old. 

 

Now if, Mr. Speaker, the member from Rosthern has a different 

definition for what review means, I assume that's a definition 

he used when he was in government.  That is not the case here.  

This is a review of all of those facilities.  It will be conducted 

carefully, and in cooperation and in consultation with those 

facilities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Member, I want 

to remind you that three months ago your minister said: within 

weeks a definitive plan will be announced.  Workers, 

concerned parents and youth are still waiting, Mr. Member. 

 

Now your party was the one that congratulated the previous 

administration for implementing this program for our 

province's youths.  You agreed with us that this treatment was 

long overdue.  And you agreed that this kind of a centre was 

the best place of treatment rather than in the home where 

conditions are extremely difficult for rehabilitation. 

 

Now what appears, that you're doing another NDP back flop, 

another flip-flop.  Now it seems that Saskatchewan's human 

resource is not important after winning the election. 

 

Mr. Minister, the fall-back rate for young adults in a 

community-based treatment program is over 90 per cent -- the 

fall back.  Compare that to the current rate in Whitespruce, 

which is under 5 per cent, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you not admit that the best place to treat 

young adults is in this centre and that your plan to eliminate 

half the spaces is much like your wellness plan -- ill-conceived, 

ill-planned, and ill-timed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, for young people or for 

adults who may have an addictions problem, almost on an 

individual basis, the appropriate treatments will differ.  For 

some, institutional in-patient care is the most appropriate 

treatment.  For others, treatment in home and in community is 

the appropriate treatment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the goal of the review and the goal of this 

Department of Health, of this government, is to provide with 

the limited resources available to us, the most effective and 

appropriate treatment for young people with addictions and for 

all people in our province who may find themselves in the 

tragic circumstance of being addicted to alcohol or drugs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Economic Policies 



June 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2523 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier and it centres around the Premier's 

chronic inability to tell the truth. 

 

Mr. Premier, why do you insist on telling different versions of 

the truth depending on whom you're speaking to -- the New 

York speech and the Harris speech. 

 

Mr. Premier, yesterday Statistics Canada said that we had the 

worst economic record in Canada in 1992 -- negative economic 

growth of 3.5 per cent.  So rather than addressing the problem, 

you go off to the Rotary Club and tell them that the growth this 

year is going to be between 2.7 per cent and 3.9 per cent in 

1993. 

 

Mr. Premier, that sounds pretty good.  But you know it isn't 

true.  The Conference Board of Canada is predicting 1.8 per 

cent growth, one of the slowest growth rates in Canada.  The 

Toronto Dominion Bank is predicting 1.5 per cent growth. 

 

Mr. Premier, where did you dream up the numbers that you 

told the Rotarians yesterday?  And instead of spending your 

time making up numbers to show what a great job you're doing, 

why don't you do something to address the real hurt that the 

Saskatchewan people are feeling? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm afraid the hon. 

members opposite would not recognize truth if it hit them in 

the face.  And nine years -- nine years, member from Wilkie -- 

nine years you told the people of Saskatchewan that you would 

balance the budget, and nine years you racked up deficits 

which now have put us $16 billion in the hole.  And you have 

the audacity about telling the truth.  Shame on you.  That's why 

you're running in third position, and we're going to finish you 

off in the next election finally and completely. 

 

Those numbers that are in that speech are numbers which come 

as the result of a variety of external estimates of our economic 

development.  Some are lower as you have cited; some are 

higher.  And the Department of Finance figures that are set out 

there, that's where the numbers come from. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, you said 

the numbers are between 2.9 per cent and 3.9 per cent.  The 

Conference Board of Canada says it is 1.8 per cent.  You stand 

in this legislature every day, Mr. Premier, and say to us that we 

should try and be a little more positive, Mr. Premier.  I'm going 

to take you up on that offer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Premier, I'm going to take you up on that 

offer.  I was reading through the Conference Board of Canada's 

economic forecast, and in spite of the 

dismal overall outlook they are painting for our province, they 

do point to a few positives, Mr. Premier.  They say the Husky 

oil refinery is a positive.  They say Crown Life is a positive.  

They say the Meadow Lake pulp mill is a positive.  They say 

Saferco is a positive.  They say that relocation of FCC (Farm 

Credit Corporation) is a positive. 

 

Funny thing, Mr. Premier.  These are all projects that came 

about as a result of the previous administration, Mr. Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So you can see, Mr. Premier, the opposition can 

be very positive if only you'd give us something to be positive 

about, other than made-up numbers, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, when are you going to start addressing the issues 

of economic growth instead of making up numbers and hoping 

the problem will go away? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, the member . . . Mr. 

Speaker, the member's . . .  I must say that in my judgement the 

questioning that the members have had, not only this question 

period but throughout this entire session, lacks so much 

credibility by virtue of concocted statements which these 

people through their back-room boys draft in question period, 

that it's hard to know where to start the answer. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Back-room boys.  They would resent 

that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well I don't think they should resent 

that at all.  I think it's quite an honour that they have actually 

seduced you people into reading those questions.  So I give 

them the credit; I don't give you the credit.  I think they got you 

boys buffaloed over there. 

 

I don't know where one goes with a question which is so far off 

the mark like that, but I can only say, Mr. Speaker, that the 

proof of the pudding will be in the eating, when the figures for 

'93 come out.  Every external analyst of the Saskatchewan 

situation has indicated that there will be growth.  I said some 

say less; some say more. 

 

The numbers that we give are Department of Finance figures 

based on the information which we have, as the record shows.  

Yes, the Department of Finance last year were almost bang on, 

unlike yours over nine years.  For the first time; unlike yours. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan are more 

optimistic.  They are following the pattern of partnership that 

my colleague, the Minister of Economic Development who has 

just returned from an engagement in Melfort, is pleased to talk 

about.  We're on the upswing, notwithstanding the doom and 

gloom of the people opposite. 



2524 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 1993 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Premier, you said last year that the Conference Board 

suggested that you were bang on, bang on in your prediction of 

economic growth.  That's true, Mr. Premier, you were bang on 

-- 3.9 per cent downturn in the economy.  You were bang on all 

right, sir.  We had a shrinkage in the economy of 3.9 per cent 

as a result of your policies. 

 

Mr. Premier, when you spoke with the Rotarians, you used 

your luncheon to make up falsehoods designed to discredit the 

co-op movement. Fortunately someone from the co-op was 

there to point out how your versions of the truth differ 

depending on who you're speaking to.  The vice-president of 

CCRL (Consumers' Co-operative Refineries Ltd.) says that you 

have disseminated misinformation about the deal in an attempt 

to discredit FCL (Federated Co-operatives Ltd.).  That's what 

the vice-president said, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, you don't want to negotiate with the co-op.  You 

want to legislate the deal. That's your goal, Mr. Premier.  You 

want to legislate . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  I want the member to put his question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker.  You want to expropriate and 

you are prepared to do everything you can to push your 

political agenda to the forefront, Mr. Premier.  Why don't you 

just tell the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  I've been listening 

to the member and not only is he very long in his questions, but 

he's on the fringe of being very unparliamentary by using . . . 

Order, order. 

 

I say to the member from Kindersley to please come back to 

parliamentary language and to put his question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, will you 

tell the people of the co-op movement in Saskatchewan that 

you will not legislate an end to the upgrader over in northern 

Regina here.  Will you legislate or will you negotiate, Mr. 

Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, after that rather 

long-winded and, I might say regretfully, sorry diatribe by a 

young member who really should be coming to this legislature 

with a slightly elevated, more elevated approach in his rhetoric 

and his tone -- but you do whatever you want to do.  It's up to 

you entirely -- after that diatribe all that I can say is the 

following. 

 

Mr. Dahlstrom's recommendations as he articulated to me at 

that speech were all looked after by Mr. Justice Estey.  Mr. 

Justice Estey had all of that information -- all of that 

information -- and he still concluded that the project had run 

financially 

aground and that we had to have something done with the debt. 

 

Now the second aspect of your question is: do we want to 

legislate or do we want to negotiate?  The answer is we want a 

negotiated settlement.  The Conservative government and Mr. 

Bill McKnight have indicated that they're prepared to buy the 

principles of Estey.  We've indicated we're prepared to buy the 

principles of Estey.  FCL has not so indicated they're prepared 

to buy the principles of Estey. 

 

In the absence of their agreement, supported by you people 

who of course were behind this deal which has encumbered 

Saskatchewan to the extent of $600 million, we have no deal.  

If the choice is no deal, period, versus legislation, regretfully 

there will be legislation.  Because the one thing that we will not 

do is sit back and hope that the taxpayers' interests are 

protected.  That policy of prayer may be yours, sir; it's not ours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, while you 

can take great joy in trying to discredit anyone who disagrees 

with you, it is you and your government that is discrediting this 

province, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier. 

 

In 1991, Mr. Premier, you said: party people and defeated 

MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and candidates 

ought not to serve on government boards.  That's what you 

said, Mr. Premier.  If we do not succeed in this and continue to 

appoint party hacks, then we have not gotten anywhere.  That's 

what you said, Mr. Premier.  In estimates later this afternoon, 

we are going to be addressing those concerns of the people, Mr. 

Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, how can you tell the people of this province of 

Saskatchewan that you are not going to be filling this Regina 

with NDP hacks when that is exactly what you've done since 

you have taken office, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, this is the most 

amazing diatribe from the member opposite.  If the members 

care to read an article on patronage, I would refer them to the 

Les MacPherson article in the Star-Phoenix recently that talked 

about the appointment of Dave Tkachuk.  And what he said at 

that time, it's like rifling through the refrigerator for a snack 

and going to that bottom drawer and getting out the decrepit 

broccoli -- that's what he compared the appointment of Dave 

Tkachuk to.  It's like rifling through the fridge for a snack and 

going to the bottom drawer and finding the decaying broccoli 

and choosing that as your snack. 

 

That's what you chose -- your federal government, the new 

Prime Minister, that's the kind of people that they're people . . . 

that they're appointing.  For you to criticize this government is 

absolutely ridiculous. 



June 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2525 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, you responded to my colleague and 

said that the proof will be in the eating.  Well I want to tell you, 

give you a sample of what the folks ate in the province of 

Saskatchewan in 1991, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: Star-Phoenix, 

September 21:  the party has also promised to abolish the 

provincial flat tax.  NDP party.  Moose Jaw Times-Herald, 

October 17: but we're not going back to taxing people.  

Leaders' debate, October 5, '91:  the PST is not going to be 

around after October 21 if we're in power.  Member from 

Riversdale.  Star-Phoenix, October 12: creating more jobs will 

also stimulate revenue without raising taxes. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that's what the folks ate and what we've got 

today, as my colleague points out, is the big bellyache of rotten 

green apples that the Premier has delivered to the people of 

Saskatchewan.  The economics of this province, Mr. Premier, 

are a mess. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, simple question:  the people ate what you 

offered in the fall of 1991.  Mr. Premier, here's the proof.  What 

do you say about what they ate in 1991?  Were you right then, 

or are you wrong now?  Which is it, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's very difficult to 

take that member seriously and I keep having to remind myself 

that he's the supposed leader of that political opposition on the 

other side of the Assembly.  But I want to say to you, Mr. 

Member, the key initiative that we explained to the people 

before the election was getting the $15 billion debt under 

control.  We campaigned on that, and that is exactly what we 

are doing. 

 

I might add there is a great deal of difficulty doing that when 

we have a federal government that insists on appointing people 

like Dave Tkachuk to the Senate at a cost of millions of dollars 

to the Canadian taxpayers -- a lot of that, of course, being 

shared by the Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

But I say to you that the goal of getting the debt under control 

has been in many ways achieved and we are now moving on to 

growing the economy and I think that 1993 results will clearly 

indicate that we're winning on that as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I can see why the 

Premier and his government would rather talk about the 

patronage appointments of some other government rather than 

their own broken promises.  The question that has to be 

answered, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier should have the 

courage to ask when he goes to groups like the Rotarians in 

Regina, is why in the face of all of the promises made in the 

fall of 1991 that he doesn't own up to the fact that his 

government is taxing Saskatchewan residents into the ground, 

that as a result of that we have the city of Swift Current 

shopping in Medicine Hat.  We have no growth in our 

economy and people continually asking to meet with this 

Premier to straighten out the economic mess. 

 

Mr. Premier, I'll ask you again:  in the face of the promises that 

you made to Saskatchewan people about no new taxes -- and 

you said the proof is in the eating -- why won't you take this 

opportunity before this House closes to confirm that you're 

meeting with Saskatchewan business leaders on a summit 

where you go and tell them the honest goods instead of going 

to people like the Rotarians and misleading them. 

 

Will you do that, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that I don't know what he has against the 

Rotarians.  They're an organization that serves Saskatchewan 

people well. 

 

But what I do want to say, Mr. Member from Thunder Creek, 

that this government is working with business people every 

day.  I just returned from a meeting of the chamber of 

commerce in Melfort.  The mood in that group was very 

optimistic.  They have opened 10 businesses in Melfort in the 

last year -- not because of government policy, but because there 

is belief in the communities of Saskatchewan. 

 

But I want to say, when it comes to the appointment and waste 

of taxpayers' money, I want to again to refer to a quote from 

the Les MacPherson column where he says: 

 

 Tkachuk, you may recall, was for many years the chief hack 

for the Devine administration, the most scandalous and least 

competent government this province has ever known. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, that is the problem 

that we are trying to clean up.  After 10 years of that kind of 

waste and mismanagement, you can't expect us to get it done in 

12 months, but give us four years and we'll have turned this 

province around along with the business community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Community Health Centres 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise to inform the House 

of a significant new development in the course of bringing 

about health reform in Saskatchewan. 

 

I've just now returned from the rural health conference in 

Prince Albert.  At this conference it was my pleasure to release 

a report entitled, "A Guide to Community Health Centres in 

Saskatchewan."  We expect that community health centres will 

be the 



2526 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 1993 

cornerstones of the health care delivery system throughout 

rural Saskatchewan. Along with ensuring access to a variety of 

health programs and services, they will also serve as the focal 

point for health promotion within their districts. 

 

The purpose of the document released today is to help 

individual health districts develop and deliver services to 

Saskatchewan residents.  It describes in detail the anticipated 

role of community health centres and how they fit into the 

health district model.  More specifically the guide outlines the 

major programs and services these centres could provide along 

with practical information that will help local districts plan and 

operate their centres.  In a sense it's a how 

_to book.  It outlines the range of services that may be 

provided, from health promotion and prevention, to 

assessment, coordination, and integration. 

 

Last, but certainly not least, it addresses the various treatment 

and care services and defines them in more detail.  Finally, the 

document provides information to health district planners on 

how to actually establish and operate a centre.  It addresses 

matters like location, hours of operation, and costs, the kind of 

down-to-earth information local officials will need to get their 

centres up and running. 

 

The establishment of community health centres within local 

health districts is an important step towards making the 

wellness approach to health care a reality.  For this reason we 

consider this new guide to be of considerable significance and 

I'm sure of interest to all members.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

I'd like to respond to the statement that you have just made and 

unfortunately it seems that the people of the province normally 

get information like this before the members of the legislature.  

But certainly considering some of the Bills before the House, 

that seems to be normal practice for you. 

 

But, Madam Minister, I do look forward to eventually getting a 

copy of that community health centres guide from you.  And 

you know what, Madam Minister, that I expect that having 

looked at what you've read for us this afternoon, I will now 

expect that this paper, once I have it in my hands, is going to 

outline exactly what people in this province are going to 

receive in so far as . . . an example, alcohol treatment that has 

been offloaded by you. 

 

(1445) 

 

That was a centre of discussion during question period, Madam 

Minister.  What is going to happen to Whitespruce?  What is 

going to happen to Calder Centre?  What is going to happen to 

Myers House?  And unfortunately we know what has happened 

to Myers House in spite of manifestations and protestations by 

the Minister of Labour prior to the election that indeed centres 

like this -- important, significant centres, wellness centres as 

such -- be given the appropriate 

and adequate amount of funding so that they will be able to 

perform the duties that they have been charged with. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I'm looking forward in your paper that it 

will be most enlightening and will assure the people of this 

province that they do not have as much to fear from your 

government as it seems apparent at this time. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I expect that your paper will outline what 

role laid-off health workers are going to have in these 

community centres.  How many laid-off workers, Madam 

Minister, will be employed in community centres, and how 

many families can rest easy, as a result of this paper, that they 

will not have to relocate. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, I say to Madam Minister, I expect that 

this paper will outline government funding to help districts so 

that they will be able to determine if they have enough money 

to operate a community health district or a community health 

centre or not.  That is what they're waiting for, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Further I expect that this paper will tell us whether the Minister 

of Health pulled acute care funding from 52 facilities in rural 

Saskatchewan as a cost-saving measure or because the facilities 

were not being utilized or was it because that the previous 

government happened to build those facilities.  I expect . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  I think the 

member knows that in a minister's statement, the minister's 

statement is to be short and the response is to be short.  And the 

member has already almost taken twice as much time as the 

minister did in her statement, so I want him to wrap up this 

statement, please. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- A couple of points, Mr. Speaker, and then I 

will conclude.  Madam Minister, I simply tell you that I further 

expect your paper to tell us exactly what the Minister of Health 

will do once all of the health districts are formed, and then you 

simply will have no reason to be in cabinet; everything is out of 

your realm of responsibility. 

 

I expect the paper will give definitive answers to these 

questions and others that people, particularly in rural 

Saskatchewan, have.  Maybe the paper will tell us once and for 

all what exactly the government's health reform policy is all 

about.  People want to know, Madam Minister; they want to 

know what kind of health care they will have access to once the 

NDP government's health reform is complete.  People do not 

want the government to continue playing with their lives and 

the lives of those around them, Madam Minister. 

 

The Speaker: -- Does the member from Saskatoon Greystone 

have leave? 

 

Leave granted. 



June 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2527 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  I wish to take this opportunity 

to commend the minister, and in particular, those people who 

worked on the guide.  It is extremely important that the citizens 

of Saskatchewan begin to have some tangible evidence that the 

government indeed has a plan and a specific kind of plan for 

health care in the province. 

 

Now change, as we know, is always a very difficult thing for 

people because we're fearful of the unknown just naturally.  

And the more specific information that your government can 

provide, Madam Minister, the more quickly that the people of 

Saskatchewan will feel reassured. 

 

I look forward with great anticipation, actually, to receive a 

copy of your community health centres guide. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the House now go to 

the Committee of Finance. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

 That the House now move into the Committee of Finance, the 

Executive Council in particular. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

 

The Chair: -- At this time I would like to ask the Premier to 

please introduce his officials to the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

I'd like to introduce to the legislature, first to my left seated 

here, the deputy minister to the Premier's office, Mr. Ron 

Clark.  To my right is the chief of staff to the Premier's office, 

Mr. Garry Aldridge.  Directly behind me is the director of 

administration, Don Wincherauk.  Seated to his left is the 

senior policy adviser for policy and planning, Ms. Louise 

Greenberg.  And behind Mr. Wincherauk is the administrative 

budget and personnel officer, Ms. Bonita Heidt. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Premier, one of 

the major failings of your government is your record on 

patronage.  If it isn't the worst example of your broken 

promises, it is tied for second place with about 10 other things 

that you've broken your promise on as well, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, you gave your solemn promise to the people of 

Saskatchewan that patronage was not going 

to happen under your administration, that that type of thing was 

finished, it's something of the past, your government was not 

going to engage in that sort of thing, Mr. Premier. 

 

On March 1, 1991, you said:  partisan people, party people, and 

defeated MLAs and candidates ought not serve on government 

boards.  If we don't succeed in this and continue appointing 

party hacks, then we've gotten nowhere. 

 

Mr. Premier, your government has developed an extensive list 

of breaking that promise.  Mr. Premier, not only you have 

made those kinds of statements about your government but as 

well the Attorney General has made those statements as well.  

On May 6, 1992, he said: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, we have committed ourself to the appointment 

of qualified people and we have committed ourself to the 

principle that we will not be making patronage appointments, 

and we have not. 

 

Mr. Premier, there is ample evidence to suggest that you have 

broken your promise to the people of Saskatchewan on this 

issue.  And we can go through them one by one if you like, and 

perhaps that would be the best way of doing it for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Don Ching is an example of where you broke your promise, 

Mr. Premier.  Zach Douglas is an example of where you broke 

your promise, Mr. Premier.  Dickson Bailey, Howard Leeson, 

Sharon Mitchell, Terry Bekolay, Terry Stevens, Lorne Johnson, 

Ted Boyle.  The list goes on and on and on, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, in light of the fact that you made the promise to 

the people of Saskatchewan that you would not be doing that 

sort of thing, you would not be engaging in patronage, why 

then have you engaged in such a long list of doing exactly that?  

Why is that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you very much 

for the member's question.  But like all -- I shouldn't say all, 

but most questions that the hon. member raises, his assumption 

is false to begin with.  He says, why is it that you have such a 

long list of patronage.  Well the answer is we do not have a 

long list of patronage. 

 

What the hon. member disputes is the appointment of some 

people and then he throws those people under the rubric of 

patronage.  For example, he indicates, mentioning one name, 

Mr. Don Ching, who worked in the former administrations of 

government and has had extensive experience as a deputy 

minister of Labour; has had the experience of Crown 

Investments Corporation head; has been involved in the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan.  This is a person who he 

describes as patronage, simply because he doesn't subscribe to 

the appointment of Mr. Don Ching. 

 

Well you may not subscribe to Mr. Ching's 



2528 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 1993 

appointment, or to that whole list of appointments, but it is 

incorrect to say that that is an example of patronage.  I will tell 

you what an example of patronage is.  Patronage is people that 

you do not necessarily agree with their appointment, but 

patronage is the appointment of people whose sole criteria for 

appointment is their political connection and their political 

qualifications and their political work done for the governing 

party. 

 

For example, Mr. Bob Andrew -- do you know him?  Do you 

know who he is, Mr. Member?  You're not acknowledging who 

he is.  Well I'll tell you who is.  He is your predecessor, the 

MLA from Kindersley, PC.  He gets a trade emissary at the 

Saskatchewan trade office in Minneapolis at a salary of 

$97,000, having had no previous experience about trade.  That 

is patronage. 

 

Mr. Eric Berntson -- do you know who Mr. Eric Berntson is? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I know him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- You know him.  Yes, the member 

from Maple Creek knows him.  Mr. Eric Berntson was the 

person who embraced Mr. Jean Charest.  He's appointed to the 

Senate of Canada for no reason except to foist the GST (goods 

and services tax) on the Canadian and Saskatchewan public -- 

cost of 71,000 in numbers, and higher than that. 

 

Here's another individual, Mr. Larry Birkbeck.  Do you know 

who this Mr. Larry Birkbeck is? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Never heard of him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Never heard of him, the hon. member 

says.  Well I don't doubt that he would, although I think Larry 

is one of the more honourable  people that's come forward.  

Larry received a 10-year municipal appointment to the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board in 1990 at a salary of $57,820. 

 

Mr. Gordon Currie.  Do you know who Mr. Gordon Currie is?  

Another Progressive Conservative MLA and cabinet minister, 

drug centre in Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Gordon Dirks, $30,000 contract from Education to do a 

study of private schools.  Do you know who Mr. Dirks is?  Mr. 

Dirks is a former PC (Progressive Conservative) minister. 

 

Mr. Louis Domotor, February 21, 1989, special projects 

coordinator -- I'll have something to say about that in a moment 

-- special projects coordinator for SPMC (Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation). 

 

Do you know how SPMC worked, by the way, Mr. Member?  

Because we're going to get a little bit of a lesson on that this 

afternoon too for you.  Mr. Louis Domotor was special projects 

coordinator.  That is patronage. 

 

Mr. Sid Dutchak.  Do you know who Mr. Sid Dutchak was?  

He was a minister of the Crown, PC MLA, 

appointed interim president of the Housing Corporation, 1958. 

 

Mr. Tim Embury.  Do you know who he was?  He was 

appointed a . . . given a consulting contract, a number of them, 

with the provincial government.  Former minister, PC MLA. 

 

Mr. Ralph Katzman.  Do you know who he is?  I think the 

member from Rosthern knows who Mr. Ralph Katzman is.  He 

was the long-time member for Rosthern as the PC until the 

current member who became the member from Rosthern pulled 

a midnight putsch on Mr. Katzman and got him un-nominated.  

And the member knows what I talk of. 

 

Well at least he had some conscience.  I tell the current 

member from Rosthern, he has some conscience in any event 

because he then appointed Mr. Katzman special assistant to the 

minister of Highways.  PC MLA. 

 

(1500) 

 

Here's Mr. Myles Morin.  I don't know if they know who Mr. 

Myles Morin is.  Former PC MLA, head of the occupational 

health in Department of Labour. 

 

Mr. Keith Parker.  Do you know who he is?  Former PC MLA, 

appointed assistant to the chairman of the Liquor Board, 

February 21, 1989. 

 

Mr. Paul Rousseau from Regina, Saskatchewan, agent general 

in London. 

 

Mr. Jack Sandberg, PC MLA and minister, customer relations, 

SaskPower. 

 

Mr. Paul Schoenhals.  This is one you should note, Mr. 

Member from Kindersley.  Mr. Paul Schoenhals, a former 

minister and PC MLA, first full-time paid chairman of the 

board of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan.  First 

full-time paid chairman of the board of the Potash Corporation 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Bud Smith.  Do you know who Bud Smith is?  Saskatchewan 

Gaming Commission.  No, he doesn't know who Bud Smith is 

either.  I mean these people sort of just want to forget all of 

these names. 

 

Mr. Graham Taylor.  Now this is a good one.  He's heard of 

Mr. Graham Taylor.  Appointed trade emissary to 

Saskatchewan Hong Kong trade office, salary approximately 

$97,000. 

 

Now this is a list of PC MLAs who went straight from defeat in 

1986 or just prior to 1991, skipped the sinking ship, and were 

immediately tagged on to a variety of jobs like Mr. Domotor's, 

on special projects coordinators.  By the way, and your recent 

senator, Mr. Dave Tkachuk, of which we'll have a few things to 

say a little bit this afternoon about that as well, that is what 

patronage is.  Patronage is the appointment by the governing 

party of people whose sole credential is political activity and 

election, as this list -- and it's a longer one -- shows, with no 

other demonstrated ability or skill.  That's what it is. 



June 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2529 

Patronage is not the appointment of people who may be 

sympathetic to the philosophy and the goals of the government, 

with whom you may disagree, but who have a demonstrated 

track record of skill.  That's not patronage; that's a question of 

disagreement as to who should be appointed. 

 

And we have said something that you have not done in nine 

years.  What we have done is we have appointed the Public 

Service Commission to become once again independent, and 

for the in-scope employees, they will be hired on merit. 

 

Now the hon. member from Moosomin is speaking from his 

seated position.  And I would invite him to take part in this 

debate so that we can hear his contribution and . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Sit down and he will. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Don't tell me when to sit down.  I'll sit 

down when I'm good and ready and I'll sit down when you get 

the proper statement of truth, Mr. Member.  So you do that.  

And you'll have your chance, member from Moosomin, very 

easily, because I have something about your involvement when 

you were in government as well which will be coming out 

about patronage and the corruption that was involved in the 

operations of that government from 1982 to 1991.  That is 

patronage. 

 

Now I say to the member from . . . MLA from Kindersley, 

please understand that.  Now you just came back from Ottawa 

as well.  And it turns out that your party revels in this.  You 

know the outgoing Prime Minister has made 655 appointments 

in six months.  You know what some of the appointments are?  

He has re-appointed Mr. Bob Andrew, National Energy Board 

-- because when we got to office we ended that patronage 

appointment -- he's appointed Bob Andrew for another 10 years 

to the National Energy Board just a few days ago, in order to 

prevent the inevitable, which is a change in government.  He's 

done that for a large majority of the 655 appointments made in 

the last six months. 

 

I could give you that list and they involve the Saskatchewan 

people.  Mr. Dave Tkachuk -- of whom I'll have something to 

say in a moment too, in response to one of your questions -- 

Mr. Dave Tkachuk appointed to Senate.  That is patronage, sir. 

 

Do you support the appointment of Mr. Tkachuk to the Senate?  

You might tell us that when you get up next to ask your next 

question and make your next intervention.  I think that he has 

been warmly received by the colleagues in your caucus.  This 

is an exemplary choice for Senate.  I have no doubt that you 

will state that view in support of your party.  That is patronage. 

 

So I say to you, Mr. Member, and to you, Mr. Chairman, that 

what we have done in this province is established a policy 

which tries, first and foremost, for the in-scope employees that 

the Public Service Commission should be the governing and 

determining body -- and it is.  It is now independent and it's 

now merit based, and it's now basically advertised-based, and 

that is where the bulk of the employment will be when it is in 

scope. 

 

When it is out of scope, that is to say, in those senior 

managements which are tied to cabinet and the ministers, we 

will look for competence first and foremost.  We will do 

advertising where possible, perhaps not in all instances but in 

most instances.  And we'll appoint people based on 

competence.  They may be supporters of ours.  They may not 

be.  You may like them.  You may not like them.  That's not the 

issue.  But what we will not do is involve ourselves in an orgy 

of patronage which you did prior to 1991.  That's what I 

promised prior to 1991 then; that's what I promise the people of 

Saskatchewan today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Premier, but you 

promised that was all going to end.  You said to the people of 

Saskatchewan, you said to the people of Saskatchewan in the 

election of 1991 that you and you alone were the one that was 

going to stand up in front of the people of Saskatchewan, and 

you were going to change all of that, sir.  You were going to 

show the example and lead the way in Canada.  You were the 

one, the great Premier of Saskatchewan, that could change that. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I did. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- You did all right.  One of the first ones you 

brought to the trough was Jack Messer.  You remember Jack 

Messer, Mr. Premier?  Do you remember him?  Lord of the 

Flies from Melfort, the guy up there who is suing your own 

government, the guy up there who is suing his neighbour over a 

few horse flies, Mr. Premier.  Do you remember him?  He 

happens to be, just happens to be, your campaign manager in 

the last election -- makes him eminently qualified to be the 

SaskPower president, eminently qualified..  Do you remember 

Carole Bryant, Mr. Premier?  Do you remember who that is?  

Just happens to be associated with your party. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The one that likes the Lexuses. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- The one that likes the Lexuses, yes, remember 

that little . . . sordid little incident where Ms. Bryant and Mr. 

Messer had to give those back after a few people found out 

about them.  Remember that, Mr. Premier?  Your definition . . . 

here is what your definition of patronage was at that time, Mr. 

Premier.  Partisan people, party people, and defeated MLAs 

and candidates ought not serve on government boards.  That's 

what you said, Mr. Premier.  You said you were not going to 

do it.  You were going to change all of that, and the people of 

Saskatchewan believed you, sir.  They believed you, and they 

elected you on the promise of no patronage in your 

government, and it wasn't weeks into your new administration 

before you started making appointments, Mr. Premier.  That's 

what you did. 



2530 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 1993 

Carole Bryant, Jack Messer, Al Shpyth, Reg Gross -- 

remember him?  Defeated candidate Peter Prebble, remember 

him?  Defeated candidate. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What does he have to do with us? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well he's working on, as I have it here, some 

environmental consultant for your government.  That's what he 

does for your government, Mr. Premier . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I'm not surprised he's after you and your 

environmental policy because there hasn't been a very good one 

of that either, but we'll deal with that at a later date. 

 

Mr. Premier, you said you wouldn't do it.  You have done it.  

The people of Saskatchewan believed you in 1991, and they 

don't believe you any more.  The list is extensive, Mr. Premier.  

Very, very extensive, of people that have been appointed by 

you and your government to government boards and 

commissions all at the public expense, Mr. Premier. 

 

Don Ching, Zach Douglas, Shannon Mitchell, Terry Stevens -- 

long-time NDP provincial executive member, worked as the 

acting executive director on occupational health and safety -- 

has nothing to do with your government; has nothing to do with 

the NDP Party, that's what you tell us. 

 

Jack Messer, Shirley Leach, Debbie Simonson Frank Buck, 

Debbie Packet, Gary Benson, Carole Bryant, John Chapman, 

Craig Dotson, Yvonne Gray, the list goes on and on and on, 

Mr. Premier. 

 

What the people of Saskatchewan want from you, sir, is for you 

to live up to the promise you made.  That's all they ask.  At that 

time, in 1991, you said you wouldn't do it, and you have done 

it. 

 

Mr. Premier, when are you going to become accountable to the 

people of Saskatchewan and live up to the promises that you 

made?  When will the people of Saskatchewan clearly see that 

patronage is not a part of your government?  When can we 

believe the statement that, if we don't succeed in this and 

continue to appoint party hacks, then we have gotten nowhere?  

When can the people of Saskatchewan expect that promise to 

be fulfilled, Mr. Premier?  When will that happen?  When can 

the people of Saskatchewan expect that promise to be fulfilled? 

 

The list is extremely long.  Ian Laidlaw is just another one that 

comes to mind, Mr. Premier.  Not only that, you like to point 

out to the people of Saskatchewan how much all these 

appointments of the past, that you were going to correct, has 

cost. 

 

The Minister of Education's MA (ministerial assistant) got a 35 

per cent raise in pay, May 13 -- Florence Matthies.  On April 

13 of '93 the Minister of Finance's MA got a 25 per cent 

increase.  On May 19 of '93 the Finance minister, another MA 

got a 22 per cent increase.  Gilda Treleaven, MA for the 

Environment minister, on April 14 got a 29 per cent increase.  

How long, Mr. Premier, do you want us to continue to point 

out examples of where you have broken your promise? 

 

Mr. Premier, the people of Saskatchewan believed you in '91.  I 

think they want to believe your promise today.  They want to 

believe that you're going to discontinue your practice of 

appointing party hacks, former candidates, defeated MLAs.  

That's the promise you made.  You could talk all you like about 

what the previous administration does, but you, sir, you, sir, 

were the one that was going to stop all of that.  You, sir, were 

the one that was going to stop all of that. 

 

Jack Messer.  Is he not a patronage appointment?  Would the 

people of Saskatchewan agree with you, sir?  Do they think for 

one moment that the campaign manager for you and the NDP 

in the last election would not be considered a patronage 

appointment?  I don't think so, Mr. Premier. 

 

I don't think that Carole Bryant would be considered not a 

patronage appointment.  I don't think that a whole host of these 

other people . . . Don Ching, your long-time friend, long-time 

law partner.  Would he be considered a non-patronage 

appointment by the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Premier?  I 

don't think so.  I don't think he'd be considered as just a person 

you picked off the street, a random look through the phone call 

turned him up.  Is that how you came to his name?  Is that how 

you came to his name? 

 

Is that how you came to Jack Messer's name?  A random look 

through the phone book.  Phoned him directly over at party 

headquarters?  Well that's where you found him.  That's where 

you found him, in party headquarters, because that's where he 

was working prior to your election, sir.  Prior to your election 

he was sitting in party headquarters directing and manipulating 

and pulling the strings for your political campaign.  And it 

probably was the work of him or someone like him who 

brought out the statement that partisan people won't be doing 

jobs for your government any longer, that you haven't gotten 

anywhere unless you stop that, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, how can you bring yourself into this Assembly 

and tell the people of Saskatchewan that you will not do it 

when there's clear example that you've done it right from the 

first day you took office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, again if you listen 

carefully to the member's so-called examples of patronage . . . 

He cites Mr. Messer.  He cites Ms. Bryant.  Then he cites Mr. 

Ching.  I want to use Mr. Ching again as an example of why he 

cites him.  Mr. Ching was deputy minister of Labour for a 

number of years in the province of Saskatchewan.  Mr. Ching 

was the head of the government Finance office.  Mr. Ching was 

. . . he got that through competition in the case of Labour. He 

got there by way of transfer to the government Finance office 

through ability and experience.  And then he worked at the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan.  And I called Mr. Ching 

to take over the Crown Investments Corporation because of his 

proven track record in this area. 



June 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2531 

But I'll tell you, even if you disapprove of that, take a look at 

Ching's record of public service to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan and stack that up against any one of -- starting 

with the A's, Andrew, and ending up with the Z's, the Tkachuks 

of this world -- stack up with any one of them who have never 

worked one iota within the legitimate civil service whatsoever. 

 

(1515) 

 

Now this business of patronage, I mean that's all the member 

has -- those examples.  He goes through a phone book and 

gives us names, two-thirds of which I have never heard of 

before.  One or two have surprised my officials because these 

are people who have been long-time civil servants that even 

you have hired; goes through a telephone book and says, here's 

your patronage list.  Why are you doing the hiring of 

patronage, Mr. Chairman?  Well I mean, this is such a 

sophomoric, high-schoolish level of debating, Mr. Member, 

and Mr. Chairman, that it's hard to know how to answer. 

 

But I want to come back to one last point about patronage.  I 

think that there is well accepted in the Saskatchewan public, 

the belief that this party has no credibility on patronage.  I'm 

not one who very often quotes my very good friend, Murray 

Mandryk, with respect to this matter.  But I will say what Mr. 

Mandryk's headline says in the Leader-Post March 14, 1991. 

 

"Patronage of little concern to Tories", is the headline.  And the 

columnist writes: 

 

 But what may be the worst indictment of how indifferent the 

Tories have become to the patronage perception is how they 

have now allowed the issue to be raised in the context of 

summer students' jobs. 

 

Now the hon. member might have known about this.  He wasn't 

an MLA, but I'll just explain to him in case he didn't know how 

it worked. 

 

What happened was in the premier's office, according to the 

Leader-Post March 14, 1991 headline, the following:  

"Devine's office tracking student job applications." 

 

And the story, written by Mr. Mark Wyatt, another very good 

friend of the people of Saskatchewan, says as follows: 

 

 Devine's former principal secretary, Don Pringle, says he 

collected the lists in order to inform the MLAs about which 

students from their constituency got summer jobs. 

 

By the way, were you called, Mr. Member from Kindersley?  

You must have been.  Will you tell us when you get up in the 

next question whether you were called about summer jobs for 

Kindersley.  I'll want to know the answer to that please, 

because I think you were called -- I believe you were called -- 

and I believe you were part of the patronage network.  I believe 

not only were you called, I believe you called the Premier's 

office and you told the Premier who you wanted by way of 

students in Kindersley to be hired. 

 

You dispute that statement of mine.  Will you dispute that?  

Because I make that statement about you, sir, and about 

everybody on the benches.  That's what you did, and we'll just 

see . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He says we'll see.  Well 

we'll see because I want you to get up and dispute that.  That's 

how you did it with student hiring.  You, sir, the great advocate 

now of no patronage. 

 

Well we came to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, we did.  

We did come to office and we changed it.  Here it is, headline: 

student hiring changed, provincial government picks students 

on a random basis.  He laughs. 

 

Even my good friend Murray Mandryk says, a definite 

improvement, and he describes how it's been changed. 

 

The members opposite say why don't you do what you 

promised?  I'm giving them a consistent, solid advice of what 

we promised we did.  We changed the student hiring process, 

even the journalists recognize that. 

 

Now the hon. member talks about the number of assistants.  

Well I want to talk about the number of assistants.  I have a 

very simple answer to this one as well.  What happened with 

the number of assistants is very clear.  First of all, the Acting 

Leader of the Opposition, the former premier, the whole gang 

of you over there, you hid them everywhere.  You hid them so 

much that they had to be uncovered in a special report by the 

Provincial Auditor. 

 

Do you remember that special report of the Provincial Auditor?  

I think you were here now as a member of the Legislative 

Assembly, and on page 11 of the Provincial Auditor's report 

here's what's said: 

 

 The following corporations reported that they hired 32 people 

at a cost of $1,198,489 to work at the offices of the ministers 

responsible for the corporations.  These ministerial assistants 

were not hired according to The Ministerial Assistant 

Employment Regulations. 

 

And then he goes on to talk about how the law was not 

followed.  That's what you did, and you know why you did 

that?  So that when it came to our estimates, when you were in 

the government and we were asking the former premier of the 

day about the hirings, he would say look at the small number of 

people I've got working in various ministers' offices. 

 

What he did not tell the legislature or the public was that he 

had them buried everywhere in every agency and Crown 

corporation around.  Only after did the special auditor's report 

reveal that, did that come to light 



2532 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 1993 

So what did we do?  We said this policy is going to change.  It 

took us a little while to change it, but we changed it.  We 

changed the policy and now what we've done is every 

ministerial assistant is on a pay schedule, a three-tiered pay 

schedule, entered based on experience and work duties and 

obligations.  The number that each minister has is regulated 

and the dollars paid to them are totalled up. 

 

And lo and behold, what we have done as a promise fulfilled -- 

the member asks, where's the promise -- as a promise fulfilled 

what we've done is this: we now have 20 per cent less costs on 

salaries.  Note this, Mr. Member from Kindersley, 20 per cent 

less cost in salary for all the ministerial assistants who are now 

above-board and see daylight, and we have fewer ministerial 

executive assistants to boot. 

 

Now we put them to the Executive Council or the various 

department agencies, and then you say, oh well, you've got 

more numbers.  Sure, we've got more numbers because we took 

them out of the Crown agencies and put them where they 

should be, properly accountable.  But if you stack up your total, 

those that were hidden and those that weren't hidden, against 

our total, not hidden but right up there, we have fewer 

ministerial assistants and fewer dollars paid.  That's the fact.  

Another promise made, another promise fulfilled. 

 

We also said that the Public Service Commission would be 

based on the principles of merit and professionalism straight 

across the piece.  And that's exactly what we've done.  We've 

reorganized it, we've established it, and you can't do any more. 

 

And if there's any one legacy that I'm going to leave, it is going 

to be that heaven forbid we should ever have another 

Progressive Conservative government in this province.  I don't 

think that's likely in your lifetime, sir, and you're a little bit 

younger than I am.  But . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- A lot. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- He says, a lot.  Fine.  Even a lot 

younger.  It'll never happen in your lifetime, so that makes me 

even happier because we're going to be without a PC 

government for a longer period of time. 

 

We're never ever going to have another government like the 

PCs come in and rape and pillage and abuse the civil service 

and demoralize it so consistently and so regularly and in such 

nefarious ways as in the last nine years you did.  That's what 

you did.  And you, sir, were a part of that patronage system. 

 

Will you please deny that statement with respect to the calls to 

the Premier's offices in this regard. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Premier, in his 

normally enlightened view of things, the Premier likes to lower 

himself to a condescending fashion whenever he speaks to 

anyone in this legislature that disagrees with him.  Isn't that 

true, sir? 

 

You like to look at people and try and suggest that they 

don't know anything because they don't agree with you.  That's 

your view of things, isn't it, sir?  If they don't agree with you, 

you try to belittle them in any fashion you possibly can.  Has 

nothing to do with what anybody asked you as a question; it 

has a whole lot to do with your attitude towards people, sir. 

 

Your attitude is shameful in this Assembly.  It is the most 

unpremier-like way of dealing with people that anyone in this 

province has ever seen.  You look at people and you say to 

them in your condescending fashion, you have no right to ask 

me questions about anything. 

 

Well I remind you, sir, the good people of Kindersley elected 

me to this Assembly to do exactly that, to ask you questions 

about you and your government, not to try and defend, not to 

try and address anything at all to do with what happened in the 

past.  What I was elected to do here, sir, was hold you and your 

government accountable.  And that's exactly what we intend to 

do.  We are going to hold you accountable. 

 

I remind you, sir, when the previous administration was in 

government I was not an MLA, and any phone call I may or 

may not have made to you or the previous administration is 

absolutely irrelevant to anything we're discussing here today, 

sir.  Absolutely irrelevant. 

 

You, sir, in your condescending fashion speak down to 

anybody who disagrees with you.  That's what you've done 

every opportunity that anybody that hasn't sat here as long as 

you, asks you a question.  That's the way you deal with the 

people, sir.  And I say it's shameful.  It's shameful. 

 

Mr. Premier, you say that some of the folks that we have listed 

you don't even know who they are or your officials don't either.  

Well maybe we can enlighten, maybe we can enlighten you and 

your officials on who some of those folks are:  Don Ching, 

former law partner of yours; Zach Douglas -- do you remember 

who Zach is? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who's that? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- One of the new vice-presidents over at SEDCO 

(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) who just 

happens to be, he just happens to be a friend of your seat mate 

across the aisle there, just happens to be a friend of his and 

former business partner with the Economic Development 

minister.  Now he's the vice-president over at SEDCO. 

 

Dickson Bailey -- you happen to remember him?  Sat in your 

administration under the Blakeney years, Mr. Premier.  

Unsuccessful NDP candidate in 1988.  He's now a special 

adviser to yourself on social issues.  Don't remember who he is.  

The most convenient memory I've ever seen, Mr. Premier. 

 

How about Howard Leeson, remember who is he . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, okay, that's good.  Howard Leeson, 

present deputy minister to the minister in charge of guarding 

the seal of Saskatchewan, NDP campaign organizer to Last 



June 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2533 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Shannon Mitchell, Shannon Mitchell -- do you remember who 

she is?  She's the daughter of the person who sits right behind 

you, sir.  Do you remember who that is? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What's the point? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- What the point is, is those are examples of 

patronage.  Those are clear examples . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . No one is saying kick them out of 

Saskatchewan.  Don't hire them to your government, though.  

That's what you promised not to do, sir.  That's what you said 

on March 9, 1991.  You said you wouldn't do that. 

 

And they're all around you.  Is there any seat mate that's within 

any distance -- whispering distance -- of you that hasn't got a 

job yet?  Any of their family, any of their friends that hasn't got 

a job yet?  Shannon Mitchell, the daughter of the gentleman 

that sits right behind you in this Assembly, has got a job with 

your government -- nothing to do with patronage though.  Don't 

accuse me of that.  We wouldn't do anything like that, would 

we, Mr. Premier? 

 

Defeated MLA Peter Prebble, he doesn't know anything about 

anything he's doing, anything about what he's doing these days.  

But he just happens to be on the air quality task force, 

something your government funds.  Terry Bekolay, don't know 

who he is.  Well, Mr. Premier, I know who he is and the people 

of Saskatchewan do.  Former NDP president during the 

mid-'80s, campaign adviser, financial contributor to the NDP 

Party, has been made a Provincial Court judge by your 

government.  Do you remember who he is? 

 

Terry Stevens, do you remember who he is?  The member back 

in the corner says, who is that?  Terry Stevens.  Well I'll 

enlighten you too.  Long-time NDP provincial executive 

member, worked as acting executive director of occupational 

health and safety.  Nothing to do with patronage; just another 

one of the people in a random search of the telephone book that 

you happened to turn up. 

 

Ted Boyle, SFL (Saskatchewan Federation of Labour) 

communications officer who worked with you in the NDP and 

is now manager of corporate relations over at SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance).  Nothing to do with 

anything that you would have and your government would 

have anything to do with. 

 

Chris Banman, defeated NDP candidate, has been appointed to 

communications director, Communications Network corporate 

board of directors.  That's where Chris is today.  Elaine Driver, 

NDP provincial party president, has been appointed to the 

Lands Appeal branch.  All examples of things you said you 

were not going to do but you've done since the day you've 

taken office, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, the people of Saskatchewan thought that you were 

going to put all of that behind you.  You said 

to them that you wouldn't participate in those kinds of things.  

You said, partisan people, party people, and defeated MLAs . . 

. is Peter Prebble not a defeated MLA?  Is Lorne Johnson not a 

defeated MLA?  Is Chris Banman not a defeated MLA?  Well 

that isn't the information that the people of Saskatchewan 

believe.  The people of Saskatchewan know that those folks . . . 

well the Premier laughs.  Did Lorne Johnson run in 

Kindersley?  Did he or didn't he?  Was he defeated?  Is he out 

serving on a board today?  Yes he is.  There you go. 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  I'd like the . . . 

Order, order, order.  I'd like the committee members to calm 

down. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, you 

can always tell when the people of the government side don't 

like what they're being accused of, because they know that it's 

true.  They know that the list is extensive.  They know that the 

people of Saskatchewan believe that these people are patronage 

appointments, and they know that you're not -- and haven't -- 

told the truth on this issue, Mr. Premier. 

 

You said that defeated MLAs and defeated candidates ought 

not serve on government boards.  And we can provide you with 

name after name after name of people that are exactly of that 

quality of candidates, of exactly that kind of description, that fit 

it, and now have a job in your government. 

 

(1530) 

 

It's the sort of thing that the people of Saskatchewan have 

grown used to, sir.  It's the New York speech when you're in 

New York and it's the Harris speech when you're in Harris.  

Both of them exactly the opposite, but both of them the people 

of Saskatchewan are supposed to believe. 

 

Mr. Premier, let's go on and deal with a few more of them.  

Maybe you can remember some of these names from the past 

too.  Sherry Leach, formerly the editor of The 

Commonwealth, has been appointed to the SaskTel board of 

directors.  Not a partisan person, just happens to be the editor 

of The Commonwealth, the NDP paper.  Just happens to be; a 

random search turned her up. 

 

Debbie Simonson, NDP campaign manager, is now on the 

Crop Insurance board.  Margaret Morrissette, the candidate that 

ran against the MLA for Moosomin is now serving in the 

Minister of Labour's office, I believe it is. 

 

Mr. Premier, why don't you just stand up in this Assembly, 

why don't you just stand up in the Assembly here this afternoon 

and tell the people that this is going to stop, that you are not 

going to engage in this any longer?  You made the promise, sir.  

Why don't you fulfil the promise? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, we fulfilled the promise 

on November 1, 1991 when we got elected. 



2534 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 1993 

And we did it in the ways that I've described, starting from the 

student hiring plan, which came right out of the Premier's 

office at that time, the Public Service Commission, the issues 

of the hiring practices, even advertising contracts, all of those 

things which you can get into.  We've got work to do.  We got 

more work to do; there's no doubt about that.  It's not perfect, 

but I tell you it is one heck of a lot better than it has been in a 

very, very long time. 

 

The member goes through a bunch of names and is confused on 

his facts, says somebody is an MLA when clearly the person's 

not an MLA. Then says here's another name, but fails to say 

that the person serves on agency, board, or commission, a 

power corporation board or a telephones board or some other 

agency, and then mentions another name, fails to mention the 

name is a ministerial assistant of which there is a political 

component to the job.  And he just mishes and mashes it all 

into one and throws in a bunch of good people who have 

served loyally -- he may not agree with them -- this province 

for 20-25 years, and then says, when are you going to stop. 

 

Well of course the assumption is that we started, and I don't 

buy the assumption that we started.  And I think that his facts 

simply are so far off the mark as to be laughable.  And I would 

say with the greatest of respect to the hon. member, not only 

are his remarks off the mark, that his party has no credibility in 

this debate whatsoever. 

 

I've made my points now on this issue three or four times.  I 

don't think there's much more I can add. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Premier, while 

we were discussing this earlier, you chirped from your seat that 

Chris Banman had nothing ever to do with the NDP Party . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Defeated candidate, that's what you 

said -- defeated candidate, defeated candidate . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You said MLA. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Okay, maybe I said it, defeated MLA. 

 

Defeated MLA was one of the criteria that you used for people 

that should not be on government boards.  There it is, sir.  It's 

for you and everyone else to see.  Partisan people, party people, 

defeated MLAs, defeated candidates.  There's your statement.  

Defeated candidates.  Banman may not have been an MLA, 

and it's a good thing for the province of Saskatchewan that he 

wasn't.  But he was a candidate, and he was defeated. 

 

He was defeated in the constituency of Rosthern in 1982, 1982.  

She was defeated in 1982, and you know it.  She was defeated 

in 1982, and you know it, Mr. Premier.  The fact is she was 

defeated in 1982.  She ran in Rosthern.  You said it never 

happened, but there's the evidence.  It's sort of like the New 

York speech again, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, we can provide you with a whole list of these 

people, if you like. 

Here's a defeated MLA just happens to come to mind: Jack 

Chapman.  Remember him?  Remember Jack?  He's working 

on the Souris Basin Development Authority today, a 

government board.  Said that would never happen, Mr. 

Premier. 

 

Margaret Morrissette, defeated candidate, works in the 

Department of Labour today, defeated in this very last election, 

1991.  Said that would never happen.  Jack Messer, defeated a 

number of years ago.  Said it would never happen. 

 

Mr. Premier, the people of Saskatchewan elected you because 

you made some promises.  You did and said whatever it took to 

get elected.  You said you were going to do all of these things, 

and then you've done exactly the opposite, Mr. Premier.  All 

the people of Saskatchewan, all I'm asking you today, is to give 

the commitment to the people of Saskatchewan that you're 

going to stop it, that you're not going to continue with 

appointing these kinds of people in direct contrast -- in direct 

contrast -- to the promise you made.  Just fulfil that promise for 

the people of Saskatchewan and we can move to something 

else. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- You can stay here as long as you want 

on this issue.  So it's your choice entirely.  But the promise has 

been fulfilled; I've been saying this to the member. 

 

But I wanted to say, Mr. Chairman, again about how . . . I 

mean I want to be very careful about this because the member 

is so sensitive about the way I speak and the way I address this 

Assembly that I don't want him to get upset and charge out of 

the House in hurt feelings.  So I have to be very careful about 

the level of the questioning.  But let me just give you a couple 

of examples as he struggles to make his point. 

 

Marg Morrissette, he said was a candidate.  I don't believe she 

ever was a candidate for the NDP.  In any event she works not 

in the Department of Labour.  She's charged to the Department 

of Labour; she works in the minister's office as a ministerial 

assistant.  You may not like that, but that is of a different 

category. 

 

Chris Banman.  First statement he made was that he was an 

MLA -- an MLA.  I said no, not an MLA, not an MLA.  Oh 

well, MLA, candidate, who cares?  He's got something about 

Chris Banman.  And then when someone pointed out that Chris 

Banman is not a he, but Chris Banman is a she, his next line 

was:  well who cares; he, she, MLA, non-MLA.  I don't care.  

I've got something for Chris Banman. 

 

And this is the factual basis of this argument.  Jack Chapman, 

he said.  Do you know who Jack Chapman is?  I know who 

Jack Chapman is.  Do you know who Jack Chapman is?  Who 

was he, member from Wilkie?  I'll tell you who he was.  He ran 

for the New Democratic Party in the 1970s. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Yes.  He got elected as an 



June 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2535 

MLA.  He came from the Power corporation.  He defeated the 

current member from Estevan, the premier.  Then in 1982 the 

current member from Estevan defeated Jack Chapman -- 

defeated Jack Chapman.  And you know, Mr. Member from 

Kindersley, what happened, to the credit of the member from 

Estevan?  He rehired Mr. Jack Chapman to the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation.  But now you say that's a patronage 

appointment.  Hired by the Power Corporation under the PCs; 

hired by us, somehow that's patronage. 

 

I mean with the greatest of respect to the hon. member, talk 

about a mishmash of names that are jumbled together.  And all 

in an attempt to try to fight back Bob Andrew, Eric Berntson, 

Larry Birkbeck, Gordon Currie, Gordon Dirks, Louis Domotor, 

Sid Dutchak, Tim Embury.  Let's see, I got so many pages here.  

Ralph Katzman, Myles Morin, Keith Parker, Paul Rousseau, 

Jack Sandberg, Paul Schoenhals, Bud Smith, Graham Taylor -- 

all seated MLAs and defeated Tories.  And all defeated and all 

appointed prior to 1991, and others, all in a vain attempt to say, 

well you're doing the same thing.  Well we're not doing the 

same thing.  And your facts and your lack of knowledge of 

facts proves it beyond a doubt. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Premier, I don't believe you and the people of 

Saskatchewan don't believe you either.  You made the 

commitment to them that you were going to change all of that.  

The Bob Andrews are gone.  The Eric Berntsons are gone, Mr. 

Premier.  They're not here any longer.  You're the government, 

you're the one that was going to change all of that. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We did. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- No, you didn't.  You didn't change that, sir.  You 

didn't change that.  You have defeated candidates, defeated 

MLAs, people working for you all over that are NDP partisans, 

party people.  That's the facts, Mr. Premier. 

 

The Minister of Education's assistant, 35 per cent increase; 

Minister of Finance, MA, Linda Lavineway, 25 per cent 

increase; 22 per cent increase went to Paul Faris, Minister of 

Finance; Gilda Treleaven, got a 29 per cent increase recently; 

Beverly Lynn Hewson got a 30 per cent increase; Margaret 

Giannetta, got a 30 per cent increase; Debbie Young got a 22 

per cent increase; Allan Barss got a 33 per cent increase.  These 

are all within the last month, Mr. Premier.  All government 

people, all working as MAs in your offices in your 

government. 

 

Mr. Premier, we just want to look at some of the folks that are 

working for you today.  Dickson Bailey, Peter Prebble, Terry 

Stevens, Chris Banman, Jack Chapman -- those are all 

examples of defeated people that worked for you at one time or 

another. 

 

Mary McGuire -- Mary McGuire was the candidate at 

Moosomin, Mr. Premier.  I was mistaken and I admit it.  It 

wasn't Morrissette it was Mary McGuire.  That's who it was.  

Mary McGuire worked for the . . . was a candidate in the last 

election; now she's working in 

the Department of Labour. 

 

We stand corrected on that, but we still . . . the example holds, 

Mr. Premier.  She was the candidate in Moosomin that the 

MLA for Moosomin defeated in the last election. 

 

Mr. Premier, Don Ching, Zach Douglas, Dickson Bailey, 

Howard Leeson, Shannon Mitchell, Terry Bekolay, Terry 

Stevens, Lorne Johnson, Ted Boyle, Jack Messer, Chris 

Banman, Elaine Driver, Sherry Leach, Debbie Simonson, 

Frank Buck, Debbie Packet, Gary Benson, Janet Abells, Carole 

Bryant, John Chapman, Craig Dotson, Yvonne Gray, Frank 

Hart, Deborah Hartung, Arleen Hynd, Kathie Maher-Wolbaum, 

are all examples.  And we can go on and on and on if you like, 

Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, I just want to ask you one final thing:  will you 

give the people of Saskatchewan the assurance that they're 

working . . . that they're asking for.  Will you give them the 

assurance that you will not continue in this way?  Will you 

keep your promise to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Keep the promise that you made when you said you would not 

be engaging in that sort of thing.  Keep the promise.  And the 

promise was, partisan people, party people, and defeated MLAs 

and defeated candidates ought not serve on government boards.  

If we don't succeed in this, and continue appointing party 

hacks, we have gotten nowhere. 

 

Well, Mr. Premier, I think the people of Saskatchewan believe 

you have not gotten anywhere on this issue.  You have not kept 

your promise, sir.  You have not kept your promise to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask leave to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It is my pleasure to 

introduce to the members of the legislature 22 grade 7 and 8 

students from Odessa, Saskatchewan, along with their teachers, 

Lloyd Posnikoff and Marge Jackson; chaperons including Clara 

Klein, Sharon Posnikoff, Marie Lockert, Debbie Glas, Joan 

Lenz, and Edie Holzapfel. 

 

They are on tour in Regina and stopped in here.  And I look 

forward to visiting with the people from Odessa shortly and 

have pictures and drinks.  And I'd ask members to join with me 

in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 



2536 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 1993 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, we can only but repeat 

the response which I gave to the last -- I think it was -- question 

by the hon. member in estimates.  But I must make two 

observations about the careless recitation of names under some, 

I suppose, attempt to try to get a headline about patronage in 

the government, careless in what it does to people. 

 

He keeps on referring to Peter Prebble working for the 

government.  I have the highest of admiration for Peter 

Prebble.  I've served with him in the legislature.  It may be that 

he is working for the government but for the life of me none of 

my officials can find that at the current time, and I just don't 

know what and why that name continues to insert itself in this 

very confused list. 

 

I must take exception, special exception, to the mention of the 

name of Arleen Hynd as part of this list.  Ms. Hynd is currently 

the deputy minister of Education and is a career civil servant 

with no political background.  She served under the Devine . . . 

excuse me, excuse me, I apologize . . . under the former 

administration in the Power Corporation in a senior 

management level.  She served in the federal government both 

under the Liberal and under the Conservative federal 

governments.  She came back because we asked her to come 

back under difficult negotiations to come back to take the 

Department of Education under control.  And I think she's done 

a super job for us as a deputy minister and can in a variety of 

areas. 

 

(1545) 

 

And this person, the member from Kindersley, as another 

example, had mentioned all the names about Chris Banman, 

and all of the other examples, just throws all kinds of names in 

there and levels these reckless charges.  I don't think very many 

people are going to support that kind of an approach to 

estimates or support to this kind of an issue.  I think we need to 

do more to clean up the question of patronage in government.  I 

think we've done a pretty good job.  Have we been perfect?  

The answer is no, we have not been perfect.  By comparison 

are we like night and day?  The answer is yes.  I think we put a 

lot of institutional provisions in there and safeguards to prevent 

abuse in the future and I think the record clearly speaks for 

itself in that regard. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Premier, the 

problems that my colleague from Kindersley have been 

bringing up with the way that your government is performing 

go into all segments of our society and indeed the economy of 

this province. 

 

Mr. Premier, one of those problems that has been with us for 

some time now is the NewGrade upgrader and your inability 

and lack of will to deal with it in a proper manner. 

 

One of the problems, Mr. Premier, is just what the member 

from Kindersley has pointed out to you.  You have filled CIC 

(Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) with your political friends, with NDP activists, 

people with their own political agenda, people with their own 

political vendettas, people with their own long, political 

memories, people that served with you back in the 1970s as 

you rampaged through the Saskatchewan economy, 

nationalizing your way through corporate Saskatchewan. 

 

And I'll just read these names into the list as we get into this 

discussion, Mr. Chairman, about NewGrade.  And I hope the 

Premier has some different answers today for the Assembly 

than what he has given to the Rotarians; and what he has given 

to the north Saskatoon business community; what he did to the 

Progress Club in downtown Regina.  Because those answers, 

Mr. Chairman, were all fraught with misconceptions, with 

half-truths, with not the whole story. 

 

And part of the problem is the fact that his friend, his law 

partner, NDP activist Don Ching, is now the president of CIC, 

the same Mr. Ching who the media say has had a long-standing 

political feud going with Federated Co-ops. 

 

Mr. David Dombowsky, the consultant over there.  Remember 

Mr. Dombowsky?  That's the guy that was pulled out of the 

phone book in the 1970s, according to the Premier, to run the 

Potash Corp of Saskatchewan -- the very corporation which the 

then deputy premier, the member from Riversdale, drove 

through this Legislative Assembly.  Spent hundreds of millions 

of dollars, borrowed hundreds of millions of dollars at high 

interest rates.  That Mr. Dombowsky who was picked -- a 

friend of the Premier -- to run the Potash Corp now over at 

CIC, drawing down a big salary, and advising Mr. Ching on 

how to deal with Federated. 

 

And who do we have for legal counsel?  Who do we have for 

legal counsel on this issue that says that we bring in legislation 

that takes away the right to go to court?  The right of recourse 

to the courts from a man that served as attorney general of the 

province of Saskatchewan for 11 years, the guy that cut the 

deal in the kitchen with Chrtien and McMurtry with the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms, that said that the recourse to 

the court would be enshrined for Canadian citizens. 

 

Remember the charter?  Remember the deal in the kitchen?  

Well who we have as the legal counsel at CIC is none other 

than Scott Banda, son of a former NDP MLA, NDP cabinet 

minister, friend of the Premier's.  It's no wonder that we have 

clause 16 in the legislation that says that this government is so 

afraid of 230,000 co-op members that they would take the right 

of the court system away from them.  That these citizens of 

Saskatchewan should have no recourse to question their 

government through a court system brought to them and 

presented to them back in 1981 by the then attorney general of 

the province of Saskatchewan, one of the founders of the new 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms, the hon. member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 



June 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2537 

And who else do we have over there?  Well we happen to have 

Bill Hyde.  He of the former vice-presidency of the NDP, 

long-time union activist, friend of the Premier, drawing a 

salary, advising on NewGrade. 

 

Now is there any wonder, Mr. Premier, is there any wonder 

that we've got problems with NewGrade when all of these 

political friends of yours are hunkered down in the bunker over 

at CIC with all sorts of power -- you passed a piece of 

legislation in here this session to make sure they had more -- 

doing the dealing?  Saying that we have to look at all . . . and 

Mr. Ching says, we're going to look at all the Tory deals. 

 

We've got political vendettas to settle here.  We've got political 

things to sort out because people in the old days didn't treat us 

right or people didn't do what we told them to do in election 

campaigns.  So we're going to get it sorted out now because 

we've got all kinds of power; we're drawing down a fat pay 

cheque; we're friends of the Premier; and we're the be-all and 

end-all in the NDP Party.  We'll do what we want. 

 

And 230,000 co-op members in the province of Saskatchewan 

are saying, we don't think that's fair.  We want to have honest 

negotiations.  We want to have a government that listens to us.  

We want to have a government that treats us fairly, not simply 

listens to its political friends. 

 

That's the problem, Mr. Premier, that the member from 

Kindersley was trying to point out to you.  You said that such 

people should not be there.  You said that you would do better, 

that we haven't gained a thing if we allowed people like that to 

be in those positions to exercise their political whimsical 

thoughts.  That's the problem, Mr. Premier. 

 

And now the situation has dragged on for months and months 

because you have built up this political agenda and you've told 

Saskatchewan people that it has to be solved immediately or 

the whole thing is going to fall down upon our ears. 

 

Well it's kind of strange, Mr. Premier.  It's kind of strange that 

Mr. Donald Gass for one, a person who you so often quote in 

this Legislative Assembly, when he takes a look at the 

proposals put forward by your political friends over at CIC, he 

says that co-op members in the province would be crazy to 

accept your terms; that you put the very refinery that the 

members have built since 1930 on the line; that they'd be better 

off to walk away from their refinery and buy their oil from 

Imperial Oil because of the deal you've proposed.  Mr. Donald 

Gass who you so often quote as being eminently 

knowledgeable on financial affairs. 

 

And then, Mr. Premier, we have a gentleman quoted from the 

consortium of Canadian banks who have much of the debt at 

the upgrader.  And he says that there was no expectation that 

the upgrader would make money in this decade -- no 

expectation for a whole decade; that the upgrader is performing 

as they thought it would.  It had some start-up problems, but it 

was performing as they thought it would. 

That's the problem, Mr. Premier.  Maybe if you had gone out 

and sought some competent people to run CIC instead of your 

political friends, this political agenda of denigrating every last 

project that has been developed in the province over the last 

decade and putting it under attack for political reasons wouldn't 

be occurring. 

 

Maybe if you had some competent people over there, Mr. 

Premier, they would say get off of this political agenda; let's 

get down to managing the economy in the 1990s.  Let's get 

down to meeting with the people in the business community to 

see how we can do better.  Let's meet with the business 

community, in this case co-op members, and say how can we 

do more in refining heavy oil.  How can we expand the 

business?  How can we generate new revenue and taxes and 

jobs?  By working with FCL instead of against them.  That's 

what would happen if you had competent people there instead 

of your patronage appointments.  And that's the whole problem 

here. 

 

You asked your current deputy minister to come back from 

Ottawa, I'm told, to redo the Public Service in the province of 

Saskatchewan, to professionalize it, to clean the patronage out.  

Because the statements that you were making in 1991 were 

believed by a lot of people, Mr. Premier, that if we can't do 

better than this, we have failed. 

 

Well, Mr. Premier, we've gone to a lot of expense now.  We've 

had Justice Estey brought in -- eminent, qualified jurist in this 

country.  Mr. Justice Estey says, I was very close to an 

agreement.  If I'd had another week or 10 days, maybe I'd have 

had it. 

 

But no, Mr. Justice Estey wasn't given that time.  And I suggest 

to you, he wasn't given that time because all of your political 

friends, all of their political friends with their agendas, their 

own agendas, Mr. Premier, the Chings and the Dombowskys 

and the Bandas and the Hydes didn't want Justice Estey to 

settle that dispute. 

 

Instead, they would prefer to see you bring legislation into this 

Legislative Assembly -- legislation, Mr. Premier, that takes 

away the fundamental rights that you fought for in 1981.  And I 

just want to read section 16, Mr. Chairman, into the record 

because I think it's important that the Premier understand what 

he's doing here: 

 

 Every decision of the minister pursuant to this Act and every 

certificate filed by the minister pursuant to this Act is final 

and conclusive and is not open to question or review in any 

court, and no decision made and no certificate filed by the 

minister shall be restrained by injunction, prohibition, 

mandamus, quo warranto, certiorari or other process or 

proceeding in any court or be removable by application for 

judicial review or otherwise into any court on any grounds 

whatsoever. 

 

I would say, Mr. Premier, that that basically takes away the 

right, period.  Totally.  Gone.  Shot.  Finished.  That you and 

your political friends at CIC can do this 



2538 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 1993 

to 230,000 members of the co-op movement in this province.  

It was bad enough that you did it to 60,000 farm families, that 

you took away the right to the court, that you could rewrite 

history.  But why, sir, would you repeat that mistake again and 

again and again and that you would sully this Legislative 

Assembly doing that? 

 

Did it mean nothing that when we brought our constitution 

home that you were so proud of, where you guaranteed to 

Canadian citizens, to Saskatchewan people the right and 

recourse of the court system?  Did it mean nothing?  It is one 

thing to step in and use this Legislative Assembly, sir, to take 

over the board of directors, to step in and take the funds of 

co-op members, to tax the dividends of co-op members, but it 

is another to be so frightened, so politically unsure of yourself, 

so weak-kneed that you would have clause 16 in to take away 

their basic rights. 

 

That is why my member from Kindersley, Mr. Premier, asked 

you about your views on patronage and how you were going to 

be different.  And I think it's only appropriate, Mr. Premier, 

that you be able to stand in this Assembly and say to co-op 

members why you would let your political friends and hacks 

over at CIC take away their basic right to recourse in the courts 

against your government. 

 

I think that's a good place to start.  Why would you let Ching 

and Dombowsky and Banda and Hyde take away the right of 

co-op people to seek recourse against you in court.  That's a 

pretty basic premise that most people in this province and 

country have taken as a right of birth.  Why would you let four 

of your political hack friends take that right away from 230,000 

co-op members?  Let's start there, Mr. Premier. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, again the hon. member 

follows the -- how should I describe it not to further inflame 

the House? -- the rather sad and pathetic, unfortunate approach 

of attacking civil servants.  He's entitled to do that.  But I tell 

you it doesn't do him well, and I don't think that it supports his 

argument very much. 

 

I want to begin by replying to some of the points which have 

merit in the following way.  When the Gass Commission 

reported on the financial mismanagement of the former 

administration, it recorded the following losses and 

write-downs all the way from internal Property Management 

Corporation loans -- I hope the members will ask me about 

those in a little while -- PCS (Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) shares, NewGrade Energy, 232 million; 

Cameco Corp. shares, Rafferty-Alameda, Grain Car -- it's a 

long list -- totals $1.83 billion plus guaranteed debt. 

 

NewGrade again, 334, that's plus another $1.34 billion.  

Nonpayment for sale of assets, Weyerhaeuser -- we were able 

to renegotiate with them a new deal which is to the benefit of 

Weyerhaeuser and the 

taxpayers.  But at the time of Gass this is what was reported.  

Investments of other concern, the Bi-Provincial upgrader, 177 

million; Meadow Lake pulp, 140 million; total account for 

mismanagement, losses and write-downs, guaranteed debt, 

questionable investments, Don Gass found $3.727 billion. 

 

Now that is Gass, and Ernst Young by the way.  It is little 

wonder therefore that those who have access to our books, both 

on the Crown corporation side and on the government side, 

come to the conclusion as follows as in the case of Moody's: 

 

 Demonstrated efforts by the current government to 

implement a comprehensive multi-year fiscal plan to stabilize 

and improve the financial performance of its budgetary 

accounts, (here's the key words) as well as manage the 

accumulated exposure to numerous Crown and commercial 

venture investments. 

 

Note that.  How to manage accumulated exposure to numerous 

Crown and commercial investments.  They just totalled 3.7, 

nearly 3.8 billion.  That is what Moody says is the big 

challenge. 

 

I'll give you another version of that.  Standard and Poor's from 

New York says: 

 

 The ratings reflect the government's strong demonstrated 

commitment to deficit reduction (and note this) and more 

rigorous management of its off-budget loans and investments 

reflecting past deficits as well as sizeable investments in 

unprofitable development projects. 

 

Unprofitable development projects, Standard and Poor's.  Now 

the member may put his head in the sand, but the business 

world at home and outside knows exactly what risk we face. 

 

The member's too clever by half to pretend that this is 

somehow a problem created by politics. 

 

September 1, 1990, my very dear friend, Mr. Dale Eisler, had 

an extensive column on the NewGrade operation.  I'm going to 

take the time of this House, because the member took some 

time, to tell you what Mr. Eisler in 1990 wrote.  The member 

from Thunder Creek probably knows, but I'm sure if the 

member from Maple Creek does, so I'd ask him to pay special 

attention to this. 

 

Mr. Eisler wrote the following: 

 

 Make no mistake the NewGrade Upgrader has been a 

nightmare.  What was supposed to be a symbol of the Devine 

government succeeding where the NDP failed has turned into 

an example of political expediency perverting economic 

common sense. 

 

Later on: 



June 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2539 

 The latest evidence came this week with yet another fire at 

the facility. 

 

Talks about the upgrader's fire and the problems related to that 

which are not particularly relevant to this particular issue.  

Then he goes on to say this: 

 

 As for NewGrade's financial status, the situation is far worse.  

From the beginning (Mr. Member from Thunder Creek, he 

writes) the upgrader was driven more by politics than 

economics which has turned the project into a financial 

basket case. 

 

Later on he writes: 

 

 The financial situation was so desperate that sources say the 

project verged on going into financial default late in 1989 and 

early 1990.  A conversion of $100 million in what were 

termed series A notes to non-guaranteed debt had become 

impossible. 

 

 Faced with the collapse and fearing the politic embarrassment 

it would cause, the Devine government (writes Mr. Eisler) 

sunk taxpayers' dollars even deeper into the project late last 

year. 

 

And then the end of the quotation: 

 

 To put that in perspective, it means the Devine government 

will be on the hook for about $600 million, most of it in the 

form of debt. 

 

 All of this because politicians wanted to make themselves 

look good. 

 

Mr. Ching, Mr. Dombowsky, Mr. Banda -- all these people that 

you so gleefully and recklessly malign and attack weren't even 

there at the time of that article and that conclusion.  Back in 

1990, $600 million, Mr. Member from Maple Creek.  That is 

what Standard and Poor's and that is what Moody's and that's 

what the bankers and the taxpayers know is what is so critical 

about this deal: $600 million. 

 

The deal was so bad, as I've pointed out in the past, one of the 

former government's key advisers, Philip Gordon, industrial 

consultant of Toronto who still is advising NewGrade, wrote 

on October 14, 1986, just a few days before the election in 

1986, in a confidential letter -- we didn't know about this -- to 

the premier of the day, and he said this: 

 

 I have been witness to numerous demands presented by 

Federated which I believe to be unreasonable and 

inconsistent with any standard of normal practice business 

arrangements and incompatible with sound commercial terms 

as between the owner, NewGrade, and operator.  Some of 

these demands were subsequently modified or withdrawn.  

Others remained on the table as of last Thursday, including 

several which I believe 

to have substantial, potential, negative effects on the 

economy viability of the project. 

 

Now this was written to the premier, he said, because he 

wanted to be on record to plead with the premier not to sign 

this deal going into the election. 

 

There's an interesting side story which is why the member 

opposite I think may be persistent in his attack on the officials 

currently involved.  Because prior to that time in 1986, Mr. 

Member from Maple Creek, what the government did opposite 

was it succumbed every time that FCL said in the negotiations, 

you've got to move this guy, or this person, this woman, 

because he or she is not doing the right job for getting this deal 

together.  And there were at least two or three negotiators 

which were moved by the pressure that FCL put on the 

government of the day, much like the words of the member 

today in his attack on the current officers in CIC today.  This is 

an old story, and it's an old tactic by FCL:  get rid of the 

negotiators, and put in another set of negotiators and another 

set of negotiators until you get the kind of a deal which got us 

$600 million in the hole. 

 

The letter from Mr. Philip Gordon, and there are others -- I'd be 

interested in getting into this debate very much -- 

documentation.  In fact the member opposite would know this, 

that the Department of Finance was so opposed in his 

administration to this deal that they were considering putting 

on a refinery tax on the NewGrade.  You know that to be the 

case, unless the minister of Finance acted independently and 

simply without notifying the cabinet.  That is a fact, member of 

Maple Creek. 

 

Now all of the story then comes out in a different way.  Here is 

a report on November 9, 1992 by Mr. Gord Brock of the 

Leader-Post.  I got a copy.  Headline says: "Report tells the full 

story."  I'll be please to table this.  I'm going to read you just a 

part of what happened about the time that Mr. Gordon wrote 

his letter.  The story says this: 

 

 Despite opposition from the government side, FCL came out 

of this 1985 round of talks with a memorandum of 

understanding in support of its right to operate the upgrader. 

 

Note the words -- despite opposition from the government side. 

 

 "The deal we started with was not near as good as the deal we 

ended with," said Schoenhals.  "That's what you get when 

governments get involved in business." 

 

Mr. Schoenhals, of course, was at that time the minister of 

Energy who was negotiating this deal and advised the premier 

and the cabinet not to sign it. 

 

Now I continue with the story.  Empey -- I'll stop here -- 

Empey is Mr. Harold Empey of FCL, the current Mr. Empey 

who is involved in this debate.  The story says this: 



2540 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 1993 

 Empey credits Devine with pushing Saskatchewan 

negotiators off their stance against CCRL operating the 

upgrader.  "I wouldn't know that but I'm damned sure it was 

Grant Devine." 

 

 Schoenhals, when asked why FCL's key demands made it 

into the final agreements, signed in December of 1986, said it 

was a question only one man could answer. 

 

Who do you think that man was, Mr. Member from Maple 

Creek?  That's right, the member from Estevan. 

 

 "Schoenhals was against it.  He was not going to make the 

deal," said McPhee (one of the negotiators that was moved 

out of it). The Co-op escaped with what it wanted because 

Devine "must of said, Yeh, let's do it." 

 

The story concludes by saying: 

 

 Devine could not be reached for comment last week. 

 

Could not be reached for comment last week.  I might add, 

could not be reached for comment last week and hasn't been 

reached for comment ever since.  That's the record. 

 

And today the member gets up and he says, move these people 

again -- move them again.  Well I'm not going to move them.  

I'm not going to move them because faced with this horror 

story that everybody understands, we've got to act. 

 

Here's the association of Saskatchewan taxpayers: 

 

 It's a bad deal and a bad partnership.  Negotiations between 

the government and Federated Co-op should be with an eye 

to limit any further losses to taxpayers. 

 

And it keeps on going: . . . compliments the government in the 

stands that we take.  Association of taxpayers. 

 

Here's the Regina Leader-Post, April 30, 1993, talking about 

this issue editorially:  "All options costly in any upgrader 

rescue." 

 

 Last week former Supreme Court justice, Willard Estey -- 

about the furthest thing in the world from an NDP hack -- 

confirmed this in a potentially explosive report calling for the 

project to be refinanced. 

 

 The NDP, Estey and media reports agree that former premier 

Grant Devine cut a bad deal with Federated Co-operatives 

and the federal government, with far too much money 

borrowed. 

 

 "The project has, in a financial sense, run aground," wrote 

Estey in his report. "Operating at capacity, it cannot sustain 

its existing debt 

load." 

 

That is what the editorial . . . And they end up saying, quote: 

 

 In the meantime, one doesn't want to sound like a broken 

record, but one cannot avoid it: another fine mess you got us 

into, Grant Devine. 

 

Editorial of the Leader-Post. 

 

You can accept or reject the editorial Leader-Post; I reject a lot 

of their editorials.  And I do not want to personalize this with 

respect to the former premier, except that is the history of the 

negotiations which got us into this circumstance.  That's where 

we are.  I didn't create it.  Myself and the advisers of the 

government are trying to get out of it. 

 

I have said to the members opposite, I've said to FCL, we want 

a negotiated settlement.  I even think the Leader of the 

Opposition said on CKRM or one of the radio hot line shows 

during the course of this debate over the last several weeks, I 

think even he said the deal's got to be renegotiated.  That's one 

small step for mankind. 

 

What he's got to tell us is, along what grounds?  And the only 

grounds which has possible meeting room for all three of the 

actors involved is the Estey report.  And what does Estey 

recommend?  He says $150 million from Ottawa should be 

pumped in; 50 million should be pumped in by FCL, plus 10 

million each of the next three years in exchange for which FCL 

would get equipment; he says Saskatchewan, notwithstanding 

that we're $600 million in debt on this, should pump in another 

25 million, plus 10 million over the next three years, and set up 

a new governance and this thing can work.  No one's come up 

with a better numerical or logical position.  Nobody. 

 

(1615) 

 

Now all that I ask the Leader of the Opposition is this: I don't 

want to politic on this issue, I don't ask you to confess or admit 

what the deal's a good deal or a bad deal, but if you and I can 

find common ground that the deal's got to be renegotiated, then 

I ask you, sir, if you want to be really of help, tell me what 

other numerical, economic, negotiated deal other than Estey 

would work.  Because I tell you they spent six months, the 

finest economic and legal minds under the mediation of Judge 

Estey, and they could come up with no other option. 

 

Now what am I to do?  I've virtually pleaded with FCL to meet 

with them.  They've refused.  Although there are meetings 

going on now, they refused prior to the legislation.  I must 

admit that there are meetings going on now, to everybody's 

credit, and I hope that they move on.  But I've virtually pleaded 

with them.  I've pleaded with the Leader of the Liberal Party 

and with you, sir, to understand our circumstance.  And if we 

are not right, if Estey is not right, if Estey doesn't work, then 

what does work? 



June 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2541 

And your silence is deafening here.  The silence is deafening 

because there is no other option except that Estey report. 

 

And you can do whatever you want with all the people 

involved in this project.  It's your right in this House to say 

what you want.  But I say to you, sir, that attacking the 

personalities even if you dislike them or disrespect them is 

irrelevant.  Even if Ching and company were dismissed tonight, 

and we put a whole brand-new crowd, it would not change the 

spots on the leopard.  It would not change the hand that we 

were dealt with.  It would not change Moody's report; it would 

not change Standard and Poor's report.  It would leave the 

taxpayers exposed to 600 million and it would not change the 

fact that the only way out of this swamp is Estey.  That's the 

position. 

 

So please, with the greatest of respect, and I have a lot of 

respect for you -- disagree with you politically as you do with 

me -- but the personality game business in this issue is 

irrelevant.  Don't fall into the FCL situation as it took place in 

the 1980s.  Tell this House, tell me what a better solution might 

be.  That's all I want to know.  And if it works I'll grab it 

tonight.  I'll grab it immediately to negotiate a settlement.  Tell 

me what's a better way. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I have listened carefully for the past 

nearly half hour during which there's been one question put by 

the Leader of the Opposition and one answer by the Premier.  I 

remind members of the committee that we are in Committee of 

Finance reviewing expenditures for Executive Council. 

 

I also remind members of the committee that on the blues 

under adjourned debates there still sits a Bill No. 90 -- An Act 

to protect the financial viability of NewGrade Energy Inc.  It is 

my opinion that the question and answer would be much more 

appropriate under review of Committee of the Whole for that 

Bill than in review of the expenditures of Executive Council. 

 

I do recognize that the Leader of the Opposition made 

reference to some individuals associated with Executive 

Council in his question and that the Premier made some 

passing reference in his answer.  But I would ask all members 

to recognize that what is before us is not Committee of the 

Whole for the Bill, but the expenditures for Executive Council 

in Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I rise on a point of order. 

 

The Chair: -- And what is your point of order? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I've been here for a 

considerable period of time and I believe that when Executive 

Council have their estimates, that on those occasions there is a 

wide-ranging discussion on policy as it relates to the various 

aspects of government.  I believe that subsequent to that we 

have dealt with these kinds of issues in a very pragmatic 

way.  I don't think we've been going into details that would ask 

for individual assignments of individual estimates that deal 

with dollar values. 

 

We've been dealing with policy as it relates to the individual 

items that have been raised.  And therefore, Mr. Chairman, I 

believe that the opposition leader and the committee have the 

right to access that information about the policy that the 

Premier of the province has and that he is going to lead the 

government in.  I believe that we in the opposition have the 

right to ask those questions, and I would ask that you rule on 

that please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, I've listened to the member 

raise his point of order.  I'm not sure if I hear there a point of 

order or a challenge to your description. 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair has heard the point of order presented 

by the member from Morse and receives it as a point of order.  

I accept the point of order.  I simply point out that I did not rule 

either the Leader of the Opposition or the Premier out of order, 

but cautioned them that we are still in Committee of Finance 

consideration of Executive Council, that I had heard some 

reference to specific clauses of a specific Bill which is before 

the House, and that is not appropriate debate in Executive 

Council Committee of Finance estimates. 

 

So having presented that caution to members, I know that they 

will recognize and respect the traditions of this House and 

continue with the Executive Council estimates in the 

Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Premier, the 

question I asked you -- and I believe it is a policy direction of 

your government and is very legitimate in your estimates -- is 

why you would wish to take away the right of 230,000 co-op 

members to have legal recourse against your government.  That 

is a very conscious, wide-ranging, broad policy decision.  And 

it has happened repeatedly in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Now I say it is very relevant, Mr. Premier, that your political 

appointments, the patronage system that you run, people who 

cannot be hired without your say-so, that those people are part 

of this broad, fundamental policy decision of yours to take 

away the legal rights of Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And I say very emphatically, Mr. Premier, that I don't believe 

that Ching and Dombowsky and Banda and Hyde and others 

who are your political appointments, have the right to take 

away legal recourse . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, sir.  

I'm glad you've admitted that, that it is a policy decision of 

yours.  And I'm glad you're owning up to it, that you hired 

them, that they're your friends, and that that decision to take 

away the recourse to the courts is your decision.  That's a 

fundamental policy decision. 

 

Now I want you to square that with me, Mr. Premier.  The fact 

that a lot of people think that there's been a lot 



2542 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 1993 

of political gamesmanship going on here, not economic reality. 

 

And I'll quote to you.  You quoted some articles to me.  Paul 

Martin, a person who is an eminent journalist in this province 

-- I guess is probably as good as Eisler or Mandryk or anybody 

else that . . . It says, and I quote, May 29, 1993: 

 

 But the NDP has done a masterful job of portraying the 

upgrader situation as a disaster needing urgent attention.  If 

you stop to think about the financial realities versus the 

political realities, it seems the urgency stems from Brian 

Mulroney's decision to retire.  The NDP wants to deal with 

Ottawa now, not with a cabinet under the leadership of Kim 

Campbell whose views on the upgrader are unknown or Jean 

Charest whose Saskatchewan organizer is (the member from 

Estevan), the (individual) who negotiated the deal in the first 

place. 

 

See, Mr. Premier, there are a lot of people out there that believe 

that the political agenda has gotten ahead of the economic 

agenda on this one.  So much so that I believe Federated Co-op 

have taken the unprecedented, unprecedented action in their 

entire history of taking out full-page ads in newspapers all over 

this province, saying that this threat to their membership and 

system is a totalitarian act unworthy of a democratically elected 

government.  As I so often hear people quote to me, this bunch 

of new-found Democrats that now sit in the Government of 

Saskatchewan are being accused by Federated Co-op and its 

hundreds of thousands of members of being a totalitarian 

government, unworthy. 

 

Well, Mr. Premier, I would think if I were one of the people 

that so strongly believed in repatriation of the Canadian 

constitution and worked so fervently on the Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms to allow Saskatchewan people to have recourse 

in the courts, that you would not want to be associated with a 

piece of legislation that emphatically takes away the rights of, 

in this case co-op members, to take issue with your government 

in the court system. 

 

You could have brought legislation in here, Mr. Premier, and 

done all sorts of things but you don't have to take away that 

right.  It's no wonder they think you are totalitarian and 

undemocratic.  What is there about the court system that scares 

you?  What is there about that that makes you feel weak at the 

knees so that you have to listen to your political friends in CIC 

and bring in such Draconian legislation that you have to do 

that.  Answer that for me, Mr. Premier.  Why take this policy 

position that you have to take the right to court away?  Would 

you do that, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to do 

so and I've done this before in a variety of ways. But I'll try one 

more time to see if I can persuade the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

I'm reading from page 13 of the Estey report.  Now I'm 

assuming, in a sensible debate which we're having, 

that at least one common fact we can agree to and agree upon is 

that Mr. Justice Estey is a neutral, independent, competent 

person.  Now if you don't buy that, then obviously we have a 

major disagreement. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Totally, totally. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- All right, the member says, totally.  

Here's what he said, page 13. Just listen for one brief moment 

on this, not even a moment: 

 

 There are only a few possible avenues of escape from these 

forces of debt. 

 

I'll stop there.  These are the forces of debt I was describing to 

the member from Maple Creek -- $600 million. 

 

 There are only a few possible avenues of escape from these 

forces of debt (Estey writes). The measurements of the 

financial problems are clear.  New money must be infused in 

the project so that the debt load will be reduced to a burden 

which the Upgrader project by itself can bear. 

 

Now this is the part that I really want to underline for the 

House and for the public.  Estey writes: 

 

 This restructuring of the project debt may be painful, but is 

the only escape route for the avoidance of the calamitous 

consequences to the community of the collapse of this 

project. 

 

Now those are not the words of the Premier, not the words of 

the member from Riversdale.  These are the words of Mr. 

Justice Estey.  This restructuring is the only escape route for 

the avoidance of what?  The calamitous consequences to the 

community of the collapse of this project. 

 

So it's not me, although I share that finding.  I would make that 

statement from what I know of the deal without Mr. Justice 

Estey's conclusion.  But the people of Saskatchewan and 

Canada have this finding by an eminent jurist and probably one 

of the pre-eminent commercial lawyers in this country -- "the 

calamitous consequences to the community." 

 

Now you ask, why legislation, and why legislation in that form.  

Well for the obvious reason that if we cannot get a negotiated 

settlement and legislation has to be implemented, in the words 

of Mr. Justice Estey in another section, "to protect the 

overarching public interest," how can a responsible government 

pretend to permit that legislation to allow somewhere down the 

road the "calamitous consequences to the community." 

 

You can't.  You have to act in a way which prevents the 

calamitous consequences to the community.  I don't like this 

legislation any more than you do, and my preferred route 

would never be to have it.  Nobody wants it.  But I tell you, sir, 

that if you should be sitting on this side of the House and in 

this chair, I honestly 



June 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2543 

believe this about you, although you were part of the 

government that struck this deal, faced with these findings, and 

I believe that you would do it, because your former government 

was contemplating the refinery tax. 

 

(1630) 

 

In fact there's a lot of work done in the Department of Finance 

on a refinery tax, breaking the deal, because you yourself knew 

that it was bad.  Here you are, to a transcript of the CBC 

(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) several weeks ago.  This 

is Barry.  I don't know who Barry is, but somebody from the 

CBC.  Barry Burgess, I'm sorry. 

 

 If you were premier and you had the same situation, the same 

financial situation that exists now between the governments 

of the day and the co 

_op, would you have tried to renegotiate the deal? Rick:  For sure. 

 

Now I know your argument will be, I want to renegotiate the 

deal.  I do too.  We're on common ground.  But answer me and 

to the House, what happens if everybody except FCL agrees to 

the way out of this calamitous consequence to the community, 

as Estey describes, except FCL.  What would you do as 

Premier then? 

 

And you can't say to me, oh well, I'll fire Ching and I'll put in 

somebody else, because that's not the hiccup.  The hiccup is 

FCL will not subscribe to the principles of Estey.  In the words 

of the report the only route out of this calamitous consequence 

is this project. 

 

Now faced with those facts and that situation what's your 

choice?  You have two.  You do nothing and walk away from it 

and hope that something works out, or in the alternative, Mr. 

Leader of the Opposition, or in the alternative, what you do is 

you come up with legislation based on Estey and hope that we 

can negotiate a deal.  That is exactly what we're trying to do, 

and we ask for your support. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Premier, you still refuse to answer the 

basic question, and I think if you look through Estey and you 

read it carefully he also said that a legislated solution was not 

one that would make anyone happy. 

 

Now what I asked you, Mr. Premier, if you have to take the 

step of legislation -- and I don't believe you do because I 

believe there is a negotiated settlement -- why take away the 

basic rights?  If you believe that legislation is necessary and 

your government is willing to put itself on the line, fine. 

 

But what you are saying, I am going to design legislation that 

even if I am wrong, even if I abuse and use and allow my 

political cronies to do whatever, I am not going to allow you 

the recourse to the court system. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, it's one thing to legislate.  It's one thing to 

say, I'm taking over the board of directors, I'm 

taking part of your dividend, I'm doing this, I'm doing that.  But 

you don't even have the courage, sir, to allow people to 

challenge you in the court system.  You don't have the courage 

that if you are wrong, that the standard procedures of all 

Canadians to seek recourse for a wrong done is not open to 

them. 

 

And I say to you, sir, that is weak-kneed.  That is why we 

question your friends in CIC.  That's why we question if the 

right choices have been made over there, that perhaps if we had 

had professionals instead of patronage appointments we 

wouldn't be in the situation we are today.  We wouldn't need to 

not only have legislation, we wouldn't have this need to take 

away their right to the court system.  You're not infallible, Mr. 

Premier.  You're not infallible. 

 

Mr. Premier, just answer the basic question.  Why not only 

legislation but why must you take away that basic right -- in 

this case co-op members -- to take your government to court if 

they see they are wronged in the process, that one of your 

political friends takes advantage, that something hasn't been 

construed properly, that there's a half-truth comes out, that 

there's something that isn't fact being talked about in this issue 

and someone says the facts were misconstrued.  Mr. Premier, I 

think we should settle this in court.  Why are you scared of that 

basic right, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I make two responses.  

First of all, the hon. member's references to the advisers to the 

current government who, after all, I remind the hon. member 

are trying to clean up this situation which they did not create, 

he questions their competence.  Well he can do that, but I'll tell 

you how competent or incompetent they may be, they did not 

advise you, sir, to get into this $600 million hole that we are.  I 

think that was the height of incompetence.  They're trying to 

salvage this thing. 

 

But the second aspect of this question is very simple.  The 

words of Justice Estey:  the restructuring of the project debt 

may be painful -- I'll stop there and add my own words -- either 

through negotiation or legislation.  Perhaps it's more painful 

through legislation.  But either way, the essence of the words 

remain.  It may be painful, but it is the only escape route, only 

escape route legislatively or negotiatedly.  Either way it's the 

only escape route in the words of Mr. Justice Estey -- the only 

escape route.  Why?  To avoid the calamitous consequences to 

the community, the collapse of the project -- the calamitous 

consequences to the community. 

 

And so when you ask why we introduced the legislation and 

the sections in the form that we do, it is because Justice Estey 

has told us this solution, which was what the legislation 

embraces, is the only escape route.  It is the only solution to 

avoid the calamitous consequences to the community.  That's 

why. 

 

Any other suggestion says we should expose the taxpayers of 

the province of Saskatchewan to the calamitous consequences 

to the community in the case of the collapse of the project.  

That is what you're 



2544 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 1993 

arguing.  You're arguing that we should simply allow that 

exposure and the potential calamitous consequences to remain.  

And I do not share that view, and I don't believe the majority of 

the taxpayers share that view either. 

 

I think the majority of the taxpayers, knowing exactly the 

province's fiscal situation, knowing exactly the reports of Ernst 

& Young, and Gass, knowing exactly the $3.7 billion of 

write-offs and debts in the Crown side that we inherited, know 

that we have got to get a deal which is fair to all sides, both 

sides.  It's all we ask: fair to FCL, fair to the taxpayers.  And 

the way out is Estey.  This thing could be solved in one hour -- 

one hour. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- If you got your way. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- No, if I followed Estey. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- If you got your way. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- No.  The member for Morse says, if I 

got my way.  If we followed Estey. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- There's only one way I would ever get 

out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well the hon. member says, only one 

way.  Now I'm inviting you as the official opposition and a 

would-be government to tell me what is another way, and don't 

say, well we can negotiate, move Mr. Ching and all of that stuff 

because that, I mean, is too transparent. 

 

Tell what another solution is.  And by the way, if you think that 

this solution isn't the case, then I say you are attacking Estey.  

That's what you're doing.  You're attacking Estey.  Six months, 

he comes up with this, and you say this isn't good enough.  

Well I'm sorry; we agree to disagree.  And until I hear a better 

one, until . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- He said don't legislate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- He did not say that either.  But until I 

hear a better one, there is no other choice in cleaning up this 

mess that you have put on the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan; I'm sorry to say that. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay, Mr. Chairman.  Now, Mr. Premier, let's 

be very careful here.  Are you telling this Assembly today that 

Justice Estey recommended clause 16 of this Bill, that Justice 

Estey said that in potential legislation you should take away the 

right of co-op members to seek redress against your 

government in court? 

 

I want you to be very emphatic when you answer that Justice 

Estey recommended that to you and your government, to your 

friends over at CIC, because I think that's important because I 

know you received a letter from Diane Lemieux, the secretary 

of the Redvers Co-op board and was addressed to you on June 

8, 1993, two-page letter.  And in the second-last paragraph Ms. 

Lemieux is saying to you: 

Finally, as members of the co-op movement we are 

flabbergasted at this action by your government to legislate.  

We are deeply concerned that your government has left no 

option to the co-op membership other than to demand later 

this month that FCL return the refinery to its original state 

and to seek recourse through the Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

Now is this why your friends have advised you to put that 

section in?  Because you are afraid of people like Ms. Lemieux, 

the secretary of the Redvers Co-op.  And are you saying -- and 

I want you on the record here, Mr. Premier -- that Justice Estey 

recommended to your government that you take away the 

rights to the court.  Because I think it's very important for all 

people of this province to understand and understand it very 

clearly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all, the hon. 

member, I haven't seen that letter. I'm sorry that I haven't, I 

don't deny that it's been mailed and it's in my office.  That's no 

problem; I mean, I accept that it's there.  But I will ask the hon. 

member from Thunder Creek how does he react to a motion 

passed by the Kinistino Co-op, the motion by the Kinistino 

Co-op is supporting the government in its actions. 

 

Well the member from Morse laughs when the Kinistino Co-op 

does it because it's undemocratic, he doesn't like it.  But he 

accepts it if another co-op goes the other way.  Of course this is 

a contentious debate.  And the co-op membership is all . . . not 

all over, there are a lot of people who support the government 

in the co-op membership for what we're doing.  I'm not talking 

about the FCL management.  I'm not talking about the people 

in management level, I'm talking about the cooperators. 

 

So I mean, you can give me these resolutions and one should 

look at them, but I'll give you resolutions in the other side. 

 

Now the question you ask specifically is: did Mr. Justice Estey 

recommend section 16?  Mr. Justice Estey spoke only in this 

report.  He had no hand, we did not give him, it is not his 

responsibility, it was not his mandate to draft the legislation.  

We drafted it.  I take responsibility for that as the leader of the 

government. 

 

Now the legislation in section 16 and other forms, you ask me: 

well why did you put section 16 in there?  Because I come back 

to Justice Estey's reports that the restructuring, painful, is the 

only escape route -- the only escape route, which if it's 

destroyed or prevented, however, could have calamitous 

consequences to our community, the community that for the 

time being I've been . . . took an oath of office for to the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan.  That's why.  That's why.  

Very simple. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- This is very important, Mr. Premier.  Now 

you've said you took the responsibility that this is the policy 

decision of your government.  Now it's a pretty long bow then 

to go back and quote Estey about 



June 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2545 

this being the only solution and the calamity for the 

community.  I don't think a former head of the Supreme Court 

of justice, Mr. Premier, is ever going to recommend, ever going 

to recommend, that any government take away the basic rights 

of its citizens to go to court. 

 

I mean you had other options.  You could have used the 

notwithstanding clause.  You could have done all sorts of 

things.  So don't try, Mr. Premier, and say that Justice Estey 

gave you this bow to draw.  You made a policy decision that is 

tied to political decisions that is tied to your own political 

agenda to take away the rights of individuals. 

 

And isn't Ms. Lemieux going to be shocked to understand that 

she can't get to the Supreme Court?  She might like to get there, 

but she can't get there because you, sir, have taken the right 

away.  You have taken the right . . . 

 

Tell me, Mr. Premier, what is so calamitous?  We've got all 

sorts of opinions here that the thing isn't going down the drain 

tomorrow, next week, or next month.  We know that the 

majority of the financing isn't up for voluntary review until 

December 31, 1994 -- voluntary, not mandatory, voluntary 

review -- some 18 months from now.  We know that, sir. 

 

We know that government hasn't put hardly a dime into the 

thing in the last three years.  Justice Estey says it is an 

operating success.  It is paying the interest, Mr. Premier.  It is 

employing people.  It is processing 53,000 barrels of 

Saskatchewan crude a day.  And at the same time, it is 

providing employment and royalties and taxes to your 

government.  Now it's an operating success.  It cannot service 

the principal amount that it has incurred. 

 

(1645) 

 

And yet you, sir, and your government have made a crisis out 

of it.  There is no one, including Justice Estey, who said that 

thing is going to go bankrupt next week or next month.  And 

you know that.  You know that the financing, you know that 

the financing isn't due until December, 1994.  And yet you 

create the situation where you, the Premier of this province, 

would take away the right of Ms. Diane Lemieux, citizen of 

Saskatchewan, co-op member, from questioning your motives 

and the motives of your political friends at CIC through the 

court system. 

 

That is one heck of a policy decision, Mr. Premier.  You, the 

guy that was in the kitchen in 1981.  You sure did cook up a 

storm.  I wonder how Chrtien and MacMurchy are doing these 

days when they know that you're taking away the rights of 

Saskatchewan citizens in their thousands to go to court.  I think 

they would have booted you out of the kitchen, Mr. Premier, if 

they'd have known what you were going to do. 

 

Now I want you to go back to the basic tenet.  I want you to 

explain to me and explain to Ms. Lemieux, because I suspect 

that you'll write a reply, of why as 

Diane Lemieux, citizen of Saskatchewan, co-op member, proud 

Redvers resident, why you would want to take away her 

recourse in the court system if she finds something not quite 

right about what you're doing, Mr. Premier.  Why are you 

taking that right away? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, every time the 

Conservatives speak on this, and again in my mind 

confirmation of why they brought this province to the edge of 

bankruptcy, $16 billion, because of their attitude which simply 

says this: why should you do anything?  It's not going to go 

bankrupt tomorrow.  Why do we do anything? 

 

This is how these people governed for nine and a half years.  

Not facing up to the reality of problems, but some sort of 

policy of prayer, some sort of policy of hope, some sort of 

negotiated suggestions in vague generalities. 

 

Well you know, the hon. member himself knows the answer to 

that very easily.  In the last 18 months, two years, the 

differential, which is where this project is really dependent, has 

varied anywhere from $4 a barrel to $10 a barrel.  If it goes 

below $6 a barrel, we lose money big time. 

 

In fact you'll recall, just before you called the election in 1991, 

we lost money big time.  You forked over another $75 million, 

roughly speaking, $75 million.  And the member says, what's 

the rush, what's the hurry?  We're going to be left at the whim 

of the international oil market, is what is he says.  Do nothing, 

adjourn the legislature, don't pass the Bill, and maybe that 

differential will go down to two bucks or three bucks.  What's 

the hurry?  Tomorrow it might go down. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Not likely. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Ah, not likely.  Well I hope that it's 

the case, not likely.  But are you telling me that's how you 

make a business decision?  On hope?  Mr. Chairman, this is 

absolutely unbelievable.  I mean it explains why we're at $16 

billion. 

 

Now the hon. member opposite talks about why you take the 

rights away of people from the legislature.  Well would he 

mind telling me why -- and he might say this to Ms. Lemieux 

as well -- why it is that his government introduced under The 

Police Act . . . when a citizen has a complaint under The Police 

Act, why does government introduce this section, section 72 in 

1990?  You introduced this, sir, and you were part of the 

treasury benches.  So when you write Ms. Lemieux I hope you 

tell her why you did this, quote: 

 

 . . . every decision or order of the commission (referring to 

the police commission) is final, and no order, decision or 

proceeding of the commission shall be questioned or 

reviewed, restrained or removed by prohibition, injunction, 

certiorari, mandamus or any other process or proceeding in 

any court. 



2546 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 1993 

That's what you did. 

 

1990, I can go . . . Farm Tenure Arbitration Board.  Want me to 

read you the provision?  Section 27.5(1), you passed this same 

provision, various legislation which you have enacted -- the 

federal law, federal PCs. 

 

So I hope that what you will do is that you will, in writing to 

Ms. Lemieux, tell her why it is you took away her right, Ms. 

Lemieux -- proud citizen of Redvers, proud cooperator -- why 

you took away from Ms. Lemieux, her rights to challenge the 

police abuse of authority out of the police commission.  A 

fundamental right that I fought for in the kitchen with Mr. 

McMurtry and Mr. Chrtien and you took it away.  You took it 

away.  You denied Ms. Lemieux's right. 

 

Now I guess the standard is that if you took away Ms. 

Lemieux's right, it must have been for good reason.  And by the 

way, no $600 million hanging over Ms. Lemieux's head.  Nope.  

But when you did it, it was for good reason. 

 

When we do it, when the judge, former Supreme Court justice 

of Canada says about the project: the only escape, otherwise it's 

calamitous consequences, then you play politics.  You say we 

shouldn't do it.  Then it's all the old advisers at CIC are playing 

politics. 

 

So you know what we should do, Mr. Member?  I'd like to have 

an exchange of letters -- mine to Ms. Lemieux about why 

section 16 is in there in the context of your deal and in the 

context of the $600 million that is left exposing -- and more by 

the way, add the federal exposure -- I will explain section 16 in 

that context, if you will explain to Ms. Lemieux in your letter 

why you put in the equivalent of section 16 in the various Acts 

-- I just named one because I think it's important how the police 

people are governed -- if you will explain to her why you put 

that in for her and took away her basic rights there. 

 

Can we have a deal; can we agree to that, Mr. Leader of the 

Opposition?  Will you explain to her? 

 

You might start, by the way, by trying a bit of an explanation to 

me and this legislature for that provision which now you find in 

essence so onerous and undesirable today. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I'd be happy, Mr. Chairman, to make that 

commitment.  I will give that explanation to Ms. Lemieux.  

And unfortunately I haven't had the benefit of the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer helping me go through law school like 

they did the Premier.  So I will seek some eminent legal advice 

when I respond to Ms. Lemieux, as I would hope the Premier 

would do. 

 

Because obviously if this Premier sets a policy direction -- and 

he obviously has because we started out with farmers and then 

we've gone to co-op members, and I don't know where we're 

going down the road future-wise. 

 

But if the solution, the solution to all of the political 

problems that the Premier can conjure up is simply to take 

away the rights of Saskatchewan citizens . . . and not only in 

this case are we talking about Saskatchewan citizens.  There's 

750,000 people in western Canada that this Premier of 

Saskatchewan says, I'll take your rights to the courts away. 

 

I mean it's bad enough when he does it within our own 

boundaries, but when he says and sets the precedent in three 

other provinces to 750,000 people, I wonder what kind of a 

message that leaves out there.  What kind of a message does 

that leave with anyone that might want to put 2 cents into this 

province -- 2 cents? 

 

Because I'll tell you, if this Premier and his political friends get 

a little bit exercised at you or if you don't fit the agenda, if you 

don't squash the deal in the middle of the election campaign 

like we told you to, then some day we're going to come back 

and we're going to settle the account.  We're going to settle the 

ledger up because you didn't do what we told you to do, 

because you got in the road of our political agenda.  You got in 

the road of my road to the Premier's chair. 

 

And if that be the case, I'll set a policy decision and I will 

happily share letters because I don't think this Premier can 

answer Ms. Lemieux in Redvers, Saskatchewan, of why he 

needs that kind of Draconian power.  I don't think he can 

answer that.  Because if he could have, because if he could 

have, Mr. Chairman, he'd have done it a long time ago. 

 

It wouldn't have been any necessity for Mr. Vern Leland to 

send a letter out to all co-op members in the province saying 

that this Premier is undemocratic, that he's totalitarian, that he 

abuses the power of his position in this government.  There 

would have been no point in Mr. Leland sending that out.  All 

that would have happened was we would have had some honest 

negotiations going on. 

 

And I'd love, Mr. Premier, I'd love to take the opportunity to 

boot all your friends out of CIC and go over and negotiate the 

deal for you.  I think that'd be a heck of a challenge.  I'd love to 

boot them all out, yes, and go over and give a good shot at 

some kind of negotiation where there wasn't some kind of 

political agenda, some kind of political agenda from your 

friends, Mr. Premier. 

 

Because I believe and Justice Estey believed that there was a 

negotiated solution available, that there was an opportunity . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Premier, Justice Estey 

said, just give me another week, maybe 10 days -- we're close; 

we're close.  And in the legislature a week and a half ago, we 

said well, Mr. Premier, it's not too late.  Give Justice Estey a 

call.  If he thinks he's close, bring him back.  You've already 

spent a ton of money; what's a little bit more?  Let's get the 

thing done.  Let's not use this kind of legislation.  Let's not take 

away the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Because once that abuse is used in this legislature, Mr. 

Chairman, unfortunately once it becomes a policy decision of 

this new-found democrat from Riversdale, 



June 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2547 

it'll be used over and over and over again.  And I say to you, 

Mr. Chairman, that is the wrong kind of a policy decision for 

the man that heads the Executive Council of the province of 

Saskatchewan to be taking. 

 

He says the former government took away the rights.  I 

remember a scheme called the land bank.  Went out and bought 

a million acres of Saskatchewan farm land, spent a couple 

hundred million bucks, borrowed most of it, fairly high interest 

rate, bought a bunch of farm land.  But you know what, Mr. 

Chairman?  Even though the PC government philosophically 

disagreed, philosophically disagreed with that program and the 

expenditure of $200 million, the equivalent of 4, 5, 600 million 

today, not one of those individuals had the right of recourse to 

the courts taken away from them -- not one, not one. 

 

Mr. Chairman, those people could sue the Saskatchewan 

government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and the Premier 

says, I acted for one of them.  Well how the heck did he get to 

the court if they didn't have the right to get there.  There wasn't 

a piece of legislation that took their right away.  He acted for 

them.  You know what? The co-op can't even get a lawyer.  

They can't even get a lawyer because there's no point, because 

this Premier and his government take the right away. 

 

Mr. Chairman, what we're trying to say to the Premier today, 

and why he would not answer the question, is why he is willing 

to use this Legislative Assembly to take that right away.  We 

don't question the right to bring in legislation.  We don't 

question the right, Mr. Chairman.  This Premier can bring in 

legislation.  He can take over the board of directors.  He can tax 

the dividends of co-op members.  That's his right, as he did 

when he nationalized potash mines and uranium mines and oil 

companies and everything else.  That's his right. 

 

But you know, Mr. Chairman, he still could have left the rights 

of Saskatchewan citizens to question his judgement in the court 

system.  He could have used his legislation.  He could have 

used his majority.  He could have had all these guys over here 

that stand up and down once in a while and they could have 

voted yea; yes, we're going to do this; we're going to take over 

your dividends.  They could have voted yea.  But, Mr. 

Chairman, he could have left that basic right there. 

 

And I say to you the reason he didn't is because he knows the 

process is fraught with the politics of his patronage appointed 

friends.  He knows that the process is tied to a political agenda, 

not just an economic one.  He knows the process will be 

questioned, Mr. Chairman, down the road.  And that is why we 

not only get legislation, we get the abrogation . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  It now being 5 o'clock, the 

committee will rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 

again. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Just before you call it 5, I 

understand the agreement was that we would report progress 

and go out of committee.  Is that what you're planning on 

doing?  You're not calling it 5 -- I'm just curious -- you're not 

going to call it 5? 

 

Mr. Chairman, I move we rise to report progress.  We don't 

want to call it 5.  I move we rise and report progress and ask 

for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


