




















































Hansard: June 01, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2113 

 June 1, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Gaming Commission 

Vote 142 

Item 1 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order.  And now the motion by 

the member for Morse: 

 

 That this committee, pursuant to sections 19 through 25 of 

The Legislative Assembly Act, command and compel the 

attendance before this committee of Doug Egan to provide 

sworn testimony responding to members' questions regarding 

allegations of impropriety in the conduct of the affairs of the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Commission. 

 

Is the committee ready for the question? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to point out to the 

committee some of the reasons why I believe it's necessary for 

us to resolve some of the concerns that we have raised earlier 

this afternoon and today; I'm going to raise some more of those 

concerns. 

 

We have received, through various ways, a number of items in 

various forms and I want to point some of them out to you, to 

the Assembly here today.  There's an article in the Charleston 

Gazette, Wednesday, January 13, 1993 in which the headline 

is "Video lottery bitter target of suit". 

 

 A federal class action lawsuit against one of the companies 

bidding on the state's video lottery contracts alleges 

stockholders were harmed by misrepresentation while two 

top officials reaped $6 million on stock sales in July.  The 

suit, in U.S. District Court in Montana's youth division, is 

against Video Lottery Technologies Incorporated, its 

president, Richard D. Barber, and former chairman, Larry 

Lippon, who was forced to resign when stock plummeted on 

September 23.  The firm is based in Bozeman, Manitoba. 

 

Then another quote from the paper: 

 

 The Victoria commission (this is Victoria, Australia) 

removed Video Lottery Technologies from its manufacturers 

list because of business dealings Lippon had with two 

convicted criminals and because Lippon reimbursed senior 

officials for making political contributions so his identity 

wouldn't be disclosed. 

 

The people in Australia did extensive inquiries into the gaming 

before they were allowed to come in there and they came back 

with a significant amount of 

information on these two companies. 

 

And I would say to the minister opposite that we would like to 

have Mr. Egan before this Assembly so that he could tell us 

whether he had done due diligence in dealing with information 

as it related to items like this, and we would like to hear from 

his report. 

 

There is an item regarding gaming from Dow Jones News: 

"Video Lottery Technologies hit with five shareholder 

lawsuits." 

 

 New York, Dow Jones: Video Lottery Technologies' recent 

woes have spawned a number of lawsuits against the 

company.  In recent days it has been slapped with five 

shareholder lawsuits, mainly stemming from the revocation 

last month of the company's gambling licence in Australia. 

 

 Video Lottery Technologies, a company based out of 

Bozeman, Montana, maker of gambling equipment and 

software, has seen its stock price drop 60 per cent in recent 

weeks following two serious set-backs. 

 

And: 

 

 The company first surprised Wall Street on September 15 

with news its third quarter results would sharply 

underperform expectations.  The licence revocation by 

authorities in Victoria, Australia followed about a week later. 

 

That, Mr. Minister, is also a part of what I would suspect that 

your report should have in it. 

 

Prosecutors . . . And here's another one from the Charleston 

Gazette, Thursday, March 14, 1993.  "Prosecutor combs file, 

quizzes officials in video lottery probe."  I'll just read the 

concluding remarks in the article. 

 

 On January 20 at a commission meeting shortly before he 

resigned, Haddad (who was a member of the governor's 

office in Virginia . . . at a commission meeting shortly before 

he resigned, Haddad) said he was told the specifications had 

been in secretary of administration Chuck Pollan's agency 10 

days before the November 30 vote to expand video lottery 

terminals.  However, the specification had been stamped as 

received at the end of November.  Only two companies 

submitted bid proposals, Video Lottery Consultants 

Incorporated and International Gaming Technologies, which 

is normally called GTECH. 

 

Then in the Baltimore Sun there is some more articles and 

there's a long article on GTECH and VLC (Video Lottery 

Consultants), and the last line in there: 

 

 Maryland's controversial venture into keno, 



2114 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

scheduled to start here January 4, was one of the triggers for 

the grand jury action. 

 

Now going on: 

 

 GTECH made contributions exceeding half a million dollars 

in 1986 and 1987 after the California legislature got involved 

in setting guidelines for a $120 million lottery contract.  (It 

goes on.)  A former California state senator admitted taking 

an illegal campaign contribution from a GTECH lobbyist.  

Allan Robbins, the former legislator, said he accepted 

$13,500 in exchange for his vote against a Bill the company 

opposed. 

 

 In Maryland, as it has in many other states, GTECH hired the 

most prominent, highest-paid, and best-connected 

representative, Bruce C. Bersano.  He immediately hired 

former governor Marvin Mandel, a friend and ally of 

governor William Donald Schaffer, to assist him.  The 

company and its lobbyists succeeded in moving the lottery 

contract award process out of the usual procurement channel.  

Mr. Schaffer named an outside consultant to prepare a bid 

proposal and in 1990 appointed two panels, one to examine 

the technical sufficiency of the bids and one to examine the 

financial aspects.  GTECH beat Control Data in 1991. 

 

Mr. Minister, I can quote you article after article and what it 

has confirmed in my mind is that the information provided to 

us in this was proved to be accurate by the individuals who 

about a month ago, not only under the guise of providing 

information that was alleged, but the FBI (Federal Bureau of 

Investigation) went further than that, Mr. Minister, and said 

that there were reasons to believe that they should be charged 

and they were charged on five counts.  Then, Mr. Minister, you 

decided to change your news release.  You said that there's 

only one company going to get the bid. 

 

Now we want to know from you whether in fact any due 

diligence was done at all by you or any of your staff that would 

have demonstrated to the people of Saskatchewan that there 

was not . . . there was in no way an opportunity for staff to 

become involved in something that wasn't ethical or had 

impropriety. 

 

And we want to know from you, sir, whether in fact there was 

anything done that represented that.  And that's why -- because 

you don't answer the questions, you haven't read the report, you 

haven't done anything in relation to that report -- we want to 

have you bring Mr. Egan before this Assembly so that he can 

answer the questions. 

 

I believe that if this province is going to spend $20 million in 

dealing with this issue, then it's time for us to take a look at 

what the report really said.  And as a matter of fact, Mr. 

Minister, it's our belief, and it's the belief of those individuals 

who are close to the gaming in various ways, they say that you 

haven't done due 

diligence at all.  You don't even know what has been happening 

in the industry and that's why you don't want to read the report. 

 

You don't want to read the report because it incriminates those 

that have gone on before you.  And that's what our concern is 

as well.  And so, Mr. Minister, the only way we can solve the 

problem is to have Mr. Egan come before this Assembly and 

provide that information. 

 

Now there is a thread of involvement in these news releases, 

and there's piles of them.  They come in by the truck load 

almost, about this, from all over United States.  And there is 

one consistent thread that goes through all of it.  It's the 

political involvement that comes in underneath -- not the . . . 

not necessarily the minister or the commission heads -- but 

somewhere underneath there's always somebody buying 

something for something else. 

 

And that thread is the reason why the FBI laid charges on five 

different points against a video lottery company.  And we think 

that you have to come clean for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and that is why we are asking you at this point 

to let Mr. Egan come before this Assembly so that we can 

question him. 

 

And the interesting thing that has happened, Mr. Minister, is 

that you have taken, since all of this has transpired, you have 

taken the provincial NDP (New Democratic Party) treasurer 

and put him in your office to do the kinds of things that have 

been involved here.  And that is the kind of things that we're 

saying. 

 

If you don't have a problem with any of this, why don't you 

come clean?  Why don't you do all of this stuff in public so that 

everybody can see what's going on?  And that's the reason why 

we have a concern, because you haven't dealt upfront with the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan in relation to this.  You 

haven't been upfront with this.  Your former minister 

responsible for this hasn't been upfront about this, and I'm not 

sure that the minister from Churchill Downs has been upfront 

about this. 

 

And that is the reason why we have a concern about that, Mr. 

Minister, and we want to have that information provided to us.  

And I think it would be in the best interests of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan to eliminate the doubt that you 

created because of all of these improprieties in the United 

States and the possibility of that filtering itself into 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And that's the reason why, Mr. Minister, we are presenting this 

as an option so that Mr. Egan can come and defend himself.  

He needs to stand here and say, because he is a former 

commissioner of the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), 

he needs to say, here, that what he signed here on the piece of 

paper that you gave to the Assembly, that he has every reason 

to believe that it's authentic and that there was in the report due 

diligence done in relation to those companies that were charged 

by the FBI for tampering 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2115 

with political people in every area that they were. 

 

And they were in California.  I didn't read about California.  I 

didn't read about New York.  I didn't read about New Jersey.  I 

didn't read about Missouri.  I didn't read about South Dakota, 

because they have been involved in those kinds of things in 

every one of those states.  And that's the reason why we want 

Mr. Egan here to see whether due diligence was done in 

relation to the inquiry that was done by the individuals from 

SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) 

along with the members of the Gaming Commission. 

 

And I think you have a responsibility to the people of 

Saskatchewan to provide that information to us.  And we would 

like to have Mr. Egan here to tell us exactly what went on.  If 

you haven't read the report to provide that information to us, 

you should at least allow the Assembly the opportunity to talk 

to somebody who has, and in that way we can provide the 

information to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Twenty million dollars, Mr. Minister, is a lot of money to 

spend on any program, any specific program.  And if you want, 

if you want to make choices, the choices I believe have to be 

clear so that the people of the province of Saskatchewan can 

understand what's going on here.  They want to know and they 

need to know. 

 

I have had people from the city of Regina inquiring about this 

on a regular basis, and they think there's something strange 

going on here, to say the least.  And they want to have you 

come forward and tell the public that you are taking your 

responsibility serious as a minister responsible for the Gaming 

Commission, and doing this for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And that's why we want to have you and Mr. Egan brought 

here so that you can answer the questions.  We want to have a 

report on the report that was presented, not just a bird's-eye 

view from the minister on executive summary that probably 

was all just a recommendation. 

 

(1915) 

 

We want to know, for example, whether Mr. Egan signed this 

as a matter of fact before he had a chance to read it, whether he 

commissioned it, whether he was responsible for the actions as 

it related to the deciding not to become involved in one of the 

video lottery companies.  We want to know whether other 

individuals have been involved, whether there's been 

individuals who have consultant contracts with the Gaming 

Commission.  Those are the kinds of things that we need to 

know, and the people of Saskatchewan, I believe, need to 

know. 

 

And those are the kinds of things that you aren't telling us, and 

so we need to have somebody who is outside of your 

ministerial thumb, you might say, telling us what's going on so 

that people can have an idea about what's really happening in 

the gaming business. 

You have an opportunity here, Mr. Minister, to absolve your 

government.  You have an opportunity to provide information 

to the Assembly that is, I believe, a requirement.  We want to 

have that done and we need that information, so we want to ask 

you to allow Mr. Egan to come forward to be the individual to 

provide that information to us in clear, concise, and precise 

way.  That's the reason why we have asked this Assembly and 

presented this motion so that you could do that. 

 

We would like to have all of the members support it because 

that way we can provide a way for the people of the province to 

understand what's going on and also for you to absolve yourself 

from the things that may or may not have happened in that 

Gaming Commission.  I just lay before you: why have 

ministers not wanted to be involved in the Gaming 

Commission?  Why have chief executive officers not wanted to 

be involved in the commission?  Why has there been a 

revoking of a licence which we asked you about yesterday? 

And you didn't tell us here in the Assembly; you had your 

Gaming Commission talk about it out to the newspapers, and 

what was confirmed, Mr. Minister, was that we were right in 

what we were saying. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly the reason why we raised the 

question.  There was political interference in a bingo hall in 

Moose Jaw and the decision by revoking the licence was made 

by your Gaming Commission or was made by you.  And that, 

Mr. Minister, was from direct political influence, and we say if 

you have the ministerial responsibility there, then you should 

know what's going on in the Gaming Commission, to 

understand that we want to know what the report said as it 

relates to the video lottery terminals. 

 

That, Mr. Minister, is the reason why we want Mr. Egan here, 

to tell us what was going on.  And that is the reason why we're 

insisting that we have some response from you, and you haven't 

provided any.  And we want to have these questions answered, 

among many others that are of concern to us and the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to respond to 

some 20 minutes of ramblings by the member from Morse, 

many without foundation.  And I want to begin by referring 

him to a document that he quoted from earlier tonight.  It's 

dated March 1, 1993.  I sent this to him some two or three 

weeks ago, and it's from Doug Egan, the director of security, to 

Mr. Innes, the chairman of the steering committee on VLT 

(video lottery terminal). 

 

And I'm only going to read the last paragraph, the 

recommendation part of the document that he signed from and 

the recommendation, and I'll quote from it.  It says: 

 

 I have reviewed the detailed security report on the shortlisted 

vendors and I have concluded that there are no substantive 

issues which would cause me to recommend against the 



2116 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

Gaming Commission doing business with any of the short 

listed firms. 

 

I'm just going to repeat part of this: 

 

 . . . there are no substantive issues which would cause me to 

recommend against the Gaming Commission doing business 

with any of the short listed firms. 

 

Now this is a document, part of this document the member has 

in front of him because he quoted from it before dinner.  Just 

before 5 o'clock you quoted from this very document, so I 

know you have a copy of it. 

 

And clearly Mr. Egan signed this and his recommendation to 

Mr. Innes, the chairperson of the steering committee on video 

lottery terminals, on the procurement, saying that he sees no 

substantive reason why the Gaming Commission should not do 

business with these two companies. 

 

Now let me explain to the member a little further with respect 

to the process that's been going on in the legislature.  Three 

weeks ago, Mr. Egan's credibility was a question by members 

from the opposite side.  We went on day after day after day, no 

indication from members opposite that they would concur with 

my view that Mr. Egan is a very competent, a very respected 

man in this province, and that he had done a fine job.  And that 

upon his recommendation, the document that I just quoted from 

here and I've read into the record twice tonight . . . The member 

opposite quoted from it earlier today so surely he's aware of it.  

But it appears three weeks ago, there was some question about 

Mr. Egan's integrity, two weeks ago and a week ago.  And the 

members opposite, the issue died, it just disappeared. 

 

And all of a sudden tonight, Mr. Egan becomes a reputable 

character; a man whom members of the opposition want to call 

before the House to answer questions on a study that he has 

indicated has told him that he would recommend these two 

companies would be good customers to . . . or good clients, or 

good people to be dealing with, with respect to the Gaming 

Commission.  The members opposite seem to be or appear to 

be concerned about the fact that the report is not disclosed. 

 

And I want to take the member back to April 5, to a letter that I 

wrote to him, explaining to him under The Freedom of 

Information and Protection of Privacy Act the reasons that the 

Gaming Commission would not release the documents that 

were put together when the security check was done, and when 

the financial security check was done, and when all of this 

process was gone through.  And I just say to the member I will 

quote from that document which clearly he must have in front 

of him as well. 

 

And I quote.  It says: 

 

 Whether or not a person will be given access to a record in 

the possession of a government institution is a decision made 

by the head.  (In 

this case, the head of the Gaming Commission.)  In the case 

of the Gaming Commission, the head is the chairperson.  The 

decision is not for you as minister to make. 

 

And let me repeat that: "The decision is not for you as minister 

to make." 

 

And it goes on.  It says: 

 

 We have concluded that parts of the report would have to be 

withheld if an application for access were made, because 

certain of the mandatory exemptions apply to those parts.  

Some of the information was obtained in confidence from 

other governments, and there is some other personal 

information in the report.  We have also concluded that all of 

the report may be withheld pursuant to the discretionary 

exemption. 

 

So two issues that you raised this afternoon and again tonight.  

One is you want an endorsement of Mr. Egan with respect to 

his recommendation of the two companies that we had 

short-listed and made the decision to enter into negotiations 

with.  You have that in front of you, signed by Mr. Egan, and I 

have a copy here.  We can send you another copy if you want. 

 

With respect to why the documents haven't been tabled, I've 

just quoted to you from a Crown solicitor, the reasons why -- 

under the freedom of information Act, an Act that you people 

drafted, as I recall, from the . . . the memo comes from the civil 

law department, the Department of Justice, to myself as 

minister in charge of the Gaming Commission, indicating why 

it's their feeling that these documents should not be released by 

the head of the department, by the head of the Gaming 

Commission. 

 

So two issues I put back to you: to you, the member for Morse.  

And I guess what I'm asking is when did you decide that Mr. 

Egan gained credibility in your eyes.  We have maintained all 

along that his record of service -- as a civil servant, a federal 

civil servant -- were exemplary and that we trusted his 

judgement.  Therefore we would intend to trust his 

recommendation. 

 

And I have a hard time to follow where the members of the 

opposition are coming from.  You quote this afternoon from a 

press release that was issued by the Saskatchewan Gaming 

Commission. And I'll just read the last line. It says, for further 

information call Byron Burnett, Saskatchewan Gaming 

Commission. 

 

And it starts, title, "Gaming Commission Names VLT 

Suppliers" and it starts and I'll just read the first line, "Sheila 

Denysiuk, chairperson of the board of the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Commission", indicating quite clearly, I say to the 

member from Morse, that he attributes to me as the minister, 

comments from a press release that came from the chairman of 

the commission.  So I want to say what we should try and 

maintain here I think, is a little credibility in this debate.  We 

should try and understand exactly where 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2117 

we're going. 

 

I indicated to the member from Morse earlier this evening, 

what we are involved in here is negotiations to arrange the 

purchase of video lottery terminals, not unlike what we would 

do if we were buying laptop computers on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, or photocopiers, or cars, or any 

other form of electronic equipment.  It's a 19-inch television 

screen.  There's some technology involved that allows it to act 

as a gaming . . . in a gaming function.  It's not a complicated 

thing. 

 

I want to say to the member opposite that you indicated you 

want Mr. Egan here to protect himself.  I say to the member 

from Morse, I think that Mr. Egan's reputation does very much 

and does very well to protect him with the exception of 

possibly a few people, many of who may sit on the other side 

of this Chamber. 

 

He signed a document indicating quite clearly what his 

recommendations were and the member opposite hauls out old 

newspapers and old indictments from a former official with this 

company, and I want to say to you that if you want to maintain 

credibility and if you want the opposition to maintain 

credibility in this debate, what we should be doing here is we 

should be speaking in truths as opposed to half-truths.  And if 

you're going to quote from a document, quote it all, and quote 

the recommendation of Mr. Egan which seemed to concern you 

so deeply a few minutes ago. 

 

I've indicated that it's not my position, first of all, to have the 

security report.  It's the property of the Gaming Commission; 

that it's the decision of the head of the Gaming Commission as 

to whether or not she would release the document; that the 

Department of Justice has indicated that they feel it would be 

inappropriate to release it for the reasons I've read into the 

record.  But that's not good enough. 

 

Now I don't know what would be good enough other than I 

give the member opposite the commitment that we're involved 

here in the purchase of electronic gaming equipment.  And if 

you want to compare the Canadian system of government and 

the Canadian system of lobbying and the way the Americans 

do business, the way the federal government seems to want to 

be headed with respect to paid lobbyists acting on behalf of 

corporations to buy the favours of civil servants, I say to you, 

first of all, that I don't believe any members or any officials in 

the Gaming Commission are involved in any of that kind of 

action.  Because I think first of all we have a different system 

in Saskatchewan and we have employees of the Gaming 

Commission with integrity. 

 

And I say to you, if you have any evidence that any member or 

any employee of the Gaming Commission has acted in 

inappropriate fashion, please present that information because 

we'll deal with that in a very fast fashion. But I don't believe 

you have.  I believe we're talking here . . . Members of the 

opposition looking for skeletons in a closet and I don't believe 

there are any.  And I think what we're playing here is a game of 

politics. 

 

And what I would rather do, frankly, is deal with the facts as 

they are.  And the facts are that this government is embarked 

on a project to purchase video lottery terminals.  Part of the 

program will be to sustain a sound economic base for rural 

hotels throughout this province so that they can compete with 

neighbouring hotels in Alberta and in Manitoba.  In Alberta, I 

may add, dealing with the same two corporations that you've 

referred to, I would assume with a Gaming Commission and an 

investigative branch that handled it in the same fashion that we 

here in Saskatchewan have. 

 

(1930) 

 

And I wonder what the member for Morse would be saying 

about the process that was used in Alberta.  And I wonder, 

have you questioned that?  Because the fact is that the results 

of their investigation led them to dealing with the same two 

corporations that we have short-listed. 

 

So I say, Mr. Chairman, the explanation and my response to the 

member may have been a bit long, but I say to him this:  that 

this government that was elected in October of 1991 does 

business in a little different fashion.  We're not buying 

technology, as the former administration did, without knowing 

that it's decent technology and that it's going to work.  We're 

not going to buy overpriced computers.  We're going to buy 

video lottery terminals to put in rural hotels and in casinos 

throughout this province so that we can compete in that 

industry with the neighbouring province, Alberta and 

Manitoba, who are acting in very much a similar fashion. 

 

And I understand your concern with respect to due diligence, 

but I can say to you today, if you have the faith in Mr. Egan 

that I have, then you'll be less concerned.  And if you'll read his 

recommendation, you will know that he indicated, as I will 

state again, that he had no problems with any of the short-listed 

vendors.  And if this isn't a copy of what you were quoting 

from, I can send you a copy this evening. 

 

But I say in closing that I'm satisfied that Mr. Egan and the 

people, the professionals, the civil servants who worked on the 

committee to make the selections, have done a fine job.  

They're all long-time civil servants who were involved in this 

committee.  Many of them worked for you under your former 

administration.  And I have all the faith in the world that 

they've done a proper job, and I have all the faith in the world 

that they've selected proper technology for us to use in the VLT 

program in this province. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Egan wrote on March 1, 

1993: 

 

 I have reviewed the detailed security report on the shortlisted 

vendors and I have concluded there are no substantive issues 

which would cause me to recommend against the Gaming 

Commission doing business with any of the 



2118 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

short listed firms. 

 

I would assume then, Mr. Minister, that the information 

provided on March 19 -- this document that you're reading 

from about Mr. Egan was dated March 1.  Your decision to go 

with both VLC and GTECH was made on March 19.  Would 

you tell me the day and give me the date that the FBI laid the 

charges in five areas in the United States and then you made 

the decision not to go with one of these companies? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I found out about 

the indictments against the officials from West Virginia on 

April 28, and that was the day I took action with respect to 

awaiting what the final results of that would be. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Right, Mr. Minister.  Now Mr. Egan gives his 

assessment of the information; you make a decision to buy 

video lottery terminals . . . or the Gaming Commission.  Fine, 

I'll go along with it because that's who made the decision, 

according to you.  They said on March 19, we will buy from 

two companies, 3,000 video lottery terminals; 2,000 to start 

with and a thousand later on. 

 

On April 28 the FBI decided that they're going to lay charges 

against the individuals who had been a part of . . . and in the 

context of one of those two video lottery terminal suppliers to 

the province of Saskatchewan.  And on April 28, you made that 

decision not to include that one. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, there is just as much information available 

in the other one as the one you made the decision not to 

conclude business with.  And that, Mr. Minister, is the 

problem.  Mr. Egan says they're good on March 1; you decide 

to buy on March 19; and on April 28 one of them gets caught 

with a hand in the cookie jar.  And that's what we raise as a 

concern for you, and we think you have a responsibility to go 

and look at that report to see what it says.  Somebody has to 

look at it who has the responsibility for making the decisions. 

 

If Mr. Egan looked at it and said it was okay, and on March 19 

you decide to buy, and on the 28th the FBI says, no you can't 

do that, then who are we going to believe?  And that's what the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan are asking you and the 

commission.  And I believe that you need to come fair and 

square with the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the question then becomes, have you decided to do 

business with GTECH?  Have you decided not to do business 

with VLC?  Have you decided to do business with VLC and 

not GTECH?  That's the decision that we're asking here.  And 

you're going to spend $20 million of the people's, the taxpayers' 

money in making that decision, and we say you better have due 

diligence. 

 

Twenty million dollars in anybody's view is a lot of money, 

and for the Gaming Commission, this is probably the first time 

they spent $20 million at a 

crack like this.  And that, Mr. Minister, is the reason why we 

raise the concern and we would like to have you answer the 

questions because you haven't been. 

 

And if you want to talk about your freedom of information, 

well, Mr. Minister, that would set a precedent in the history of 

your government that has never been set by any government 

before.  Where members of the Assembly have to be told by a 

minister of the Crown to go to the freedom of information 

legislation to access information, that is disgusting. 

 

We saw that today where the media have been asking you for 

information on various other aspects of government and you 

have refused to provide it.  On the Piper Aircraft deal, it has 

been refused, Mr. Minister.  It has been refused.  The media 

wanted it.  We asked questions today in the legislature and they 

said no, you can't have it.  And, Mr. Minister, that's what you're 

saying here today, you can't have it. 

 

And what we say, if you didn't have something to hide, why 

would you be preventing the public from seeing it?  And that's 

the reason why we're asking you the question.  Will you allow 

Mr. Egan to come before this Assembly to clear up the Gaming 

Commission's reputation in lieu of the fact that they are in 

serious trouble in relation to this. 

 

And I believe they have been.  I just look at how many chief 

executive officers you've had in the last 18 months.  That's 

unprecedented.  How many ministers have you had?  It's just 

goes from one to the other; hardly stops long enough to have a 

change of the lettering on your cabinet door.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, is the reason why we're asking you to allow Mr. Egan 

to come before this Assembly and allow us to ask him 

questions for the betterment and the overview of the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

My question to you is: will you do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to clarify a 

few points that were raised by the member from Morse. 

 

First of all, the people charged were gaming officials from the 

state of West Virginia.  They were not officials from VLC in 

Montana. 

 

And secondly, we put the negotiations on hold on April 28, 

pending what we were led to believe were two outstanding 

indictments, and we weren't sure who they were against.  And 

at this point, we still aren't.  We're not sure at this point, and we 

don't have the information as to whether or not there are two 

outstanding indictments. 

 

But what we did to protect the people of Saskatchewan and the 

interests of the people of Saskatchewan was put negotiations on 

hold pending the outcome of that.  And I think that's a fair and 

a prudent way to handle the negotiations. 

 

We understand that this is a lot of money we're dealing with.  

We, as I've said before, want to ensure 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2119 

that the money is spent in an appropriate fashion and that we 

receive good quality equipment for what we're purchasing.  

And that's what we intend to do. 

 

So I say to you, we are comfortable with Mr. Egan's 

recommendation.  And pending the outstanding indictments, 

we have put negotiations on hold with VLC. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

when your government first came to power, this was one of the 

areas in which I had some expectations for immediate action.  

For 10 years prior, little had been done to regulate the industry, 

or for that matter, to improve its potential in order to generate 

revenues. 

 

My first question to you is to ask you what you believe the 

mandate is of the Gaming Commission with respect to the 

provision of gaming as it is permitted under the Criminal Code 

of Canada. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I say to the member from 

Greystone that it's quite clear.  Under the Criminal Code of 

Canada, the provincial government is responsible for the 

management and control of gaming.  We certainly intend to do 

that. 

 

I see very much the responsibility of the Gaming Commission 

and of the province to be the regulators of the industry, to 

ensure that we have a handle on all aspects of regulating the 

purse of the prizes, the amount that's wagered, the electronic 

systems to monitor the table games, the central computer 

system to deal with how these machines are operating and 

whether or whether or not they're tampered with, whether the 

pay-outs are appropriate, whether the machines are working 

and functioning properly.  And that's really what I see to be the 

major role -- is regulatory.  And we intend certainly to do this. 

 

I would want to say that it's not unlike the role that the 

provincial government takes with respect to setting policy for 

the existing casinos and for bingos, which has been going on, 

as you will know, for a long period of time. 

 

I want to say that I recognize that we have some -- what I 

consider to be -- some very serious problems in terms of bingo.  

It's been an industry that I think . . . and a part of the gaming 

industry that has been lacking regulation.  And we intend to 

first of all, as we move into the casinos and the video lottery 

terminal program, make sure that it's well regulated.  And we 

intend to make some changes with respect to bingo as well 

because we feel there are some problems there. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'll get around to 

bingo sometime during the evening. 

 

Do you believe that the government is involved to maximize 

revenues for the charitable purposes outlined under the code? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I think quite clearly the 

direction that the Government of Saskatchewan 

has taken and what we have . . . the position that we've taken, 

the policy that we've developed with respect to gaming, would 

indicate that we do have a commitment to charities and to 

communities. 

 

The gaming policy as you will know involves aboriginal 

people, exhibition associations.  And as you will be aware, the 

bingo operations are relatively major players in terms of 

funding for charities in Saskatchewan.  And we certainly do see 

a role for charities with respect to this revenue.  We think it's 

important that this money be turned back, in as much as we 

can, to the communities. 

 

And as well, we see an opportunity here for aboriginal people 

to create some economic activity both on and off the reserve, 

not only in the industry but through the profits that may be 

generated through gaming, so that they may develop their 

industries as they see fit with the profits from gaming. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I've been listening to the exchange 

between the two members.  I want to remind them that at this 

time that we have a motion before us concerning the 

appearance of a witness.  And the questioning and comments 

should more or less -- and hopefully more -- relate to that, with 

a view to dispatching the motion so that then we can get back 

to the consideration of the estimates. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I just 

want to raise a couple points here and my colleague has . . . 

The reason for the motion was to have someone before the 

Assembly that would possibly give us . . . or answer some of 

the questions we've been putting forward.  Now the minister 

has stood in his place for the past 45 minutes to an hour since 

this afternoon and this evening basically indicating that he 

doesn't have the ability nor is he willing, because supposedly a 

letter from the Gaming Commission has indicated they're not 

willing, to release information on this study or this proposal 

that was put forward. 

 

And as you're aware of debate that has taken place in the 

Assembly and question period, Mr. Speaker, we've been 

continually asking for information on this whole proposal 

regarding the video lottery terminals and the purchase by the 

government, how the government can take and spend $20 

million on video lottery terminals and yet on basic needs, on 

health needs for individuals or in the educational factor, they 

just don't have the money. 

 

On one hand the minister and his colleagues would argue that 

the province is in debt and there's fiscal restraint under the way.  

On the other hand they take and they'll spend $20 million and 

argue that they've got everything under control and they would 

like us to trust them and expect that at the end of the day that 

they knew what they were doing. 

 

And yet, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that as 

opposition members it's only fair that we ask, 



2120 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

can we look for the information in light of the fact that the 

government has indicated from day one that they were going to 

be more open and they were going to treat people more fairly.  

In fact they were going to deal with people more fairly and 

people could respect their government and the work done on 

their behalf.  And yet we look at how they've treated people 

and we don't have to look too far. 

 

We can look back at the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) debate, Mr. Chairman.  The GRIP debate -- what did 

the government do at that time?  The government brought in 

legislation that said, deemed to . . . or using the word deem, 

that said the contract with water was or had been in place all 

along; and secondly, they brought in a piece . . . in the 

legislation they took away the right of farmers to even take the 

government to court.  Now we find NewGrade in front of us, 

and again this piece of legislation that the government's 

bringing forward is taking away the ability of anyone to 

challenge the government in court. 

 

Now what I'm saying regarding the motion before us, Mr. 

Minister, is the fact in relating to the debate on GRIP and 

relating the NewGrade to the debate before us this evening is 

the fact that we're asking the minister for some real answers 

and we want some answers for the public.  We want the 

minister to answer the questions.  We would like to have the 

minister release the documents. 

 

And if the minister has nothing to hide, if the government has 

nothing to hide . . . And I remember the minister on many 

occasions on this side of the House always finding reasons or 

arguments condemning the former government about hiding 

documents or hiding figures or information that they had. 

 

And so it seems fair to me, Mr. Chairman, that indeed the 

motion that we have before us in asking Mr. Egan to come 

before this Assembly would open the door for debate to take 

place, questions to be put forward to an individual who was in 

charge, who was involved in the Gaming Commission, who I 

believe being non-political and being outside the realms of this 

Legislative Assembly could provide us with more accurate and 

open information, so that at the end of the day the public of 

Saskatchewan would know that indeed all the information is 

out there, that everything was above-board as the minister 

claims. 

 

And yet the minister continually refuses to release that 

information and continues to hide behind supposedly a letter on 

his desk that indicates that no, he's not privy to that.  And yet 

on the other hand the minister would argue that under the 

freedom of information, this information is all available. 

 

Well if it's available, if the minister is open, why doesn't the 

minister just want to come right out this evening and answer 

the questions directly rather than skirt the issue and continue to 

not really be realistic and open with the public of 

Saskatchewan in how he is spending $20 million, and then 

asking all his 

colleagues to pull in a little bit all over the place, charging 

leaseholders in the province of Saskatchewan anywhere from 2 

to 3 to 4 to $500 more for their properties. 

 

And I believe the motion in front of us, Mr. Chairman, is a 

motion that is asking the minister indeed to put his words into 

action, to indeed be open, come clean with the public.  And I 

believe it's very appropriate that the motion brought forward by 

my colleague from Morse is before us and asking the 

government to allow Mr. Egan to come before this Assembly 

on the basis of dealing with these issues and getting, trying to 

get to the bottom of the whole contract and the debate that is 

taking place regarding these video lottery terminals.  And so, 

Mr. Chairman, I just want to suggest that it would be 

appropriate, I think, for all members of the Assembly to take a 

serious look at what's been taking place here, look very 

seriously at the motion before us and vote in favour of the 

motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to make 

a few short comments with respect to the government investing 

some $20 million in the video lottery terminals.  I'd want to 

indicate that firstly, it's a self-financing program; the revenue 

that it will generate should handsomely pay the capital costs of 

it. 

 

One of the reasons that we embarked upon it is from requests 

from the Saskatchewan Hotels Association, the Saskatchewan 

Restaurant Association, who were indicating that there was a 

massive bleeding of gaming dollars outside of the province.  

Now we could have allowed that to continue -- allowed 

Saskatchewan dollars to go to Alberta and North Dakota and 

Montana.  But we chose to introduce our program to keep 

Saskatchewan dollars here in our province. 

 

With respect to openness, I'm doing my level best.  And I just 

want to quote a short quote from one of your colleagues, the 

member from Arm River, as we finished Property Management 

Corporation estimates.  And I was doing there as I am trying to 

be here: as straightforward as I can.  He finishes the estimates 

by saying: 

 

 . . . and I'd just like to, when I'm on my feet, thank the 

minister and thank you, Mr. Minister, for being 

straightforward tonight.  I think some of the ministers in the 

front row should take a lesson from you because I think you . 

. . I'd like to congratulate you on answering your questions as 

straightforward as you did.  Thank you (Mr. Chairman) . . . 

 

Well nothing has changed since the other night, I say to 

members opposite.  I'm answering these questions, inasmuch as 

I can, with respect to what information would be allowed and 

should be allowed, keeping in mind what is a good business 

practice. 

 

When you're dealing . . . and getting confidential information 

from other jurisdictions who ask that to remain confidential, I 

think the Gaming Commission 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2121 

has all the right in the world to justify their position by not 

releasing the documents that were given to them by other 

jurisdictions. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, the fact 

that the member of Arm River gave you a little accolade at the 

end of the debate does not necessarily speak the same of the 

debate that is taking place today.  And it's neither here nor 

there, but we're all aware of the fact that certainly from one day 

to the next times can change, circumstances can change. 

 

And as the debate has taken place regarding the Gaming 

Commission, as we get into it a little further after the vote on 

this motion, Mr. Minister, I think what we're pointing out to 

you, sir, and certainly my colleague has indicated the fact that I 

believe there's one, or if not two, ministers prior to you that 

were involved in maybe a lot of the negotiations that took place 

before that. 

 

And if, as you say, Mr. Minister, the only reason that you 

would hold back on that information is because of some of the 

debate that has taken place to date and that isn't finalized yet, it 

would seem that to me, Mr. Minister, that it would be only fair 

that you would give your commitment that when at the end of 

the day that you release the documentation, that you release the 

information to us.  Make a commitment to release the 

information to us. 

 

If as you mentioned, regarding my colleague from Arm River 

suggesting that you were straightforward and open in your 

questions on your department the other evening, well, Mr. 

Minister, in that spirit of cooperation, I'm wondering if you 

would make a commitment to us tonight to release all the 

information at the end of the day so that when everything is 

said and done, we have access to that information. 

 

And if you're willing to do that, Mr. Minister, it would seem to 

me that other than getting Mr. Egan before the committee 

tonight, certainly later, we'd just as soon have the information 

today so we could look at it, scrutinize it a little more carefully 

and make sure that what is taking place on the purchase of 

these VLTs . . . and as you indicated, in the long run they 

should pay for themselves and no one will argue against that. 

 

The other thing, Mr. Minister, it's interesting to note that I 

believe there was a time period when you were totally against 

the purchase of this type of equipment as well.  And it's 

interesting to see how times can change from even a period of a 

matter of a few months. 

 

But I would think, Mr. Minister, if you've got nothing to hide, 

why not make a commitment to release every piece of 

information regarding the purchase of VLTs and the studies 

that have taken place and that might get us by even the motion 

before us regarding bringing Mr. Egan.  Although bringing Mr. 

Egan to the floor gets us the information today, not tomorrow. 

 

And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you're as 

honourable as my colleague has indicated, will you make a 

commitment to release all that information? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to say 

to the member from Moosomin, circumstances haven't changed 

from the other night when we did Property Management 

Corporation as to which I'm every bit as cooperative tonight as 

I was in the other estimates that we had the other night. 

 

But I guess in terms of the information that was compiled by 

Mr. Egan and the people who worked in putting together that 

information, they made some commitments.  They made some 

commitments to other gaming commissions, to law 

enforcement agencies that the information that they would 

receive would be kept and dealt with on a confidential basis.  

And I think it's well within the right of the Gaming 

Commission to honour those agreements. 

 

I think that it may not even have been a written commitment -- 

I don't know -- but even a verbal commitment.  I would suggest 

that the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission should have and 

would have enough integrity to honour a commitment to 

another jurisdiction or to another gaming commission structure 

similar to their own. 

 

I think it's fair to say that information passes between gaming 

commissions throughout North America.  Because I would 

hope and I would assume that they all have similar concerns, 

that being a good regulation of their industry, ensuring that the 

characters of those they deal with are as reputable as can be 

managed.  There's bad apples in every crowd; we know that.  

And I think to break faith with those who they gained 

information from would be saying that you can't trust . . . you 

can't pass information, you can't share information with the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Commission.  And I don't think it can 

function in isolation. 

 

I think it's similar to any law enforcement agency.  The RCMP 

is an example.  It shares information with provincial police 

forces and that's the way it should be.  And I know that that 

information passes on a confidential basis -- a lot of it -- and it 

should be held that way. 

 

And when it's indicated to me that those are the reasons or part 

of the reasons that the information should not be released and 

that it would not be appropriate to release, well I have to accept 

that.  And I do. 

 

So I say to the members opposite, the information that I can 

share -- and there's lots that I have here -- I'd like to explain to 

members how we're going to be paying back the Consolidated 

Fund, the money for these VLTs, what we think we may be 

able to generate, the interaction with the communities and how 

we redistribute this money.  I'd like to go through all of that 

with you, and I'm hoping that if time permits we can do that. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  Well it 



2122 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

seemed to me, Mr. Minister, in light of the motion before us, 

you indicated that there's a fair bit of information then in that 

report that is confidential.  It indicates to me that there is a fair 

bit of the report, too, that is basically open.  And I think Mr. 

Egan would be able to inform the Assembly what really is 

available, what could be made public to date, what would-be 

agreements are in place that would . . . they would have to 

abide by. 

 

And I don't see why it's a problem to bring Mr. Egan before 

this Assembly to address some of the concerns that the 

opposition has raised.  And so if there's information that is 

available, why will the minister not make that available tonight, 

rather than sealing and closing the total document to the 

opposition? 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to say to the 

member from Moosomin, I think there may be elements of 

what Mr. Egan was looking at -- or the committee that put it 

together -- may be able to be shared.  I would want to check 

with them, and I wouldn't suggest that anything to do with the 

financial stability of these companies -- some of which are 

trading on the stock market -- would be appropriate.  I think 

that would probably be inappropriate. 

 

But with respect to technical aspects of how they chose and 

how they short-listed these companies, I'm certainly willing to 

check and see if the Gaming Commission would be willing to 

release that.  I've never been asked for that part of it, but 

certainly I wouldn't see that as being inappropriate and I would 

ask if they would be willing to share that information. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

wonder if we can just maybe try and put this into a bit of 

perspective.  We have a couple of companies based out of the 

United States, VLC and GTECH, and they are under 

investigation by a number of folks -- the FBI, just to mention 

one -- a couple of number . . . state gaming authorities. 

 

And that may be well . . . that's well and fine, I guess.  If they 

are cleared of any allegations or any concerns in the United 

States then I think that we would probably not have any great 

degree of problem with the province of Saskatchewan doing 

business with them. 

 

Now you have said that a security report was done on both of 

the these companies, VLC and GTECH, and that's fine and 

proper and we all understand that, and that Mr. Egan and 

department officials took part in that and there was a report 

prepared.  And that's exactly the way it should go.  We 

recognize that. 

 

And you say that you never read the complete report; that you 

read only an executive summary of it.  And well we understand 

that you're a busy man in light of all of the things that are going 

on in gaming in this province today, these days, we recognize 

that maybe that's appropriate as well.  Although maybe a little 

bit of . . . maybe a little more 

thoughtfulness could have been put into it and looked at the 

report a little more thoroughly, I think, would have been in 

probably in your best interests and certainly in the best interest 

to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now you never read the complete report, only the executive 

summary.  You're about to enter into an agreement with some 

companies from the United States. They're under FBI 

investigation and state gaming authority investigation, and 

you're about to spend $20 million of the taxpayers' money on 

this venture.  Now it seems to me, Mr. Minister, that there's 

something just a little bit wrong with that somewhere along the 

line. 

 

We've got a couple of companies that are under investigation in 

another jurisdiction, a number of jurisdictions in the United 

States.  There's obviously some reasons why they're under 

investigation.  The FBI just doesn't enter into investigations 

just because they feel they've got nothing to do with their time.  

I think they probably have some reasons why they feel that 

there needs to be some investigating of these two companies. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What's your point? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I think the point is rather simple.  This man, Mr. 

Minister, these companies are under investigation.  You should 

be investigating them as thoroughly as possible.  You should be 

reading more than just the executive summary.  You should be 

reading the complete report.  And if the complete report . . . if 

you're unwilling to read the complete report and report on that 

complete report, then maybe we should be allowed to ask the 

man who is capable of answering those questions about the 

report.  I think that seems eminently reasonable. 

 

If you're unwilling to report on what the content of Mr. Egan's 

report is, maybe the members of this legislature should have an 

opportunity to ask Mr. Egan about the content of that report, to 

see for ourselves and see for the benefit of all the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan whether there's any problem with these people.  

And if there isn't any problem with them, get into it as quick as 

you possibly can. 

 

But at least, Mr. Minister, I think part of your responsibility to 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan should be to read the complete 

report and be able to, be able to comment on that complete 

report to members of this legislature before we are willing to 

give you the appropriation of $20 million of taxpayers' money 

to spend on some equipment for gaming in this province. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, don't you think that that just is a fair bit 

reasonable for an opposition to ask you?  If you can't report on 

the content of the report because you haven't read it, either you 

take some time to read the report or ask Mr. Egan to come in 

and we'll ask the questions of him. 

 

And I just wonder what your thoughts are on that, sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I'll just say to the 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2123 

member from Kindersley that the issue is not whether or not I 

have read the report.  The issue is, is that the interdepartmental 

committee that have done the assessment, do ongoing 

assessments with respect to the companies, are satisfied, and 

we're satisfied that when they completed their report -- and 

they do interim checks -- that they were satisfied that these 

were appropriate companies to deal with. 

 

I take them at their word.  I think they're all competent civil 

servants, and I would think that they're acting on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan in their best interests. 

 

I think it's important to remember here that what we're doing is 

entering into a purchase arrangement and we are buying the 

VLTs.  They will then become the property of the people of 

Saskatchewan.  They'll be introduced through the hotel system 

in this province and into the casinos, and the relationship with 

these companies will be severed.  And this is what we're 

attempting to achieve. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what we're attempting to 

achieve is to find out whether there's anything inappropriate 

going on here.  And until we get the content of the report of 

Mr. Egan, it's difficult for us to be able to just sit back and say 

to the people of Saskatchewan, well we hope the minister 

knows what he's doing; we hope that $20 million of the 

taxpayers' money is going to be spent wisely by this man and 

by his department.  And we have to, I think, Mr. Minister, have 

a little bit more than just a hope that you're going to and your 

department officials are going to deal with this correctly. 

 

We think that, Mr. Minister, when other jurisdictions feel 

there's reason to investigate these people, that there probably is 

good reason to investigate them.  Therefore we also believe 

that there's good reason for you to investigate them and for 

your department to investigate them and for the opposition to 

have the opportunity to ask some questions about that report, 

that security report. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I can only conclude by your reluctance to 

release the content of that report or by your reluctance not to 

have Mr. Egan have the opportunity to speak to the legislature 

and for us to ask him questions, we can only conclude from 

that, Mr. Minister, that there's something not right about this, 

that there's something being . . . somebody's trying to hide 

something here, Mr. Minister.  That's what we can only 

conclude by those kinds of things, if you're not willing to 

release all information about it. 

 

That opens it up, that takes away all of the concern that there is.  

The moment it's opened up and everybody realizes that there's 

nothing wrong with this deal, the opposition will drop it like a 

hot potato because we know there's nothing in it for the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan to be concerned about. 

 

But if there is one shred of doubt out there amongst the people 

of Saskatchewan that there is something wrong here, Mr. 

Minister, I think it's your 

responsibility to be able to address that and take care of that 

concern that people have. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, is it not your responsibility, is it not your 

responsibility to the Saskatchewan taxpayers to clear the air, 

take care of all of the concerns that are outstanding right now, 

address all of the issues that people are asking you to address?  

Or if you're not willing to do that, allow Mr. Egan, the man 

who authored the report, to come in and take care of the 

questions for you.  Is that not your responsibility, one way or 

the other?  You either answer the questions or allow someone 

else that can answer them to do that for you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to say to the 

member from Kindersley that I think it's certainly fair for the 

members of the opposition to question the expenditure of $20 

million.  I think it's most appropriate that they do. 

 

I also think that it's most appropriate that this government 

protect and won't jeopardize other jurisdictions and other 

commissions by releasing information that they've been asked 

to hold on a confidential basis. 

 

I've indicated tonight that I would be willing to inquire as to 

what, if any, of the investigated portions I may be able to ask 

the commission to release.  As an example, the technical 

evaluations of the technology -- I'm willing to see if we could 

have that released.  I don't see that as being a problem.  I think 

it may create some problems to table in this legislature the 

financial status of the companies if there are financial 

statements that were given in confidence.  And I don't know 

that, but I think it would be inappropriate to table that. 

 

But I say tonight that I'm willing to check with my officials to 

see what elements of this may be released.  And if there are 

portions of it, I'm more than willing to do that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  

I found your answer very curious when you described video 

lottery machines, VLTs, as not much different from a laptop 

computer or a 19-inch television screen. 

 

If that's actually the case, then why, Mr. Minister, was there 

such a ruckus because the White Bear Indian Band had 110 

19-inch television screens in the golf house?  If that was the 

only crime they committed, surely there's something wrong 

with the laws of this province.  But if VLTs are not similar to 

19-inch television screens, and perhaps they're not similar to 

laptop computers and perhaps there needs to be some answers 

here, Mr. Minister. 

 

On the one hand we're talking about GTECH and VLC and the 

allegations against those two companies that they have been 

involved in some improprieties.  On that hand, Mr. Minister, 

there's allegations of corruption and bribery of gaming officials 

in one state -- I believe you said West Virginia -- and that 

makes people suspicious. 



2124 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

Not only in West Virginia, Mr. Minister, but across the 

U.S.(United States), there's been allegations of improprieties by 

these companies, including the bribing of officials.  Even in 

Australia, Mr. Minister, these allegations have surfaced.  In fact 

I believe these two companies are not allowed to do business in 

Australia any longer. 

 

On the other hand we have you appointing the past treasurer of 

the NDP Party to the position of CEO (chief executive officer) 

of the Gaming Commission.  The chief bagman for the NDP is 

now in charge of the Gaming Commission.  And what do we 

get, Mr. Minister, when you put these two hands together?  

You end up with your hand out and that's very much, Mr. 

Minister, what the people of this province are concerned about, 

is who has their hand out here.  And that is why we would like 

to see Mr. Egan come before this committee to answer 

questions. 

 

There's no reason why Mr. Egan should not be allowed to come 

before this committee and answer questions that do not have a 

commercial impact on the operations of VLTs in this province.  

And he would not even have to answer questions that would 

infringe on interprovincial agreements dealing with the security 

checks.  But he could come into this Assembly and he should 

come into this Assembly to answer such questions as, has a 

minister of the Crown, to his knowledge, read the security 

report; or questions of, is organized crime affiliated or 

associated with either of these companies. 

 

And why should those questions not be answered here, Mr. 

Minister?  It reminds me of something from Shakespeare, from 

Hamlet, and the quote is: "(Me thinks) the lady doth protest 

too much . . ." 

 

What are you protesting about, Mr. Minister?  Why the 

protestations of innocence?  Answer the questions and then 

everyone will know of your innocence. Or what are you trying 

to protect, Mr. Minister?  On the one hand we have the NDP 

bagman and on the other hand we have companies with 

allegations of improprieties dealing with the bribery of gaming 

officials.  And I believe those questions need to be answered.  

The people of this province deserve an answer, Mr. Minister. 

And will you allow Mr. Egan to come before this Assembly 

and answer those questions? 

 

(2015) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I would say to the member from 

Souris-Cannington, whether or not Mr. Egan reported to this 

legislature, if he knew of any wrongdoing or inappropriate 

action by any of the officials at the Gaming Commission, I 

think he has enough background in terms of law enforcement 

to know the path to take and know the route to take.  He retired 

from the RCMP many years ago and was involved in many 

investigations, so I would assume he would know how to 

handle any wrongdoing if he were aware of any. 

 

And quite clearly that's his job; that's part of his job as 

the security officer for the Gaming Commission.  And I would 

suggest that Mr. Egan has done a very fine job.  He's a 

well-respected man and I have all of the faith in the world that 

he is acting as appropriately as an official for the Gaming 

Commission as he did when he was a former member of the 

RCMP. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, why not allow him 

to come forward and answer the questions?  You didn't answer 

that.  We've asked you a number of questions and you refuse to 

answer them.  Why not allow Mr. Egan to come forward?  

Allow the Committee of the Whole, all of us, to ask questions 

of Mr. Egan and get some answers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I guess the offer I would make 

to the member from Souris-Cannington, if he's concerned with 

respect to any wrongdoing by any officials of the Gaming 

Commission, a simple letter to Mr. Egan asking if he's aware of 

any inappropriate actions that have been done by any employee 

of the Gaming Commission, that certainly he would be more 

than happy to respond in whatever fashion he would deem 

appropriate, depending on the circumstances. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to go through this 

scenario once more, just so that the minister has an opportunity 

to maybe change his mind about bringing Mr. Egan before the 

committee here. 

 

Mr. Egan signed a report saying: 

 

 I have reviewed the detailed security report on the shortlisted 

vendors and I have concluded there are no substantive issues 

which would cause me to recommend against the Gaming 

Commission doing business with any of the short listed firms. 

 

Now if he read that and he read the information about GTECH 

and VLC, if they were the two on that list, which I would 

suspect that you then took his advice and had the Gaming 

Commission say that they would be, GTECH and VLC were 

going to be supplying the hardware and the video lottery 

terminals to the province of Saskatchewan, and he read all of 

the reports, and it had allegations of improprieties all over 

United States.  And I didn't even read half of the ones that . . . 

There isn't a state that they haven't been in where there hasn't 

been allegations, Mr. Minister. 

 

And he says: 

 

 I have reviewed the detailed security report on the shortlisted 

vendors and I have concluded there are no substantive issues 

. . . 

 

And then on the other hand, we come to the conclusion -- or 

you come to the conclusion -- that because on April 28, you 

finally discover that what we have been saying has been 

accurate because the FBI have laid charges, then we have no 

conclusion to come to accept that you haven't read the report, 

other members of your cabinet who are responsible -- who 

were responsible at this time -- didn't read the report. 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2125 

 And if the report had that kind of information in it, it should 

have concluded something entirely different, Mr. Minister, 

entirely different.  And that's the reason why we're raising the 

question. 

 

Everybody seems to be wrong except you.  And the people 

over there say, well they did an investigation in Ohio; they did 

an investigation in New York; and they did an investigation in 

Virginia; they did another one in California; they're doing 

another one in Oregon; they're doing another one in Montana; 

they're doing them all over the place.  And it isn't just because 

they think that perhaps these guys who do business with either 

one of these companies, are always legitimate.  And what they 

have been doing, Mr. Minister, consistently is dealing with 

improprieties as it relates to elected officials and their staff.  

And that has occurred on a number of occasions.  And finally, 

the FBI laid charges.  That, Mr. Minister, is a fact. 

 

And so we have made the observations that if the detailed 

security report didn't have that in it, it ought to have.  If it had it 

in it, you should have come to the conclusion on the day that 

you saw his signature, that on April 28 should have been the 

decision that you made on March 19 when you decided to buy 

video lottery terminals from two companies who were being 

investigated.  And I don't understand how the logic escapes you 

that this in fact is accurate. 

 

Now we have no reason to be suspicious of Mr. Egan.  We 

have no reason to be suspicious of you.  But we have reason to 

believe that because you don't provide the information to the 

Assembly and people who we have read about in the papers, 

have not provided information to those people in authority 

either until they were asked directly by the FBI or their private 

gaming commissions . . . And then they came forward with 

information.  Yes, this is happening here, this is happening 

here.  Some people resigned. 

 

And we say, if it's happening over there, what prevents it from 

happening over here except, Mr. Minister, that you be open and 

upfront about the details of the purchase, the details of the 

inquiry, the details of each part of the investigation in relation 

to these video lottery terminal companies, these suppliers. 

 

So we say to you, Mr. Minister, if you want to have the public 

of Saskatchewan believe you're clean, bring forward the 

information that we've asked for.  That's the way you can clean 

it up.  Then we'll quit asking questions.  We won't ask you one 

more. 

 

However, we will continue to ask questions here and in every 

context that we can until we find out what the information is.  

And you could save this Assembly a lot of time, you could save 

yourself a lot of time by just revealing that to the people of the 

province.  You don't have to do it to me.  Why don't you do it 

to the RCMP, for example?  Why don't you do it to the people 

who ought to be investigating this besides the Gaming 

Commission?  That's where we have a problem, Mr. Minister.  

You have put into the Gaming Commission individuals who 

are directly related to your party -- 

directly related to your party. 

 

And that is exactly the context of the information provided to 

the various organizations south of the border.  That is exactly 

the reason why we're asking the question.  Because 

improprieties were discovered through those kind of context 

over there, and the information that we have is that the 

individuals would have no less scruples doing that with the 

public of Saskatchewan. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is the reason why we're asking you the 

questions and why we would like Mr. Egan to come to this 

Assembly and tell us in a factual way what was going on.  

Because basically, Mr. Minister, we don't believe you either.  

Neither do the public of Saskatchewan.  They don't believe you 

and that's the reason why we're asking you the questions here 

today. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Being a quiet and 

unassuming kind of a person, I can be overlooked once in a 

while.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'd like to ask you a question or two.  I heard you 

say that you had complete confidence in Mr. Egan, and I would 

say to you, sir, if you feel Mr. Egan is capable, and we on this 

side of the House have no reason to think otherwise, why won't 

you either let us talk to Mr. Egan and ask him questions about 

his report, or why won't you let us have the report and let us 

read it?  If you have complete confidence in that report, then 

why will you not let us read it.? 

 

The other thing, Mr. Minister, we are not . . . Mr. Minister, I 

don't think on this side of the House we're questioning the 

competence of Mr. Egan.  But what we do think over here that 

maybe when Mr. Egan made his report someone over on that 

side of the House who should have read the report maybe didn't 

read the report, and you went ahead and you done business 

with these people against the recommendations of the report. 

 

I believe if we could see that report, we would find that you or 

your people on that side were cautioned, and you ignored that. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is what I'd like to ask you.  One of the 

two, either let us have the report and we will read it, or you let 

us question Mr. Egan about the report.  If we can accept your 

opinion that this man is honourable, and I believe he is; we 

have no reason to think otherwise. 

 

And if you can't do that, if you don't want to bring him, then let 

us have the report and we'll read it if your people over there 

don't want to read the report.  Why can't you do that, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I want to say to the hon. 

member, I must admit that yes, I do trust Mr. Egan's 

judgement, partly based on his past record of service to the 

RCMP in this province.  I believe him to be a man of integrity 

and I do trust his judgement. 



2126 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

As well, the response that I got from the civil law division of 

the Department of Justice, I also trust -- these are well-qualified 

lawyers -- with respect to what would be appropriate and what 

would not be appropriate to release.  I have to trust their 

judgement. 

 

And I just, one more time, quote into the record Mr. Egan's 

response with respect to entering into dealings with these two 

corporations.  And he says: 

 

 . . . I have concluded there (is) no substantive issues which 

would cause me to recommend against the Gaming 

Commission doing business with any of the short listed firms 

(which include the two firms that were finally short listed). 

 

So in closing I just say, I do trust his judgement, I trust his 

integrity, and I also as well respect the decision made by the 

Department of Justice with respect to what is appropriate to 

release and what is not. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I wonder, if you got all this 

confidence and everything was fine, why can't we see the 

report?  I can't see . . . your logic seems to break down.  On one 

hand you're telling us you're the only person that has to see that 

report, or you're the only one that has to agree with it.  We feel 

there's something wrong with it.  We also feel that we have the 

right, as guardians of the taxpayers' purse just as much as you 

are, that we should have the right to either access to Mr. Egan 

and ask him questions or access to the report. 

 

Now you can't have it both ways, Mr. Minister.  Either you've 

got something wrong in that report that you don't want us to see 

or . . . well I don't know what else, what other reason you'd 

have for withholding that report. 

 

Are you afraid?  Is there something that's politicly damaging to 

you or some of your friends?  As far as I'm concerned, that's a 

very poor excuse.  Just because the Justice people said you 

don't have to release it, that doesn't mean you can't release it.  If 

it's all above-board and everything's fine, why can't you release 

it?  If there isn't something hidden in there, why can't we see 

that report or talk to Mr. Egan, who we happen to agree that is 

just as trustworthy as anyone else.  We want to talk to Mr. 

Egan or see his report.  What's wrong with that? 

 

(2030) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to say to the 

hon. member, and I've been through this I think no less than a 

half a dozen times today, that I am prepared to ask what 

elements of the investigation with respect to these companies 

we may be able to release. 

 

But I also say that I wouldn't want to put in jeopardy the 

economic viability of any of the companies who were 

short-listed, because there may be financial statements.  And I 

think you would understand, as a businessman, that it wouldn't 

be appropriate to 

release that kind of information.  And I think with respect to 

the integrity of the Gaming Commission, to release information 

that they had been asked to keep on a confidential basis and to 

use on a confidential basis would as well be inappropriate. 

 

So I say to you as I've said to the other members, that I'm 

willing to see if there's anything of a technical nature that we 

may be able to release, and if in fact there is, I'll be more than 

willing to send it across to the members tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you ask what part we want, 

we want to see it all.  We don't want to . . . if you cherry-pick 

through the report is what you're doing now, you're only 

answering the parts you want to answer.  You don't give us the 

full story.  We want to see the story. 

 

Now we happen to believe there's something wrong in there.  

Now if you say there's nothing wrong, then release the report.  

And as far as you defending them two companies who are 

proven to be untrustworthy, I just can't see it.  I think all you're 

doing is throwing up a smokescreen that has got no validity to 

it, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I thought I'd just try 

one more time.  I can recall the hon. members asking for 

information with respect to businesses because they were 

concerned because of public interest and public funds being 

involved with businesses, and then you have to rank which you 

think would be more important, the public interest or the 

private interest. 

 

And often NDP members sitting here and standing here would 

say, I would like to see the information offered.  So my 

colleagues have simply asked the question.  This seems to be of 

large public interest, considerable public money.  It's of great 

public interest in the United States.  And the minister's only 

excuse is, well it's a private company and we wouldn't want to 

jeopardize their business opportunities if we let Mr. Egan come 

here and talk about it. 

 

Doesn't that seem rather weak?  Is that your best shot?  Is that 

the only reason that you can't have us examine in more detail 

the consequences of what's happening?  Is that it?  Because 

we're dealing with business?  I think governments deal with 

business every day and they're brought before committees.  

They're brought before standing committees. 

 

Pretty weak argument in something that is so on the minds of 

the public, gaming is, gambling is, on reserve, off reserve, in 

the United States, urban, rural.  How can the minister say, well 

it really is not any of the public's business.  Pretty, pretty 

shallow argument. 

 

So I ask the minister, could he explain why these particular 

businesses should be exempt from public scrutiny by the 

members of the Assembly?  Why should these businesses be 

exempt when there are businesses and all kinds of them that 

legislative 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2127 

assemblies have examined and looked at.  What's his unique 

reason here not to have . . . open the books?  What's the reason? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, I'd just 

like to say to the member opposite, I well remember the years 

from '86 to '91 when we sat over there and you sat over here, 

and the questions.  And I gained an understanding of the role of 

the opposition, as I've gained an understanding of the role of 

government.  And I think as a member who was the premier of 

this province for some 10 years, you clearly understand why 

some of the information may be on a confidential basis as well. 

 

With respect to statements that may come from companies that 

were submitted in good faith to the Gaming Commission -- 

financial statements -- I would think that would be an 

inappropriate document to release.  Some of these are trading 

on the stock market, and I don't think it would probably serve 

well to have that kind of information floating around the 

province or around North America. 

 

And I think you can also understand, and I hope you can 

understand, integrity, in terms of a commitment to another 

jurisdiction, to maintain confidentiality with respect to 

information.  And I'm sure you do understand that. 

 

But let me just say that I well understand my years in 

opposition.  And I understand the nature and the context of the 

questions and why they were posed.  Sometimes, I admit, it 

was for political reasons, and other times it was really and truly 

a seriously . . . a belief that we wanted to protect the public 

interest.  And I think it's no different with you as opposition, 

with you and the caucus that you sit with, and that sometimes it 

really is legitimate and sometimes the questions may be posed 

for political posturing. 

 

But I say just in closing tonight that I don't want to put the 

Gaming Commission, and I don't think the Gaming 

Commission wants to put itself, in a position of jeopardy where 

it may jeopardize relationships with other law enforcement 

agencies or with other jurisdictions.  I respect that. 

 

I take Mr. Egan at his word when he indicates that he's willing 

to recommend these companies as being short-listed and being 

comfortable with that.  And I guess I'll leave my comment at 

that. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Just to quote, Mr. Minister, your latter 

comment about in some cases, you recall in opposition you 

really wanted to look at the issue because you genuinely 

believed it was in the public interest to open the books.   Now 

we genuinely know, as you do, the public is very interested in 

this.  There are -- not to exaggerate -- scandals in the United 

States.  There's police investigations, FBI investigations. 

 

It's very difficult politically, the whole realm of gambling, as 

you know; you're dealing with it on a day-to-day basis.  I can't 

think of an issue that has more 

public concern, whether it's in Prince Albert or whether it's in 

Las Vegas.  I mean people are really interested, on and off 

reserves.  So that excuse that this isn't really of interest, you 

know, is fairly weak.  So we genuinely want to know.  And 

there's a great deal of public interest. 

 

And there's . . . secondly, there's a lot of money involved.  So if 

there's a lot of interest, if there's been many, many police 

investigations, and there are contracts let . . . and we just want 

to look at the situation. 

 

And your only defence is, well these people are in business and 

we promised that we wouldn't talk about their businesses.  

We're not particularly interested in publishing, or having 

published, their financial records, their profit and loss 

statements.  But if they're profitable, I mean I suppose the stock 

market would like to see that. 

 

Maybe the minister could tell us which companies are publicly 

traded on the stock market.  I didn't know that there were 

companies here involved -- maybe I should have -- that were 

publicly traded.  And he can let me know and then we could 

perhaps decide, well is it in the public interest to look at a 

public company that's publicly traded on the stock market?  We 

can go to stockholders' meetings, we can go to shareholders' 

meetings, and we can certainly ask them a great deal of 

questions.  In fact I'm sure that many would like to be able to 

do that. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, as sincerely as I can, we genuinely believe 

the public would like to know more, honestly believe the public 

would like to know.  And if your only excuse is, well we can't 

tell you because these are private firms, that is, you know, one 

of the weakest arguments I would get from . . . certainly from 

your government, Mr. Minister, or your political party, that the 

private sector is quite deserving of all this protection when you 

have in many cases, politically, when you think about 

nationalized companies, taken them over, opened them up, 

kicked them out, run them out of town, all kinds . . . 

 

I mean you have no regard, in some cases, for private 

companies at all if it suits your political will.  Now if the public 

wants to know what kind of people we're dealing with in the 

private sector, and you say I can't tell you because you have so 

much respect for the private sector, I don't think it washes.  It 

just doesn't jibe. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, could you tell us again what reason you 

would have why the private sector needs to be protected from 

having the public look at them because of the gaming activities 

we have in the province of Saskatchewan, in the light of all the 

police investigations with the people that have been involved in 

the United States that have contracted here in Canada? Could 

you just tell us again why you think you can't let the public 

know about these private companies that you think are so 

special. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I would want the 



2128 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

member not to focus on just whether these be publicly traded 

companies or whether they not be publicly traded companies.  I 

want to say that I do understand that there's a lot of interest in 

the whole casino and the whole gaming program.  I think that's 

going on throughout North America and clearly neighbouring 

provinces are in no different position. 

 

You asked which companies that we've been talking about are 

publicly traded.  I can tell you that VLC is, GTECH, and IGT 

(International Game Technology) are three companies that are 

publicly traded.  But I think the issue here is not whether or not 

we would want to or are trying or attempting to protect any 

individual company.  I think what we are trying to do is protect 

the integrity of the Gaming Commission. 

 

As I've indicated, law enforcement agencies have shared 

information with Mr. Egan and I think you're well aware of 

that.  And they've asked that the information be kept 

confidential, and I think that that should be honoured.  We've 

had information from other gaming commissions and they've 

asked that that be kept confidential, and I think that that should 

be honoured.  I think that's more than appropriate. 

 

So I would just say that if the Gaming Commission is to 

establish a rapport with other agencies, that the commitments 

that are made with respect to confidentiality need to remain 

confidential.  More than one of your caucus colleagues tonight 

have asked that the whole report be released and I've indicated 

that Justice has indicated that that should not be the process and 

it shouldn't be done; that Mr. Egan has indicated that it 

shouldn't be done. 

 

What I have indicated, though, is through the whole 

investigation, in terms of the technical details of the 

corporation and other aspects that they've looked at, if there are 

any areas that the Gaming Commission would be willing to 

release, I'm more than willing to ask them to make those 

portions of the investigation public. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- You've raised a couple of questions, Mr. 

Minister.  With respect to these companies, could you provide 

us with letters from these companies that request you to keep 

all this information confidential? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I would say to the member from 

Estevan, there are perhaps two areas where these kinds of 

requests may be.  One in the request for proposal in the 

response to the proposal call.  The other may be within the 

documents that were produced and put forward to the 

investigative body. 

 

We may have something in terms of the proposal call asking 

that information be maintained on a confidential basis.  We 

don't have the proposals calls here tonight but we're certainly 

more than willing to pass on any of those kinds of documents 

that may be contained in the proposal call. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- With all the respect in the world, Mr. Minister, 

you've been using this excuse over and over and over again that 

there's been this big request for 

confidentiality and you can't now recall if you've got any letters 

or if you've got any requests.  You might have some on 

proposals; you might have some here. 

 

I mean that's . . . If you're so convinced . . . It seems to me 

you've convinced yourself, Mr. Minister, that that's the best 

excuse to come up with.  I asked you for letters requesting that 

the information stay confidential and you haven't found any.  

It'd be more than fair that if you've used that as your major 

excuse that the companies have probably written you.  And I'd 

have them handy if that's your number one reason for not doing 

this. 

 

Second question: are you aware of any allegations with respect 

to stock manipulation in these publicly traded companies? 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well let me answer your second 

question last.  I was made aware and we've gone through this 

again.  And I don't know if you were unavailable at the time, 

but we've gone through this dozens and dozens of times. 

 

I was made aware on April 28 that an official from the West 

Virginia gaming commission was indicted for insider trading 

for purchasing shares of VLC, a publicly traded company, 

VLC.  And I mean we've been through this.  The member from 

Morse and I have been through this.  This is I think about a 

month now.  And I mean this is nothing new.  But I guess if we 

need to we can go through it again. 

 

So that was on April 28 that I was made aware of that.  And at 

that time I asked that negotiations halt between VLC and the 

Gaming Commission pending what we were told was a 

potential for two outstanding indictments.  And until we find 

out where those two outstanding indictments are, we had 

indicated that we would cease negotiations with VLC. 

 

Now to make it clear, the indictments were against a gaming 

official from West Virginia.  This had nothing to do with an 

official from VLC.  But we heard there were two outstanding 

indictments and we were concerned.  And as a caution, we ask 

that negotiations stop with VLC.  And I don't know that we can 

be much more open with the member from Estevan. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if you have confirmed that 

there were serious allegations and maybe charges and perhaps 

even indictments with respect to stock manipulation from 

companies that you're . . . purchase stock -- okay -- 

irregularities, did those companies request confidentiality? 

 

In other words, if we have a publicly traded company where 

there is irregularities taking place, stock manipulation or 

buying or selling or something, some sort of bribery and maybe 

some indictments, did those companies send you letters and 

say, but don't publicly talk about our request to you?  Have you 

got letters from any of the companies that were either publicly 

traded and investigated or under investigation for 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2129 

manipulation requesting that you keep the information between 

you and them confidential?  Do you have any letters like that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I say to the member from 

Estevan . . . and I guess what I want to do is sort of straighten 

this out and put it on the road that really it should be on.  The 

Gaming Commission has indicated that they have had requests 

from law enforcement agencies and from other gaming 

commissions that they keep information obtained with respect 

to investigations and information shared, that they maintain 

confidentiality. 

 

I have been through this not once, not five times, many times, 

many times.  I have shown the member from Morse and other 

members of your caucus that Mr. Egan was satisfied with the 

short list as he had reviewed it and that it was appropriate to do 

business with these companies.  And I think that information 

the member from Morse might want to share with you as well 

because that was quite clear. 

 

And let me just correct your slant on the happenings in the 

United States.  An official from West Virginia was indicted for 

insider trading in that he dealt with one company, knowing full 

well he was going to purchase the VLTs from that company, 

bought shares in the company.  That's the official that was 

indicted.  And I think that's what the member from Morse was 

referring to earlier tonight.  We've been through that as well. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well we'll leave you alone, but you certainly 

haven't convinced anybody watching television or certainly 

anybody in here that you have got . . . that you have letters, that 

you have requests, that you have . . . I mean it's nothing but 

ducking and hiding. 

 

We just wanted to put it on the record that you have no letters 

to offer, nothing to substantiate what you've been saying as 

your excuse for not having the public look at this, or bringing 

Mr. Egan in.  So we'll just have it on the record.  And when the 

public finally gets to the bottom of it, then we'll know. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, you certainly haven't convinced anybody here 

and I'm not sure you've convinced your colleagues, or even 

your staff, Mr. Minister.  So I have no more questions, Mr. 

Chairman.  I will thank the minister for his attempted 

cooperation. 

 

The division bells rang from 8:50 p.m. until 8:58 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Devine Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth Haverstock 

-- 8 

Nays 

Wiens Johnson 

 

 

Tchorzewski Serby 

Lingenfelter Wormsbecker 

Shillington Crofford 

Anguish Stanger 

Teichrob Knezacek 

Kowalsky Harper 

Carson Keeping 

Cunningham Carlson 

Koenker Renaud 

Pringle Langford 

Lautermilch Jess 

Hamilton  

-- 25 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, what I'd like to ask is a 

number of questions as it relates to the hotels and the VLCs 

that you're going to be putting in them.  Have you purchased 

any VLCs to this point for placement in hotels? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Not at this point, Mr. Chairman.  

We have in the neighbourhood of 250 VLTs in hotels in the 

south-east part of the province, sort of an "L" around the 

American border and then up the east side.  Those are all leased 

VLTs, so we have purchased none at this point. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Those are all leased.  What's the percentage of 

contribution that is made in each of the areas of . . . who gets 

what percentage . . . I guess I should say, the hoteliers get what 

per cent?  The provincial government gets how much?  And is 

there a third group of people that get money out of the video 

lottery terminals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, the breakdown of 

profit sharing, and this is the net profits on the machines, is 15 

per cent to the hotels, 15 per cent to the people we lease from 

and 70 per cent to the government. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- In Bear Claw and the arrangement that you 

have there, is that the same way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, in Bear Claw, as 

with other exhibition association casinos throughout the 

province, they're strictly table games.  There are no VLTs, and 

the percentage of take that the provincial government is 

involved in is 9 per cent of gross. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, where is the pay-out come on 

the VLTs that are in the hotels?  Is the pay-outs . . . if there's a 

bingo, who pays the pay-out on the VLTs, or do you only take 

the 15 per cent and the 15 per cent and the 70 per cent from the 

remainder, or where does the pay-out come from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member, the 

numbers that we talked about -- the 15 per cent for the hotelier, 

15 per cent for the people we lease from and 70 per cent for the 

province -- is out of the net win.  And these VLTs are 

functioning at 92.6 per cent pay-out. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The pay-out on these is 92.6 per cent. 



2130 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

And so that out of the 7.4 per cent, you get a pay-out or a 

receivable to the hotelier of 15 per cent of the 7.4 per cent, and 

you get a pay-out to the leasing company of 15 per cent of the 

7.4, and you get 70 per cent of the . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- That's right, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How much does the arrangement at Bear 

Claw provide to the province?  How much does it provide to 

the holders of the gambling devices they have there?  And how 

much accrues to the lessees of the equipment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, of net win, the 

government takes 9 per cent.  From the total of the net win, the 

expenses -- light, overhead, I would assume salaries, things of 

that nature -- are taken out of that portion.  And the balance is 

put into a trust fund. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- A trust fund for who? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well there's a trust fund set up at 

this point for the first nations people and the exhibition 

association, the Weyburn exhibition association.  This is the 

first one . . . casino of its kind in the province, in that there are 

no other exhibition associations in joint ventures with first 

nations people.  So what we have done, until we are able to 

negotiate a split of the balance, the 9 per cent less . . . and then 

the expenses and then the amount that's put into the trust fund.  

That's under negotiation and will continue until we get the 

casinos up and running, which we would expect to be 

sometime next spring.  The casinos up and running, I guess I 

mean by that that the casinos across the province will include 

slot machines that they don't have right now. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What's the net pay-out if the video lottery 

terminals have a 92 per cent point six per cent pay-out, how 

much is the pay-out on the Bear Claw Casino? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well it's difficult to say what the 

pay-out is going to be because it's . . . you can't program the 

probability of win.  In a blackjack game, I mean there's no way 

of knowing what the quality or the expertise of the players are 

at the table.  And I guess you could . . . you may be able to 

figure out a rough percentage over a period of time, but from 

day to day and from evening to evening that percentage will 

change.  So this is why the calculation in terms of the 

government's percentage -- less expenses and then whatever is 

the balance goes into the trust fund.  But in terms of 

programing a percentage pay-out, you can't. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well does that mean then that if there's a large 

pay-out at a given time that they will go back to the trust fund 

to get the money back out of it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, that's true.  Any 

losses in a given evening would be covered out of the trust 

fund and then, you know, a good evening would probably 

mean a cash injection into the trust fund. 

Mr. Martens: -- Where did the money go that was there for the 

time that it was operating prior to the last time it's opened up?  

I heard that the RCMP had taken $70,000.  I'm not sure 

whether that was accurate but that was what was in the paper.  

What was the volume of dollars that was earned in the period 

of time that they were open? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd have to say to the 

hon. member that I have no knowledge of what was seized in 

terms of cash.  I guess I read in the paper as you read what is 

announced.  That question would be more appropriately asked 

of the Department of Justice.  I have no knowledge. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well don't you think that you have a 

responsibility there to look into that to make sure that you 

know what's going on because if you're holding it in trust for 

one . . . You're responsible for gaming in the province of 

Saskatchewan, so you should have, be able to have access to 

that information.  And I would suggest that the public should 

know how much money was involved in those few weekends 

and times that the gaming was going on at Bear Claw, and I'd 

like to know that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well the difference is, is that we 

administer the operation and the supervision of legal casinos.  

The casino that had operated in Bear Claw prior to the licensed 

casino was an illegal operation, and as such, the Gaming 

Commission had no inspectors, we had no monitoring of the 

games, we had no idea of what the revenue would generate.  It 

was the RCMP that acted on the casino which was, under the 

Criminal Code of Canada, illegal.  They stepped in, and what 

they confiscated in terms of equipment or in terms of cash, I 

have no way of knowing.  And I don't really know that it's 

appropriate. 

 

We're in the business, the Gaming Commission is in the 

business of regulating legal casinos under the policy 

framework of the Government of Saskatchewan that comply 

with the Criminal Code of Canada.  Those we regulate and 

monitor on a regular basis.  We know what the net win would 

be.  And you know, I mean, those we monitor.  But illegal 

casinos, we're not in the business of monitoring. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, who pays the telephone costs, 

the insurance costs, the electricity costs in relation to the 

hoteliers having the VLTs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member 

from Morse, the western Canada lottery foundation is on 

contract to operate and maintain the casinos, the 250 casinos -- 

roughly, that's the figure -- that are in operation at this point.  

The hotelier, as I understand it, is responsible for the electricity 

to run them and the labour to maintain the pay-outs and that 

sort of thing.  But all of the other functions that are done, are 

done under contract with the Western Canada Lottery 

Corporation. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay then, on the telephone and insurance, do 

you pay the Western Canada Lottery for 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2131 

that contract through the Gaming Commission to offset the 

costs, or does it come out of the hotel or the lessor or the 

government?  That's what I need to know. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The insurance, as I understand it, is 

paid by the hoteliers, but the funds all go directly to the 

Western Canada Lottery Corporation and they reimburse the 

Government of Saskatchewan for our portion. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Do you know what percentage of the cost that 

the telephones are in relation to the VLTs as a percentage of 

the net?  Can you tell us what that is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- We're just looking up now the 

details of the budget, and I'm not sure if the cost of operating 

the telephones are in that or if they're not.  But we can have a 

look.  And while my officials are looking, if you'd like to 

maybe ask another question we can go on with that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Can you provide the committee with the 

reasons why you wouldn't allow VLTs in bingo halls? 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, we've been quite 

firm and are quite strong in the conviction that these VLTs 

should be placed only in age-restricted venues.  As you will 

know, bingo halls don't operate in that function.  One of the 

reasons that we chose beverage rooms is because they are 

age-restricted, and we feel very strongly that minors should not 

have access, either visible access or physical access, to 

electronic gaming. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the problem that arises 

when VLTs become involved in a society -- and this is taken 

from studies that have been done throughout the United States 

-- when VLTs are provided to the society, that is the 

jurisdiction, the VLTs' demand goes up till it consumes 80 per 

cent of the gambling volume, and the bingos and the Nevadas, 

they go down to 20 per cent. 

 

And that raises a whole lot of concern on the part of the bingo 

halls and the charities; that there is a serious concern on their 

part that today, in the total volume of gambling, Nevadas and 

bingo halls take in about $210 million.  And they take in that 

210 million . . . the charities get $40 million out of that and that 

$40 million goes to pay various kinds of agencies and 

charitable organizations throughout the province. 

 

And they have a serious, serious concern, Mr. Minister, that 

when the 80 per cent figure is taken on that $210 million, and 

they will lose it to the video lottery terminal industry, that they 

then will have no opportunity to say except goodbye.  They 

will have then 17 per cent of $40 million for a total take in 

bingo halls rather than 17 per cent or 18 per cent of the take in 

the $210 million they have now, that they take on the Nevadas 

and the bingo halls. 

 

And so their concern is that when you introduce this 

and because you exclude them, they will have no opportunity.  

And the conclusion they come to, Mr. Minister, is this:  that 

you are deliberately doing this so that you can take away the 

percentage of opportunity that they get in the gambling 

industry for money that they can take for the charities to fund 

various things in the community. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is going to have a ripple, backfire effect 

to those charities that these individuals are sponsoring.  They 

are in a broad-base part of society, but they do provide a very, 

very concentrated, definite financial benefit to many, many 

charitable organizations who are very legitimate and who 

provide a public service, which today is not being funded out 

of anywhere else except those places. 

 

That, Mr. Minister, is the reason why bingos have been asking 

you to have a meeting with them so that they can tell you 

what's going on.  And they have been refused. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, has been consistently told us over the 

past three months -- that they have not been able to come in 

contact with you because they fear, they fear that you're taking 

this and deliberately putting this money into the provincial 

coffers, in the Consolidated Fund, so that you can avoid having 

to deliver money through to the charities.  And that is a serious 

concern to them. 

 

And so I want to raise that with you today, and I want you to 

give us an explanation other than age as being a reason why 

you put it into the bars. 

 

There are lots of places.  For example, you can't buy cigarettes 

if . . . I believe it's 16 years of age.  And they don't put them 

just in the bars so that they can buy cigarettes in the bars.  

They're in any convenience store in the province. 

 

And you have age restrictions on driver's licence.  You don't 

exclude people from driving in a family just because you have 

one guy that's under 16 years of age. 

 

You've got lots of these kinds of places.  And you could locate 

those video lottery terminals in areas of that bingo hall where it 

wouldn't impact one way or another in that bingo hall.  And yet 

they would have an opportunity to share in the benefits that 

accrue in a different type of gaming. 

 

And so, Mr. Minister, those are some of the concerns raised by 

the charities in relation to discussion that I tried to point out to 

you.  And I'd like to have a response from you on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, the questions that 

the member raises, the statements that he make, certainly are of 

concern to us as we move towards the introduction of casinos 

and the video lottery terminal program. 

 

I was in Manitoba just a few short weeks ago.  We met with the 

minister in charge of gaming in Manitoba, 



2132 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

with their Justice minister, and as well with the chairman of 

their gaming commission.  I think the gentleman's name is Mr. 

Funk, and Mr. Funk indicated to us that as they introduced their 

video lottery terminal program in Manitoba they were 

concerned that it would have a major negative impact on bingo.  

Now he indicates to us that hasn't been the case in Manitoba. 

 

We don't know what the impact is going to be in 

Saskatchewan.  So as we set our revenue sharing with 

aboriginal people, with exhibition associations, and when we 

look at the amount of revenue and how that revenue is split, 

we're very cognizant of the fact that there may in fact be some 

negative impact on break-opens, which affect a number of 

organizations, and that bingos as well may in fact be negatively 

impacted. 

 

I would want to say as well the studies that the Gaming 

Commission officials have done and the information that's been 

passed on to me would indicate that every jurisdiction appears 

to be a little bit different.  Similarly, gaming patterns sort of 

break down and are different with respect to socio-economic 

background, age, and sex. 

 

So in terms of just how the introduction of the VLT program 

and the casino operation will impact on bingos were really 

quite difficult to say.  But we are aware that there may in fact 

be negative impact.  We're also aware of concerns of the 

charities and the charity associations who are involved in 

bingos, and we will be monitoring that very closely. 

 

I want to say with respect to meetings with bingo associations 

and people involved in the charitable associations, we have on 

the minister's advisory committee people who are from that 

background who are involved in charities.  And I can say that 

to my knowledge there have been no refusals to meet with any 

bingo associations from my office as long as I've been the 

minister in charge of gaming. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I have a detailed study by 

Raymond James & Associates Incorporated, a member of the 

New York Stock Exchange, and they have a report out that 

indicates that this translates into an 80 per cent slide into the 

video lottery terminal system.  And this was given to me by the 

bingo association, so they understand a little bit about the 

details of what's going on. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, as it details throughout this whole 

package, this study indicates and it just goes up like this.  In 

three or four years, it hits the 80 per cent, and from then on, the 

bingos and the Nevadas are just gone.  They might as well 

forget even becoming involved in it. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is that concern that I raise to you 

because the charities have come to me on repeated occasions 

and told me over and over again that it's a money grab on the 

Department of Finance's agenda.  And that is the reason why 

they're becoming involved in it, because that way they can take 

it all, 

they can take the 70 per cent of the money for themselves and 

they don't have to give any to the charities.  They can take it all 

on their own, and then say to the people, well that's just the 

way it works, you got to be involved in it. 

 

But the charities wanted to have these video lottery terminals in 

their bingo halls so that they can get the benefit of that transfer 

of what is involved in a video lottery terminal centre.  And they 

want to have access to that. 

 

They have made representation to the former minister; they 

tried to get in touch with her; she wouldn't meet with them.  

And I would say, sir, that they would want to have a time to 

spend with you so that they can tell you what is happening 

around the world.  And they will give you the opportunity to 

take a look at these studies themselves so that they can see 

what's going on.  And we need to have an absolute 

commitment from you, Mr. Minister, that you will meet with 

them to talk about what their benefit could be.  Because the 

excuse that you use, that it's an age-restricted area, doesn't cut 

with them.  They have told me that.  That was an issue that was 

raised with the Minister of Finance.  They said it doesn't 

matter; we can have a restricted area.  That's no problem, but 

we want to have that opportunity in our bingo halls.  That, Mr. 

Minister, is what they've been asking for you to talk over with 

them, and at no point in time have they ever had that 

opportunity. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, let me say to 

the member from Morse that if the bingo associations -- any in 

particular or all as a group, the consolidation of their leadership 

-- would request a meeting with me, I can assure you that we 

will do everything in our power to structure a meeting. 

 

As I've indicated before, my office -- and we just contacted 

them to double-check -- is not aware of any meetings that have 

been refused by my office.  And I give them the public 

commitment tonight that if they care to meet, if they choose to 

meet with me, I certainly am more than willing to meet with 

them. 

 

I want to say with respect to allowing VLTs into bingo halls, 

over a period of years there has been a massive change in terms 

of bingo functioning, how it works, how the revenue sharing 

has gone.  And I want to say that I think a lot has been done in 

the last while to ensure that charities are getting a larger portion 

of that form of gaming dollar than they were years back.  And I 

want to say that we as a government want to ensure that the 

vast majority of bingo gaming dollars go back to the people in 

the communities from which those dollars come. 

 

In terms of allowing video lottery terminals into bingos, I 

frankly don't see that in the cards in the near future.  And the 

reason is partly, I guess, because of age-restricted venue that 

we feel quite strongly about, and I'll speak to that for a just a 

couple of seconds before I sit down.  But I think the most 

important thing that I would want to say is that the introduction 

of video lottery terminals into beverage rooms is a fairly 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2133 

major undertaking.  We want to make sure that it's done in a 

structured fashion.  We want to ensure that we're not 

over-saturating the market -- that we can only guess at what it 

is, we can do an educated guess as to what the market will be. 

 

But I want to say that we would rather go slowly on the 

introduction of gaming in this province to ensure that we don't 

have an over-saturation of the market, that we can have a 

strong and a controlled regulation of not only the video lottery 

terminals but of the new casinos that will be starting up 

because I think that's really very important. 

 

I talked with the member from Greystone earlier this evening 

with respect to sort of the mandate and what I felt was an 

important role.  And clearly one of them is regulatory.  And I 

think in order to have a well-regulated industry, we have to 

make sure that we have a structured introduction of all forms of 

gaming. 

 

So I would say, clearly I'm willing to meet with the bingo 

associations.  I would say at this time I don't believe that it will 

be the policy of the Government of Saskatchewan to introduce 

VLTs into bingo halls at this time.  I wouldn't rule that out at 

some time in the future but I certainly wouldn't see it within the 

next year or so. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the combined charities 

operating bingo halls in Saskatchewan have given you a report 

of what they would like to see in the video lottery terminals 

because they gave it to me.  And its submission is by the 

combined charities operating bingo halls in Saskatchewan to 

the Government of Saskatchewan.  And it was presented just 

within the last three, four months, so you should have 

somewhere on hand that information. 

 

And they talk about the volume of dollars that accrues to the 

VLTs as it relates to all other gaming once this is established.  

In Montana they have for example, 86 per cent of it is VLTs.  

Other places it's typical of that and that report that I have from 

the New York Stock Exchange focuses on that as well. 

 

And at the conclusion, Mr. Minister, what they did is they set 

up in part 5, they set up a business program that deals with 

capital costs, the control, the maintenance, the site locations 

and revenue.  And, Mr. Minister, they would like to be a part of 

that. 

 

(2130) 

 

I don't know whether you completely understood what will 

happen if it goes down to 20 per cent of what they were before.  

That is only $40 million of total volume gambling in bingo 

halls.  Now that $40 million, you've got to multiply that times 

17 per cent in order to get what they are going to get.  And that 

is not a whole lot of money that they're going to receive.  So 

their concern is not that they maintain that 17 per cent, but that 

they retain the industry in the gambling. 

 

And they want to be involved in that discussion and they want 

to have an opportunity to meet with you to 

talk about that.  And other ministers have received this 

information.  Your Gaming Commission should have had this 

available to them and they could have then become involved in 

the discussion.  But what you have, Mr. Minister, is clearly 

some communication problems, because they should have been 

able to present this to you.  Because I'm almost certain they 

have because that's what they indicate on the beginning of the 

submission, that they have. 

 

So I want to have an assurance from you, Mr. Minister, that 

you will not only meet with them but will be open-minded in 

relation to involving them with video lottery terminals. 

 

I'm going to say to you this, that age restrictions in bars is not a 

good argument.  I think that's an excuse.  And I would say one 

other thing.  I would say one other thing to you, Mr. Minister, 

and that is that as far as I would be able to tell, alcohol and 

gambling would not necessarily become the best thing for 

controlling the addiction that there is in gambling and in 

alcohol, and the combination of the two would make it 

extremely worse. 

 

In the bingo halls you don't have liquor, so you could have a 

reasoned approach to the kinds of gambling that's going to 

happen.  And that, Mr. Minister, is the kind of thing that these 

people are also concerned about and probably you need to have 

some of your Gaming Commission people address that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, I want 

to make a few comments.  First of all I would want to suggest 

that the comparison between what may happen in 

Saskatchewan and what has happened in Montana may be an 

unfair analogy in that Montana has 7,000 machines for a 

population of some 800,000 people. 

 

At maximum, we plan to introduce, at this point, 3,500 

machines to this province, a population of a million people.  So 

I guess in terms of the impact of VLTs in Montana -- and this 

is why I'm saying there are so many variables in introducing 

this industry and it's going to be really difficult to determine 

what the end result is -- but I think it's not reasonable to 

compare a population of 800,000 with 7,000 VLTs to a 

population of a million people, as Saskatchewan is, and our 

intention to introduce half of that amount of VLTs. 

 

Now let me say as well that studies that we've had completed, 

one by Mr. Eadington of the University of Nevada who is one 

of the foremost gaming experts in that jurisdiction, indicate that 

at full flight the per capita potential for gaming in 

Saskatchewan could reach $500 per capita.  Now I don't know 

if that's a realistic figure.  I guess we're going to have to wait 

and see.  But at this present point it averages about $150 per 

person in this province. 

 

So as you can see, two variables.  One, we don't plan on 

introducing, lock stock and barrel, 7,000 machines in any 

venue that is requested of us nor in any establishment that is 

requested of us.  We want to see a 



2134 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

reasonable amount, what we feel will be a reasonable amount.  

We don't want to over-saturate the market but there is some 

potential in terms of the number of dollars that may be spent on 

gaming in the province. 

 

What I have said and what I will continue to say is that we feel 

very strongly and we think it is a good argument -- the 

age-restricted venue.  I don't believe it's appropriate to have 

children in areas where the VLTs will be operating.  I've been 

in these casinos and I've seen the environment and I don't think 

it's the place or the type of place where I would want to see 

children. 

 

And I'm not suggesting that there couldn't be an offside place 

to accommodate the admittance . . . and to prohibit the 

admittance of minors, but I say that we want to introduce this 

as a staged process.  We want to make sure that we're not 

over-saturating the market and we want to make sure that we 

can have control on it as the industry grows. 

 

Just in closing, let me say that the two neighbouring provinces, 

Manitoba and Alberta, have the same regulations that we plan 

to use -- that being VLTs not allowed in areas other than where 

there are age-restricted venues.  Now they may change their 

minds; I don't know.  And we may change . . . the Government 

of Saskatchewan may change its mind at some point in time 

down the road. 

 

But I would want to say, just in terms of logistics, we don't 

want to bite off any more than we can chew.  We think that we 

can manage the introduction of these VLTs; and we can do it -- 

maintain the security, have that system up and running. 

 

And I think as the industry matures and as the amount of 

gaming opportunities increase in the province, we'll have to be 

flexible in terms of how we share the revenue, how that 

revenue gets back into communities.  And I think that will be 

an ongoing process.  And we clearly intend to monitor very 

closely the impact of gaming in this province, not only with the 

aspect of revenue sharing, but the social impacts as well. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the information that I 

have here from the U.S. and for the information that was 

provided to the New York Stock Exchange, that they have 

assessments in Kansas, Wisconsin.  They must have 20 of 

them. 

 

They have provinces in Canada, almost all of them, outlined.  

They have four provinces in Australia.  And they take and 

assume that there is going to be an extensive switch in the 

gaming patterns in relation to video lottery terminals.  And 

that, Mr. Minister, is the reason why I raised it because there's a 

concern by the bingo hall operators that they are going to lose 

the opportunity to contribute to the society in a charitable way 

to the functions that they have normally received money for. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is a concern because it deals with the 

Lions clubs, it 

deals with Kiwanis clubs, it deals with Optimist clubs, it deals 

with ACT (Associated Canadian Travellers), every one of 

them.  And they provide a very, very legitimate benefit to the 

community and I don't want to see that eroded in any way, 

shape, or form. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, when we left off I was asking you what you believed 

to be the mandate of the Gaming Commission, given the 

provision of gaming as permitted under the Criminal Code of 

Canada, and you, I think in response indicated that the primary 

mandate would be one of regulation.  Do you believe that the 

government is involved to maximize revenues for the 

charitable purposes outlined in the Code? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member 

from Greystone, I guess we see this as . . . and certainly the 

charity is part of gaming.  It has historically been part of 

gaming in Saskatchewan and other jurisdictions as allowed by 

the Criminal Code of Canada.  As well, we see opportunities 

for first nations people.  We see as well exhibition associations 

playing a role in their communities as they have sponsored 

social events over the years, and we don't see their role 

disappearing. 

 

We think that there is room within the context of the Criminal 

Code of Canada for all of the individuals, charities as you've 

mentioned, and we certainly intend to ensure that their welfare 

and that their participation in gaming is going to remain. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you. Mr. Minister, who do you see 

as the most efficient deliverer of services with the monies 

available to be raised through gaming? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I guess it depends on which 

form of gaming.  If we're talking break-opens, I guess which 

delivery service is . . . there's one that's been in existence and 

we know that to be the case.  We see private industry, 

aboriginal people working with exhibition associations forming 

management teams to operate the new casinos. 

 

We have private industry involved with respect to restricted 

venues for video lottery terminals.  Clearly the exhibition 

associations, or the charitable associations are playing more 

and more a major role in terms of the operations of bingo.  So I 

guess I couldn't say that I see one particular operator as being 

perhaps better able to handle gaming than another.  I think 

you'll find good operators in all areas, and you'll find some 

poor ones, some better than others.  That's sort of the nature 

and how it works. 

 

But I guess the bottom line is that we see a cross-section of 

society benefiting from gaming.  I mean clearly the money is 

going to come out of the communities and from tourism.  And I 

guess it would be a responsibility to ensure that through one 

way or another, the people of the communities and of Indian 

bands benefit from the economic spin-offs of gaming.  I think 

that there's room for all to participate, but to specifically 

answer your question in terms of one operator being more 

efficient or better able to handle 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2135 

it than the other, I don't particularly see that.  I think we've got 

a number of players who can handle their roles very well. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  There are many 

forms of gaming, all with varying levels of accountability.  

Break-open Nevada tickets were at one point coming in from 

many different suppliers, which made it very difficult to 

control the number of tickets that were being sold, and whether 

or not the government was getting its licence fees on every 

box.  The previous administration signed a long-term contract 

with Western Gaming to be the sole supplier of break-open 

tickets. 

 

My question to you is: is it a condition of that contract that the 

tickets must be manufactured in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  Thank you for the 

question.  There are some -- as you will know -- some details 

of the contract with respect to Western Gaming, and one of the 

. . . I guess one of the criteria for the contract is that they 

maintain a good quality of break-open so that there's less risk 

of tampering and so on. 

 

With respect to manufacturing, I guess there's different degrees 

of manufacturing, and I would certainly prefer to see, right 

from the paper product through the printing and to the 

distribution, I'd like to see all of that done within the 

boundaries of Saskatchewan. 

 

I've had two appointments that I've had unfortunately had to 

cancel at Western Gaming in Saskatoon.  I wanted to go up and 

see their operation and see how their facility functions, but 

because of the legislative duties, sometimes, as you will know, 

that's not a possibility. 

 

But I guess to my mind the goal would be to have as much 

Saskatchewan content as we possibly could.  To be very honest 

with you, I haven't had enough time as a new minister in this 

portfolio to explore all of the facets of the break-open 

operation.  But I certainly intend to do that over the course of 

the summer. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Can you tell me 

how much time remains in that contract with Western Gaming, 

and what increases in revenues are anticipated by the Gaming 

Commission during this year? 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Madam Member, I'm led to believe 

-- but I'm not sure if this is absolutely correct, but we will get 

this information to you -- that the contract expires in June of 

1994.  We will ensure that you get the details of that.  The 

projected revenue for break-open tickets this year is 

$3,008,100. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Can you tell me if the 

government will be tendering contracts once the existing one 

runs out, and whether the tickets will 

have to be produced in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I think firstly what I'd like to 

do is review the details of the contract with Western Gaming.  I 

would like to know what other opportunities are available.  My 

understanding is that the printing of these tickets is a very 

expensive process.  And I'm not a printer, so I can't . . . I'm in 

no position to articulate just exactly what expensive is in regard 

to the printing of those or what that means. 

 

But I think what we would like to do is have a look at our 

options when the contract expires.  I will want to be assured 

that Western Gaming has done an appropriate job with respect 

to the distribution of these tickets. 

 

And as we do with other areas, we issue proposal calls.  It's 

certainly one of the things that we do in this province.  We 

want to see a fair system of bidding.  And if this particular 

operation opens up to a new contract, my assumption would be 

that we would be looking for proposal calls and from that 

submitting a proposal to cabinet for a decision. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Am I to 

understand that what you're saying, is that you will assume that 

there will be open tendering.  You won't guarantee that there'll 

be open tendering? 

 

And as an addition to that, just for further clarification, I would 

like to make the comment that there have indeed been people in 

Saskatchewan who are making a very high quality product 

prior to this arrangement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- To the member from Greystone, 

you know I agree.  I mean there are a number of things that are 

involved here, certainly more than just the quality of the 

product.  We would be interested in knowing what the 

Saskatchewan content would be, how many Saskatchewan 

employees, the reputability of the shareholders of the 

corporation, the kind of security that would be offered before 

we would make a decision as to which supplier if we were to 

put out a proposal call. 

 

Which is why on something like this I would probably prefer a 

proposal call if we were to use this route rather than a low-bid 

tender because there are so many different aspects to these.  I 

mean you're looking at an awful lot of dollars that change 

hands, and you want to ensure that the security is there and that 

the quality is there and that you're dealing with reputable 

people. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you. Mr. Minister, initially hotels 

were able to sell Nevada tickets as long as a portion of those 

revenues raised went to finance health care.  And can you tell 

me with the introduction of video lottery terminals, what the 

status of those revenues is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I would want . . . as you will 

know, the breakdown will be eighty-five, fifteen, in terms of 

the net on the VLTs.  The government's revenue, as I see it at 

this point, will be turned into general revenue and will be part 

of the 



2136 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

budgetary process as it is with Education, the Department of 

Highways.  And in the overall context of the budget decisions, 

the revenues would be weighed against the required 

expenditures and would be dealt with in that fashion.  And you 

may be asking if we're looking at dedicating government 

revenue to health care, as an example.  I wouldn't favour that 

proposal. 

 

I guess after having been through the budgetary process once I 

know how difficult it is to put these budgets together, and I 

don't know that a dedicated fund -- although it sounds good -- 

is going to serve the purpose of delivering health care. 

 

So I would rather see it into the Consolidated Fund and be part 

and parcel of the whole division in terms of putting the budget 

together. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I was actually 

talking about what already has been, not about the future, and 

so my question is how much will hospitals be losing as a result 

of this change? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well you know, as I've indicated to 

the member from Morse, I don't know that you can put a 

dollar-and-cents figure.  What we're going to do is we're going 

to monitor what the revenue base of break-opens is going to be.  

We're going to watch very closely what the impact is going to 

be on the charities as it pertains to bingo revenues.  We know 

there will probably be some shifts and we want to monitor and 

watch very closely what's happening. 

 

It's pretty difficult for me to speculate.  I mean I could stand 

here and say that I would suggest to my cabinet colleagues that 

we designate 15 per cent of the VLT revenue to health care, as 

an example, and 5 per cent to charities, or the other way 

around.  But not knowing what the impact of the introduction 

of VLTs' casinos is going to be, it's almost impossible . . . well 

it is impossible to do that with any degree of accuracy. 

 

So what I'm suggesting to . . . and have suggested to the 

member from Morse and I suggest to you as well, we are going 

to be looking very closely, monitoring very closely how the 

revenue shifts happen.  And I think that's important and it'll be 

an ongoing process as we introduce the new reforms of 

gaming. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Surely you 

know how much of the portion of break-open Nevada tickets 

went to finance health care.  I mean a portion already was 

there.  So how much are hospitals going to be losing as a result 

of no longer having those monies? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, we can pass over 

from '92, '93 the number of boxes sold, the gross revenue, the 

amount of expenses, the amount that the hospitals received, the 

amount of prizes that were paid back as well as the fees.  And 

if you would like a copy, I can have the page produce a copy 

for you and send it across.  Roughly it works out, and varies 

from year to year, but works out in the neighbourhood of 200 

to $250,000 a year on break-opens. 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Will that 

document actually talk as well about what you have been able 

to evaluate in terms of giving up of licensing fees on 

break-opens?  I mean that's no doubt going to be the result of 

the fact that they're going to be less popular than slot machines.  

So is there a number in that document that will give us some 

idea as to projected revenues lost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well as I've indicated, I don't know 

how we could project revenues lost.  We don't know what the 

sales are going to be.  As I indicated to the member from 

Morse, we had a study done by a professor at the University of 

Nevada, Eadington, who is a well-known expert in the field of 

gaming.  He indicates to us that at this present time in 

Saskatchewan there's about $150 per capita spent on gaming, 

and the potential for increase as other forms of gaming is 

introduced; and as the industry matures that there's potential for 

$500 per capita. 

 

Now how that might break down and if we can reach 500 or if 

we reach 300, I just don't know.  I guess we can speculate, but 

it would be nothing better than an educated guess. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Given the time 

this evening, I'm going to reserve the remainder of my 

questions until next sitting. 

 

Okay, sorry.  I actually looked at my watch instead of the 

clock.  If I may, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Minister, video lottery terminals have been the subject of 

much discussion even here and for some time now in the 

province.  In fact, the province has probably forgone 50 to $60 

million in revenue while the discussions have been going on. 

 

Can you tell me what the projections are for video lottery 

revenue for 1993 in the Gaming Commission budget and what 

the target deadlines are to ensure that those revenue projections 

are actually met? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- To the member from Greystone, 

we're projecting a revenue of $30,035,500.  This is assuming an 

effective start up date of July.  We are not sure if we're going . . 

. well, we're, as a matter of fact quite sure actually right now, 

our target date for having the central computer system up and 

running is the July 15. 

 

We will be, however, generating some revenue from the 

Western Canada Lottery pilot project.  We haven't got the final 

figures in there but the projection that we get from Western 

Canada Lottery on a preliminary basis would indicate that 

we're going to be very close to the figure that we budgeted for 

revenue for 1993. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  So you're saying that there are 

target deadlines that you have and the start-up date would be 

the July 15, was it?  Do you have other target deadlines that 

you have a time line in which you plan on meeting all of the 

different revenue projections?  Is this correct? 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2137 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well clearly, we will base revenue 

assumptions on start-up date of the VLT program.  Clearly we 

weren't going to be getting it introduced at the beginning of this 

fiscal year.  So you make your projections based on your best 

guesses, when you can get the technology up and running, 

when you can get it performing. 

 

I would suggest that any proper budget process or budgetary 

process would include estimates based on targets.  And our 

target for this year is revenue of just over $30 million for this 

fiscal year.  We believe we're very close to the target and that 

at the end of the year we'll have achieved our goal. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell me what the 

results have been in your discussions with the following 

groups, all of which have asked for some of the revenues once 

VLTs are operating, and what, if any, percentage sharing is 

going to take place -- the hotel industry, the charities licensed 

to operate bingos, private clubs such as veterans' clubs and 

curling clubs who will not be allowed to have the machines, 

and the horse racing industry whose revenues will be hurt by 

this move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I would want to say to the 

member from Greystone that, as I've indicated tonight, 

commitments to percentage of revenue haven't been given to 

charities other . . . And hotels, we've established an 85 per cent 

and 15 per cent split. 

 

The horse racing industry is in some -- the thoroughbred 

industry especially -- is in some very difficult financial 

difficulties as you will know.  And it appears that we're going 

to have to look at another way, if we're going to have the 

thoroughbred industry up and running in this province on the 

long term.  And we're going to have to look at a way of 

subsidizing that particular industry. 

 

Government subsidizes it to a point, at this point, as you well 

know.  And our problem in Saskatchewan is not unique.  

Throughout North America racing commissions and people 

who are interested in horse racing are struggling with 

maintaining a viable industry.  It's a high cost industry.  It 

clearly doesn't generate an awful lot of revenue and they have 

difficulty keeping the purses up. 

 

So we're going to be working with the Horse Racing 

Commission to see what we can do to help them maintain a 

viable industry.  We're looking at private clubs, service clubs, 

charities.  As I've indicated . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order.  It now being 10 o'clock, the 

committee will rise and report progress. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:02 p.m. 

 


