


















































Hansard: June 09, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2361 

 June 9, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to be 

able to introduce some petitions this afternoon on behalf of 

Saskatchewan folks. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from Saskatoon, Abernethy, 

most of southern Saskatchewan, Corning, Stoughton, 

Shaunavon, Mr. Speaker, Mankota, Humboldt, and some more 

from Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd be pleased to table those now. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm also 

pleased to table some petitions before the Assembly.  I'd like to 

read the prayer first: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petitions I have in my hand are signed 

by individuals from Saskatoon, Humboldt, Englefeld, Courval, 

Annaheim, Muenster, and a number from Regina. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have several 

petitions I would like to lay on the Table.  I will read the 

prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from down through the 

Eston, Lampman, Roche Percee, Estevan, Torquay, Eastend, all 

through that area, as far west as Naicam, and all through that 

country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would be pleased to lay these on the Table. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

some petitions to present today.  The prayer reads: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the McTaggart, 

Weyburn, Fillmore areas of the province, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

would like to lay this on the Table now. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have petitions to 

present on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan.  The prayer 

goes: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

From the town of Weyburn mostly and some from Regina.  I'd 

be happy to table these at this time. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a 

petition to lay on the Table today.  It's pertaining to SaskPower: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that the Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to do the 

following: 

 

 Order SaskPower to facilitate the production of non-utility 

generated power in areas of increased demand, namely 

Lloydminster and Meadow Lake; 

 

 Several companies in this area have applied to generate 

power.  Allowing non-utility generation of power in this area 

will make the construction of the power line and its attendant 

$42 million expenditure unnecessary. 

 

  Order the Minister of Environment to undertake a complete 

environmental assessment including public hearings; 

 

 Order SaskPower to table in the legislature a complete 

economic analysis by an independent auditor that proves that 

economic benefits of the proposed line exceed the economic 

benefits of non-utility generated power or conversion; 

 

  Further, order SaskPower to cease and desist all 



2362 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1993 

planning, surveying or preparation for construction of the 

Condie to the Queen Elizabeth 230,000-volt power line on 

any of the proposed routes until all other points in this 

petition are honoured. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from Dilke, Bethune, and 

there's quite a few from Regina, Moose Jaw.  There'd be 

landowners living in the city that own the land along the power 

line. 

 

I therefore lay this on the Table.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 

table some petitions with respect to the NewGrade upgrader.  

I'll read the prayer. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These are from major cities across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker 

-- from Weyburn, Estevan, several pages from Regina, from 

the city of Saskatoon - 

_ and from several rural communities. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to present to 

the Assembly today some petitions that have been given to me 

and the prayer goes: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I have people here from Watrous, from Shaunavon, from 

Tugaske, Eyebrow, Regina, and Fort Qu'Appelle, Balgonie.  I 

table them today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have petitions 

from concerned Saskatchewan citizens today pertaining to the 

NewGrade heavy oil upgrader.  I'll only read the prayer, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have several dozen petitioners who are 

all from the city of Regina, who wish to express their concern 

with what the government is 

doing in this regard, and I would be pleased to lay on the Table 

today on their behalf their names. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7), they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province praying that the Assembly defeat 

any legislation introduced to redefine the NewGrade Energy 

Inc. corporate governance and financing arrangements. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you and through 

you to the Assembly I would like to introduce a group of guests 

sitting your gallery today, 55 grade 7 students from Stewart 

Hawke School in Hudson Bay.  They are accompanied by 

Blain Emerson, Wendy Anderson, Garry Hein, Elvina Rumak, 

and Laurel Emerson. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce in the west 

gallery, Mr. Lee Schultz, a friend of mine and a resident of 

Regina, who is a former student of the Stewart Hawke School 

in Hudson Bay. And I would ask that we in the Assembly 

welcome our guests today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to introduce to you and through you to all the members of 

the House, a couple of ladies sitting up in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, just above me.  And they are my wife, Carol, and 

accompanying her here today is her sister Elizabeth Surcon 

from Yorkton. 

 

And I'm very pleased to see the ladies take some time out of 

what I know has been a very busy day shopping here in the 

city, to come down and join us for question period.  And quite 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to encourage them to stay for 

much of the afternoon, because the longer they stay here, Mr. 

Speaker, it's less time they have to spend money in the malls. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to ask all the members to offer them a 

warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Executive Council Publications 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, can you confirm that your office, 

Executive Council, has been using its staff and resources to 

distribute blatantly political material to NDP (New Democratic 

Party) constituency executive members? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't know what the 

hon. member is referring to.  I obviously can't 



June 9, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2363 

answer that unless I know what he is referring to. 

 

What Executive Council may be distributing in the eyes of 

Executive Council may not be what he sees through his eyes.  

So I don't know how one can answer that kind of a question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, if this has been 

taking place, if you have been using your office to distribute 

political propaganda to NDP executive members, do you feel 

this is an appropriate use of the Premier's office and of 

taxpayers' money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I have to give the 

same answer which I just gave to the first question.  The 

member has got a script that he insists on reading through.  Fair 

enough.  But I mean he has to show me what he's complaining 

about, and far be it for the Premier's office to be political. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, yesterday I 

received a package in the mail that was supposed to be sent to 

NDP MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly).  The 

return address on this package was Executive Council, Room 

110, Legislative Building -- your office, Mr. Premier. 

 

This package included a cover memo which reads:  NewGrade 

upgrader.  The following information is intended for 

distribution to your constituency executive members. 

 

One of the parts of the package is a blatantly partisan memo 

entitled: Devine's bad deal.  Mr. Premier, you are using your 

office and taxpayers' money to send NDP propaganda around 

to NDP executive members. 

 

Mr. Premier, that's totally inexcusable misuse of personal 

personnel and taxpayers' money for purely political purposes, 

and I would like to hear an explanation for that, Mr. Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, no explanation to 

the hon. member is required.  Because if the hon. member is 

saying that the Premier, including the former premier, or any 

premier for that matter, has no right, no obligation, no duty to 

mail out information pertaining to government policies and 

legislation and programs to government MLAs or to other 

people, party or other people -- we'll even include the 

Progressive Conservative Party people, if you want -- there's no 

problem in that context whatsoever.  And perhaps maybe some 

of them should know about how bad a deal you negotiated with 

FCL (Federated Co-operatives Ltd.). 

 

If the hon. member opposite said that that is not a proper 

function, for goodness' sake, I don't think he understands what 

the role of a premier is. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, there are a lot 

of people in this province who don't appreciate receiving junk 

mail, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier.  But when Saskatchewan 

taxpayers find out that their own money is being used to 

distribute NDP junk mail, I think they're going to be a little 

more than irritated, Mr. Premier. 

 

I'm going to send you over a copy of the material, Mr. Premier, 

and I want you to assume . . . I'm going to send you a copy, and 

I've addressed it: return to sender, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, how much money was spent by your office on 

this NDP junk mail campaign?  How much money was spent? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, no money was spent to 

send out NDP junk material.  Some money was spent to send 

out information pertaining to government programs.  I'll take 

notice of that and provide it in due course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, how much of 

your staff's time and resources were spent on this NDP junk 

mail campaign?  And do you intend the NDP Party to pay for 

this junk mail sent out by your office, rather than the taxpayers' 

dollars? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm assuming that 

the question is in order, although I would direct you, sir, to the 

attention that the hon. member asks me to answer questions 

about the NDP.  I'm not here to answer questions about the 

NDP; I'm here to answer questions about the operations of 

government. 

 

On the assumption that the operations of the government 

involved a dissemination of information, we'll provide that 

information as I indicated to the hon. member in the first 

question. 

 

But if he wants to talk about waste and taxpayers' waste, I'll tell 

you, whatever the cost of mailing this literature and 

information out is only but a fraction of the cost that the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan will bear for the next . . . for a 

number of foreseeable years for having the very good friend of 

the former premier, Dave Tkachuk, appointed a beloved 

senator for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, once again you've 

demonstrated that your own narrow, political agenda is more 

important than saving tax dollars.  Once again you've 

demonstrated you're willing to put a lot of time and effort into 

reducing the value of the 



2364 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1993 

importance of the Co-op upgrader.  Once again you're 

demonstrating that you have no economic plan for the 

province.  Your only hope is political, to put all your time and 

resources into discrediting others, and once again you have 

demonstrated that you have no reservations about using 

taxpayers' dollars for that kind of junk mail. 

 

Mr. Premier, every day you get up and say how willing you are 

to negotiate.  My question to you then is, Mr. Premier:  how 

can there possibly be real negotiations when the Premier of the 

province is prepared to spend taxpayers' dollars and use his 

office to attack other people in that negotiating process?  

Would you answer that question for us, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the material here 

consists of letters, which have been tabled publicly, to Mr. 

Leland, letters between the minister, various . . . got even 

correspondence from FCL.  Correspondence from FCL's 

contained in there; government press releases which are part of 

the package, which the hon. member indicates is somehow 

material which he finds unacceptable.  In fact there's even a 

copy of a letter to Mr. Bill McKnight. 

 

Now he says, how can we negotiate.  Well we can negotiate the 

same way that FCL can negotiate, putting out full-page ads 

setting out their expenditure proposition.  And the question that 

you ask of us is equally applicable to them.  They say they're 

prepared to negotiate and can do it.  We're prepared to 

negotiate with them and we can do it also -- very simple. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, on one of 

those pages there it says this: the following information is 

intended for distribution to your constituency executive 

members.  And it has four items that it says that you're 

supposed to distribute to them. 

 

What actions will you be taking to address this 

misappropriation of taxpayers' dollars?  Will the NDP Party be 

reimbursing the government for these misspent funds?  And 

will you be determining which one of your highly paid political 

advisers authorized this misuse of taxpayers' dollars to put this 

junk mail out, and will you be asking for that person's 

resignation, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I think the answer to all of those will 

be simply no. 

 

And the hon. member opposite, if he would get his head out of 

the sand and acknowledge that this is an absolutely atrocious 

deal for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan.  Everybody 

acknowledges the deal has to be renegotiated.  FCL says 

renegotiate the deal; the 

federal government says renegotiate the deal; Estey says 

renegotiate the deal; the Government of Saskatchewan says 

renegotiate the deal.  That is what this material says, and sets 

out the history and the background for renegotiating the deal. 

 

The only people on the face of this planet is the small rump 

group called the Progressive Conservative caucus of 

Saskatchewan that says, don't renegotiate the deal, somehow 

this is NDP junk mail.  Well I tell you, no wonder you people 

are so far down in the polls and why you're sitting where you 

are, because you simply refuse to face reality.  Look, get real.  

Tell the people of Saskatchewan that you made a bad deal and 

tell them that you support Estey and let's negotiate a deal. And 

we'll do it this afternoon.  We'll do it this afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, I will be 

sending the original of this package to the Provincial Auditor, 

Mr. Premier, to see if he feels this is an appropriate use of your 

office and your office's budget.  In the mean time, I would like 

to ask you to refer this matter to the Standing Committee on 

Privileges and Elections as well. 

 

I would like you to ask their opinion as to whether the 

Premier's . . . should be paying for such blatantly NDP 

functionary junk mail, Mr. Premier.  Will you give this 

commitment today to give it to this committee to do its work in 

a proper fashion?  Will you agree to that today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the only junk around 

here, with the greatest of respect, is the questions that the hon. 

member has been directing in this area.  How he can categorize 

correspondence, including both the responses between the FCL 

and the Government of Saskatchewan, on a matter of important 

public basis, a matter of important public issue, a question of 

junk, is only up to him in his mind. 

 

I'll tell you one thing, it wasn't D-Mail that put it out, it wasn't 

Mr. Dave Tkachuk, and it's only a fraction of the cost, only a 

fraction of the cost to what it'll cost the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan to keep the good friend of the member from 

Estevan ensconced in safety and comfort for the rest of his life. 

 

And you say that the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

should continue to harbour a deal which requires some form of 

renegotiation.  Shame on you.  Of course, I'm not going to . . . 

(inaudible) . . . to that kind of an answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, Justice Estey 

has said that you should negotiate, not legislate.  Don Gass has 

said that your heavy-handed legislation will do significant 

harm to Federated Co-op and force them to walk away from 

both the upgrader and the refinery.  These two people whose 

opinions you used to put a lot of stock in, you've quit listening 

to them, Mr. Premier.  Instead of negotiating, instead of 

looking 



June 9, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2365 

for a solution that's suitable to all parties, you are spending 

your time, energy, and taxpayers' money to send out this kind 

of mail from your Executive Council office to executive 

members of the NDP Party. 

 

Will you put an end to this political vendetta against the Co-op 

upgrader; and will you quit misusing taxpayers' money; and 

will you instead turn your efforts to negotiating a settlement, a 

real settlement for the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

who buy and use and trade through FCL in their petroleum 

products.  Will you do that for them please, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, this line of questioning 

the members repeat, and the answers I must repeat.  I want, the 

government wants, a negotiated settlement.  We've wanted that 

for 18 months.  We have not been able to get a negotiated 

settlement for 18 months.  I argue that this taxpayers' exposure 

of $600 million, this deal is so bad that it requires a 

renegotiated settlement. 

 

But I say something else to the hon. member.  If a renegotiated 

settlement is impossible, then we are not going to sit by and do 

nothing.  We are not going to adopt a policy of prayer.  We're 

not going to adopt a policy of hope.  We are going to adopt a 

policy of acting in the interests of the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And in this debate I am shocked that you, sir, being an MLA 

sworn to uphold the interests of the taxpayers, are concerned 

about a mail-out list and don't say a word about $600 million 

which the taxpayers are on the hook for.  My goodness where 

are your priorities?  Shame on you.  Shame on you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Opposition to Bill 38 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, one would 

have to question where the Premier's values are. 

 

My question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, by now I'm sure 

you're fully aware of the nature and the extent of the opposition 

to Bill 38.  We have received literally thousands of letters and 

phone calls from Saskatchewan citizens from all walks of life, 

from every profession, representing all political parties.  And, 

Mr. Premier, I am sure that your office have received these and 

very likely many more like them. 

 

Mr. Premier, very early in your term of office you pledged your 

government to the principles of openness and consultation.  

That pledge has yet to be fulfilled.  And nowhere is that more 

evident than in your refusal to listen to the concerns of the 

people over Bill 38. 

 

Mr. Premier, as per the wishes of the people I serve and as a 

member of the opposition caucus who is 

allowed to not only speak freely but to act freely, I am asking 

you to either withdraw Bill 38 or accept the amendments that 

so many people support.  Will you do that today, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I wonder who wrote that 

question for the hon. member because he has raised some of 

these matters in committee, and I have addressed them in 

committee and the answers to the questions are on the public 

record. 

 

I will say to the member that I don't know of a piece of 

legislation that has been introduced in this Assembly that has 

had as much consultation about it and meetings about it and 

correspondence about it and telephone calls about it than this 

Bill.  We have consulted everyone.  We know everyone's 

views.  We have treated all those views with great respect.  We 

have either answered them in the form of amendments before 

this House or we provide the rationale for why it is impossible 

or inappropriate to deal with those matters in this Bill.  I mean 

the matter has been fully debated, fully considered. 

 

I want to say also to the member as I said in committee, Mr. 

Speaker, that when the essence of Bill 38, when the matters 

raised in Bill 38 are explained directly and appropriately to 

people, then the vast majority of people support the idea that 

we should not discriminate against people in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, again to the Premier.  

It is painfully evident that you do not listen, that you do not 

care.  You've denied farm families.  You've slighted the 

business community.  You've neglected residents of rural 

Saskatchewan, rejected the cooperative movement.  You've 

betrayed and gouged taxpayers and you ignore the wishes of 

the majority of Saskatchewan citizens who have real concerns 

over the consequences of Bill 38. 

 

Mr. Premier, now we see examples of how you are muzzling 

the views and opinions of your own colleagues, why you 

muzzled the members of the opposition through your many 

closure motions.  But now we see you choking off free speech 

of your own NDP MLAs.  The members on this side of the 

House would at least allow the member from Regina Rosemont 

to table his Bill so that we can review it.  But, Mr. Premier, 

rather than being open and democratic you choose to play the 

dictator and close, close, close. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you allow the members of your caucus to 

express themselves freely in this legislature?  You have taken 

the right away from the opposition on many occasions, but on 

issues such as Bill 38 we ask that you release your choke hold 

on democracy.  Will you allow a free vote, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. 



2366 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1993 

Speaker, at least the member . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I would ask certain members in 

the opposition, but particularly the member from Estevan, not 

to constantly interrupt.  He's been doing it too much today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, at least the member has 

made it clear to all people in this Assembly and to the 

television audience watching that this question is not his; he 

has read somebody else's question.  That is obvious and I 

extend him that courtesy by acknowledging it in this House 

because the member is more intelligent than to ask a silly 

question like that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The matter of how our caucus will treat 

Bill 38 is a matter which I have explained in this House and 

outside this House.  It was a vote within our caucus to handle it 

in the way in which we're handling it.  And that, Mr. Member, 

is how we are going to handle it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, it's obvious that the questions have 

certainly raised a tone of fear and anxiety over on the 

opposition side of . . . on the government side of the House 

when . . . Mr. Speaker, who's to say whether or not I 

specifically wrote the questions out or gave a lot of information 

forward and brought some information forward? 

 

And we've had a major discussion in this Assembly.  We have 

asked the Premier on many occasions, we've asked the Minister 

of Justice on many occasions, why he will not allow a free vote 

in this Assembly.  And that's what we're asking today.  That's 

all that we're asking, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is it not appropriate for the members of the opposition to ask 

the government for that free vote for all members that they 

promised the electorate in the last election?  Is that not true, 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Now this is . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. Will the members on both sides 

please come to order.  It's simply inappropriate . . . it's 

inappropriate to yell across the floor when another minister is 

trying to answer the question.  The same thing applies from the 

government side. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- This is an incredible line of questioning, 

Mr. Speaker -- an incredible line of questioning considering 

that the vote in principle on Bill 38 has already been held.  It's 

over.  Several days ago the vote was held. 

 

In our caucus, Mr. Speaker, we looked at Bill 38 and saw Bill 

38 exactly for what it was; it was a question of 

prohibiting discrimination, a matter of human rights.  Not a 

matter of morality, not a matter of religious conscience, but a 

matter of prohibiting discrimination in an area where most 

parts of this country have dealt with it a long time ago.  And we 

decided that we would vote as a caucus in the way that we did, 

and we did that about one week ago.  Now, Mr. Member, catch 

up with it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, yes, there has been a vote, but there 

are many more opportunities for votes in this Assembly.  And 

since that vote some members have had the courage to stand up 

and express their views. 

 

Mr. Premier, what we're seeing . . . what we have seen of the 

NDP Party is that . . . what you do with those who break ranks.  

Steve Langdon is a good example.  So there is no question that 

fear permeates your leadership in your caucus both nationally 

and provincially. 

 

Mr. Premier, many of your colleagues have said that the only 

option they are left with is to be absent from the Assembly for 

that vote.  And that is an absolute shame, Mr. Premier.  You, 

sir, are denying them the opportunity to represent the views of 

their constituents in the Legislative Assembly of this province. 

 

Mr. Premier, let me remove the fear you have on losing the 

power of your office in a free vote.  The opposition, the caucus 

assures you that a free vote in this legislature will not in any 

way be interpreted as a vote of non-confidence in your 

government.  In fact we will view a free vote as a vote of 

confidence in democracy. 

 

Mr. Premier, given that we have removed your greatest fear, 

will you now declare a free vote on Bill 38? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, for hundreds of years in 

the parliamentary system, everyone involved in . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I will simply take the time until the 

members come to order, and let the minister answer the 

question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I was saying that for 

literally hundreds of years in the parliamentary system that we 

follow in this country, everyone involved knows, even the 

former premier knows, that in the passage of a Bill a vote on 

the principle of the Bill is taken at the conclusion of the 

second-reading debate. 

 

I want to tell the member, in the event he did not listen to my 

earlier answer, that that vote actually took place in this House 

about a week ago.  So I'm not at all certain what he's carrying 

on about with respect to a free vote.  That's behind us.  That's 

done, Mr. Member. 



June 9, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2367 

Let's get on with it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, and again to the Premier, let met 

quote back to you what you promised you would do if you 

were elected.  Mr. Premier you promised, and I quote: the role 

of private members must be enhanced in order to restore public 

confidence in the role of the people's representatives and 

improve the ability of all MLAs to act directly on their 

constituents concerns.  That was your promise.  That pledge, 

Mr. Premier, came from your NDP caucus in January, 1991. 

 

Mr. Premier, I ask you directly and I ask you to answer 

directly: what can be more serving to this principle than 

allowing your MLAs to vote freely on Bill 38 and allowing 

them to, as you promised, to act directly on their constituents 

concerns? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I sympathize with the member, Mr. 

Speaker, whose instructions obviously are to fight his way 

through that list of questions no matter what they are. 

 

We have on this side of the House a democratic caucus in 

which we discuss and debate issues and arrive at decisions 

collectively as a caucus.  We do that whether or not the 

member agrees with the decisions we make. 

 

Our members are all satisfied, without exception, with the way 

in which that process worked, and I challenge the members 

opposite to ask any one of them.  They are satisfied with the 

process and how it's worked and they're satisfied with the 

results, Mr. Member.  And we'll run our caucus without the 

benefit of any advice from you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And I can assume that's 

the type of rhetoric we can always appreciate that comes from a 

legal mind. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, what we do have . . . yes, we've had a vote 

in principle on second reading on the Bill.  But, Mr. Minister, 

the Bill still has to go through committee.  The Bill still has to 

receive third reading.  The Bill is not law.  There are many 

amendments that are going to be brought forward. 

 

Will the minister give his commitment today to review those 

amendments carefully, listen to the people of the province, and 

allow those amendments to protect the people of the province 

from the major concerns they have regarding Bill 38?  Will the 

minister do that today, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well we're eagerly awaiting those 

amendments, Mr. Speaker.  We have just handled a couple of 

Bills in this House in which we received a large number of 

amendments and 

considered them and dealt with them in the parliamentary way, 

and we'll do that with respect to these Bills. 

 

Just so that the member's questions here are not the complete 

disaster that they seem to have been up to this point, let me say 

this: I will go back to my caucus and I will ask them how they 

want to handle the votes during the committee stage.  Now will 

that make the member happy and can we finally put an end to 

this ridiculous line of questioning today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 56 -- An Act respecting Occupational Health and 

Safety 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be given third 

reading and passed under its title. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:38 p.m. until 2:57 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Romanow Lautermilch 

Van Mulligen Calvert 

Lingenfelter Murray 

Shillington Hamilton 

Teichrob Johnson 

Solomon Trew 

Goulet Draper 

Atkinson Serby 

Kowalsky Whitmore 

Mitchell Roy 

MacKinnon Cline 

Penner Crofford 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Upshall Harper 

Hagel Keeping 

Bradley Langford 

Lorje Jess 

Pringle Haverstock 

-- 36 

 

Nays 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Devine D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd  

-- 9 

 

The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Why is the member for 

Bengough-Milestone on her feet? 



2368 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1993 

Ms. Bradley: -- To beg leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It's my honour, on 

behalf of my colleague from Shaunavon, to introduce to you 

and through you to the members of the legislature, a school 

group that's visiting today in Regina from Cadillac.  They're 

grade 4, 5, and 6's and they're accompanied today by their 

teachers, Steve Climenhaga, Collette Andrée; chaperons, Gina 

Hedlin; bus driver, Jody St. Jacques.  And I'd just like to 

welcome them here today and I look forward to meeting them 

afterwards to have a visit and answer their questions, have 

drinks, and a photograph. 

 

And I'd like all members to join me in welcoming them here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 49 -- An Act respecting Correctional Services 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask at this time that the Minister of 

Justice please introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  With me today 

on my left is Ms. Madeleine Robertson of the Department of 

Justice, a Crown solicitor.  Behind me is Darcy McGovern who 

is also a Crown solicitor with the Department of Justice.  And 

seated to my right is Mr. Dick Till who is the executive director 

of corrections. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I understand that Bill 49 is dealing 

with some early release procedures and has some regulations . . 

. amendments in the Act regarding early release and how it is 

handled.  And I wonder if the minister could explain the 

purpose and the intent of Bill 49.  I know he's given a bit of an 

explanation in his second-readings speech, but I wonder if the 

minister could make a comment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I apologize to the member 

for taking a few minutes to collect my notes and materials here 

on that question, which is a question that we have discussed in 

this House in Department of Justice estimates, I think it was. 

 

The early release program has, as the Assembly will know, 

been in effect for some considerable time.  And it is a program 

that we take some satisfaction in in this province.  I think that I 

speak for my predecessors as well as for myself. 

 

We are very careful about the administration of that program 

and try our hardest to ensure that the people who get the benefit 

of an early release program are low-risk prisoners who are 

unlikely to commit a crime 

or to repeat.  And that's an especially sensitive area as the 

member knows and as we have agreed in previous discussions 

in this House. 

 

The statutory base for the program was contained in another 

Act.  And with this Act, we are bringing those provisions into 

this Act and provide a statutory base for what we have been 

doing and what we intend to continue to do. 

 

We are, as I say, very conscious of the risks of this program 

and very conscious of its controversial nature considering some 

of the well-known cases from elsewhere in Canada where 

serious crimes are committed by people who have been granted 

parole and who are given the benefit of a release before the 

expiration of the time of their sentence. 

 

And as I mentioned, we're quite pleased with the results in 

Saskatchewan.  The rate of failure -- if I can use that term -- is 

quite low.  So we are -- let me put it this way -- we're satisfied, 

but we're very watchful. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As the minister was 

trying to find his paper, it took me back to question period and 

the comment from across the way as to whose questions, and I 

begin to wonder whose answers the minister was trying to 

build up for the question.  But I appreciate the response. 

 

Mr. Minister, one of the major concerns, and we certainly 

addressed it in estimates on Justice, was the problems that 

victims face.  And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, in regards to 

this particular piece of legislation, is there anything in here to 

address the concerns of a victim or a victim's family, or that 

where possible victims should be addressed through this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, Mr. Chair, this Bill is concerned 

with the administration of the correctional facility and the 

handling of people who are sent to us by the court system.  The 

victims are taken . . . are dealt with elsewhere, in other 

programs within the department. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Another question, Mr. Minister.  Regarding 

reduced custody offences, I wonder if the minister would have 

any examples of the most serious offence where a reduced 

sentence would apply or could apply. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think the member and I can call the 

score even in this game of who's reading what, so I'll just skip 

over that part of it. 

 

I want to say, as I think the member knows, that the people 

who are incarcerated in correctional centres are people who are 

sentenced for a term of less than two years.  So we don't find 

generally in correctional centres the big, heavy 

_duty offences, the big criminals and the people who have 

committed a very serious crime.  So we're not faced with the 

same kind of problems that my counterpart is in Ottawa who 

would be dealing with prisoners who are there for offences 

which the community would regard as being serious.   



June 9, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2369 

And we sort of don't have the same kind of a problem that they 

have. 

 

But I can give you some examples of . . . We would not grant 

early release to a person charged with attempted murder, who'd 

been convicted of attempted murder, if we were to have any of 

those in our correctional centres, or any inmate who caused the 

death of a person in the commission of a crime within the last 

two years.  And that would be our . . . that's our two years, you 

know, because of the fact that we don't have any prisoners 

sentenced for longer than that.  Or prison breaches, offences 

committed while in the centre. 

 

But generally the answer is that we don't have the kind of 

long-term criminals or really serious crime situations that my 

counterpart, the Solicitor General, has in Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, you also made a comment about the 

fact that they're allowing for more stronger and effective, 

cooperative, community-based programs that will be 

administered under this Act.  I'm wondering, Mr. Minister . . . 

You mentioned earlier about a consultation process and about 

consulting with groups.  I'm sure there's organizations out there 

that now are involved in some form of rehabilitation programs, 

and I'm wondering if you could just let us know about the 

consultation that took place and the groups that were talked 

with and some of the suggestions that came out of those 

meetings. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I thank the member for the 

question.  We deal with a number of groups on an ongoing 

basis about correctional problems, and those groups have been 

consulted with respect to this Bill. 

 

They include the John Howard Society, and the Bill was 

reviewed with them.  The Elizabeth Fry Society, and similarly, 

Mr. Till consulted with that society.  And with the Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, vice-chief Dan Bellegarde, 

who has a special interest in and special responsibilities in the 

field of aboriginal justice.  And as well, the Gabriel Dumont 

Institute. 

 

With respect to all of these groups, they were satisfied with the 

legislation, had no objections, and supported it. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, we do 

have a number of amendments here but they're the type of 

amendments, we believe, that could certainly be looked at and 

maybe even implemented through the regulatory process.  So 

what we intend to do rather than taking the time of the 

Assembly to go through meticulously, I'll table them and ask if 

you would look through the amendments. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Minister, you would find that there are some 

amendments that, if not all of them, would certainly find a 

place in the Bill.  And those that you really feel could add to 

the Bill, we'd ask that you look 

seriously at them, review them, and take the appropriate action, 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'll be glad to take a look at those.  As 

the member knows, there is quite a broad regulation-making 

power and we will try and incorporate as many of the 

suggestions as we can under section 57, the regulations passed 

under that section. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 67 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, on behalf of members of the 

Assembly I'd like to thank my officials for the enormous 

amount of work they did on the preparation of this legislation 

and for coming to the committee to assist us today. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, as well on behalf of the opposition 

I'd like to thank the minister and his officials for being here and 

responding.  Certainly we got into a lot of questions but I think 

we've answered some of the appropriate questions and 

concerns that were raised. So thank you very much. 

 

Bill No. 77 -- An Act respecting the Implementation of 

Certain Treaty Land Entitlement Settlement Agreements 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  With me today, 

sitting beside me is Mr. Victor Taylor, who is an assistant 

deputy minister with the Saskatchewan Indian and Metis 

Affairs Secretariat; and behind me Mr. Mitch McAdam, a 

Crown solicitor in the constitutional branch of the Department 

of Justice. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, in 

the essence of cooperation here, I will be asking questions on 

certain clauses so we'll move ahead.  I would ask one thing 

though.  It's been brought to my attention, Mr. Minister -- and I 

hope you give your own answers rather than referring to your 

officials' answers; you seem to want people to use original 

work here today . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, I don't 

know, Bob, if it's even yet or not -- I've been informed that the 

economic development side of the department that I used to 

deal with has now been transferred out of your hands and into 

the hands of the Minister of Economic Development.  Can you 

tell me if he has total control now with any consultation with 

your officials; or is this a cooperative effort; or who do 

aboriginal people who traditionally dealt with your secretariat, 

how do they function now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The member is right, Mr. Chair, the 

Leader of the Opposition is correct when he says that this 

program has been moved over to Economic 



2370 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1993 

Development.  With the program went two employees who had 

been administering the program in the secretariat who are gone 

over to Economic Development.  So the same people are 

administering the program. 

 

My understanding is that the similar advisory board 

mechanisms will continue as was the case when the Leader of 

the Opposition was the minister.  And you'll know how those 

committees were constituted. 

 

Actually it's been pointed out to me by my official that one of 

the positions were vacant; two positions went over and one 

person. 

 

The relationship between the secretariat and other departments, 

including Economic Development, is close and I think not 

different from the days when the Leader of the Opposition was 

the minister responsible.  In other words, the secretariat is the 

source of a great deal of information and advice to the 

Department of Economic Development. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Will any of the entitlement process now 

involve the Minister of Economic Development, seeing as that 

he has control over and understand that part of the selection 

process that some bands were going through, involved joint 

ventures, other things that they were considering putting their 

settlement into in lieu of land that also involved potential 

economic development projects in parks, in urban areas?  

Would they now have to deal with the . . . if their choice of 

their band is to make that particular purchase rather than say a 

block of farm land, is it my understanding now that they deal 

with the Minister of Economic Development in those areas? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The Minister of Economic Development 

will not be involved in the kinds of situations that the member 

raises.  Those options that you mention will be exercised 

downstream by the band and working primarily with the 

federal government.  And if they get into an economic 

development project, they need make no reference at all to the 

minister. 

 

If they want to access one of the programs for additional funds 

over and above the funds provided in the agreement, then 

naturally the department and therefore the minister would get 

involved for those additional funds.  But for the treaty land 

entitlement funds itself, the minister has no voice. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, the 

fact that the province of Saskatchewan has now okayed a third 

school board network perhaps changes the landscape a little bit 

here on treaty land entitlement. 

 

I can envision a French school board being formed in the 

appropriate place, then receiving remuneration under the 

agreement which was struck with the other entities in the 

education field and being able to 

receive a pay-out even though they might only be a few weeks 

or a few months old, if one was so inclined. 

 

And I'm not saying that anyone would do this, but we do have a 

third player now.  And as you know, there was long and hard 

negotiations with SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association) and others to arrive at what we have arrived at.  

And if someone were to throw a wrench in that, I think it might 

be very unproductive for the whole process. 

 

I'm not going to say that . . . ask if you know of any such move, 

but I'm asking you: would that be possible under clause 5 of the 

agreement, that a French school board could be formed and 

then receive compensation because of the entitlement process 

proceeding forthwith? 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The question is . . . I think we know the 

answer to the question.  I believe that the French governance 

provisions do not confer a taxing power on the French school 

boards.  If that is the case, then they won't have a tax loss, and 

therefore the provisions would not apply to them. 

 

Now I have to say to the member that my officials were not 

involved in the French governance legislation, so we're not 

certain of that.  It would not apply immediately, in any event, 

because the school divisions would have to be in existence for 

a period of a year before they could have a tax loss.  And that 

would be a factor to be considered, although that's not the . . . 

you know, obviously this land entitlement and the acquisition 

of land is going to go on for a period of years. 

 

And if we're wrong in our understanding of the French 

governance provision, then I suspect that the answer is that the 

French school divisions would be in the same position as other 

school divisions, namely if there has been a tax loss, they 

would be entitled to compensation. 

 

But I think I had it right the first time.  I think these boards are 

without taxing powers and therefore will not have any tax loss. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I suspect that you are, if we 

take this at first blush.  This question was posed to me just a 

week ago by a person that has been involved in education in 

the province for some time in the provincial level. 

 

And because the length of time that the entitlement process 

needs in order to be finalized, that individual said to me, I 

believe anyone in this province that doesn't think that there isn't 

going to be taxpayers involved in the third school board by the 

time the entitlement process is finished is dreaming in 

Technicolor, were the words they used; that at some point 

taxpayers will be involved. 

 

Now I know your minister stood here and said no, that wasn't 

the case.  But 10 and 12 years from now at the 



June 9, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2371 

rate we're going, it may in fact be there.  It is not hard to create 

a tax loss if you are in a position where you think that there is 

some benefit to be derived at.  And I think it is a legitimate 

concern. 

 

This process has taken a great deal of time to put in place.  I 

would hate to see something happen that would impinge upon 

its ultimate success.  Because as you know, the role of the 

federal government in assuming education and health costs on 

reserve, relieving the province, is predicated upon us also 

making financial contributions. 

 

If there is a wrench thrown in the mix and school boards and 

divisions feel that there's another player . . . And I'm 

wondering, Mr. Minister, if there aren't going to have to be 

some amendments to the Act down the road or some 

assurances because we never contemplated a third school board 

in the designation of this Act. 

 

And I only bring to your attention the concern of someone who 

has dealt with education in this province for a great number of 

years, and I think legitimately raises it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I recognize that, Mr. Chair.  I think 

it's a good question, a legitimate question.  And I want to say to 

the member that we'll follow up on the point and if it should 

require amendment to the agreement and to the legislation, 

those may happen in due course.  But we will follow up with 

the other parties to the framework agreement and try and sort 

this out with the school trustees association and try and 

determine what action is appropriate. 

 

Clause 5 agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

clause 7 deals with the rural municipalities and once again the 

arrangement that was made on tax loss and compensation, that 

type of thing.  I never thought of this at the time but if RMs 

(rural municipality) are into amalgamation -- and there is some 

indication from your government that that may be desirable -- 

that if we get into amalgamations and some of the changes that 

obviously would then occur with larger entities in place, will 

that have any effect on . . . If that occurred, would the average 

ratepayer be affected any differently under this agreement?  

And I know maybe that's a hypothetical question, but I can't 

sort it out in my mind if, say, that happened. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think the answer is no.  In the 

hypothetical event that the municipality should of their own 

volition decide to merge or whatever, a tax loss is a tax loss 

and maintaining roads is still maintaining roads.  So I think that 

the situation would not be changed if the eventuality mentioned 

by the member should happen to occur as a result of the 

voluntary decision of rural municipalities. 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, in the event that it wasn't 

voluntary, I'm wondering if we shouldn't think about, as was 

done in the health Bill . . . or districts Bill, that the rights and 

privileges of that RM entity be carried through into whatever 

larger unit happened to occur. 

 

Once again, the length of the entitlement process means that a 

lot of things may change in the world and I would hope that the 

rights of ratepayers of a particular RM who were affected that 

way, then faced with entitlement changes down the road, would 

somehow be protected in law that the folks over on the east 

side of the new unit, however big it might be, could not sort of 

subjugate the rights of RM X who were involved in the 

entitlement process because they'd been shoved into this larger 

entity. 

 

Because when this thing was designed, it clearly was aimed at 

RMs as they now exist in the province of Saskatchewan and the 

ratepayers involved in that RM with the various issues that 

entitlement might change, i.e., roads and road allowances and 

that type of thing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think it clear, Mr. Chair, that the logic 

of the situation would require that they be protected.  And the 

member is quite right, the provisions in the agreement were 

drafted on the basis of the present system.  And if there are 

changes to the system, then the appropriate changes will have 

to be either incorporated into the document or observed, at the 

very least. 

 

And that is the second matter which I undertake to the member 

that we'll follow up on, perhaps with less urgency than the first 

because it's still an eventuality that hasn't happened yet.  But 

we'll look into it. 

 

The Chair: -- I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 

Plains. 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you.  I'm asking leave to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you.  I would like to introduce to you 

and through you to members of the Assembly, 10 members of 

the United Nations who are here on a training program: 

uranium in the environment.  It's sponsored by the International 

Atomic Energy Agency, and they're here today with their 

instructor, Dr. Geoff Parslow. 

 

It was my pleasure last year to be able to speak with the group, 

and I will be meeting with them shortly to answer any 

questions they might have and to speak to them about the 

proceedings of the Assembly.  And I would ask all members to 

join with me in welcoming them.  They come from many 

countries -- Algeria, Argentina, China, Egypt, Indonesia, 

Madagascar, Malaysia, Slovenia, Thailand, and the instructor 

from Regina. 



2372 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1993 

So I would ask all members to join in welcoming the members 

from the United Nations program.  And I hope that I'll be able 

to inform them about some of the proceedings that they've seen 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 77 

(continued) 

 

Clause 7 agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

under clause 9 on the framework agreement and how it deals 

with water and water rights and its relationship to their 

privileges that they have and the rights that they have, would 

you give me an explanation of a couple of things. 

 

One is, if a river runs through the area that they are dealing 

with, whether the reserve or the land entitlement would have 

the boundaries around the body of water; whether the 

boundaries of the land entitlement would be partially 

surrounding a lake, for example; what the rules and the 

entitlement involved in each one of those three areas.  What 

would be for us to know and for the province to know? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, this is perhaps the most 

complex part of the agreement, at least it certainly was the 

most complex part to negotiate.  And I'll deal with the three 

situations that the member puts forward. 

 

First of all, with respect to rivers running through the land, 

through the reserve.  The river to the high-water mark does not 

go with the land.  The high-water mark is the cut-off point. 

 

However, there is flexibility with respect to that which will be 

considered by the parties on a case-by-case basis.  In some 

cases it may be appropriate to transfer title to the bed . . . to the 

river bed up to the high-water mark.  There is room for 

negotiation on a case-by-case basis with respect to that. 

 

There is also a co-management arrangement which was arrived 

at -- and this was really the idea that was the breakthrough on 

the question of water rights -- a co-management agreement by 

which the rights of . . . the use of the water and the upstream 

and downstream implications can be managed jointly by 

government and by the band.  So that's the first situation. 

 

(1545) 

 

The second is a body of water entirely enclosed within the land 

being acquired.  And in that case the band will 

own all of it.  It will own the water and the bed, all of it. 

 

With respect to land which partially surrounds a body of water, 

a lake, then the cut-off will be the high-water mark.  The bed 

will not be . . . will not go with the land. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Going back to your river bed or a stream that 

flows through the land entitlement, what kind of conditions and 

what kind of discussions take place in relation to that that 

would have a representative from either the Water Corporation 

or the Department of Justice who would be negotiating with 

them, or the Indian land claim?  What kind of criteria are you 

using to establish whether that would go in with the land 

entitlement, or it would not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- There are no criteria laid down in the 

agreement.  It's a case-by-case basis, and one would want to be 

reasonable about it.  So far as the provincial government is 

concerned, the lead agency would be the Water Corporation, 

but the secretariat and the Department of Justice would also be 

involved as well as the Indian band.  And the whole process 

would have to fully take into account other stakeholders, as 

they say, interested parties, to the water and its use.  But there's 

no criteria set out in the agreement as such.  It is intended to be 

an open and flexible process. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I suppose that one of the things that I would 

be wanting to put into the whole area of the discussion are the . 

. . what I would call the common law riparian rights of those 

upstream and downstream and the water users that are there in 

relation to that involvement.  And I believe that that sort of 

public involvement needs to be there when a decision is made 

to go underneath the river bed or creek or stream. 

 

And understanding the significance of it, when the federal 

government wanted to put the grasslands park in, they did not 

get the Frenchman River.  And the significance of that is that 

authority and responsibility for natural resources rests within 

the framework of the province. 

 

I recognize also on the other hand, that there were some 

arrangements made prior to 1930, at least in one band, where 

they have that right in a lake.  And I don't remember the name 

of the lake in northern Saskatchewan where the . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Sturgeon Lake, right -- where they have a part 

of the lake as a part of their right. 

 

And I would think that there has been significant, I would call 

it discontent on that line between individuals who cross over 

and that sort of thing.  I think you need to be very careful that 

those individuals who have a vested right below and above 

need to be taken into consideration when the discussion is 

taking place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The answer is yes, I agree with the 

member fully. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Will you define two things for me in 



June 9, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2373 

this?  And first is what the riparian rights are of these -- and 

riparian rights will be what every person in society has -- and 

then, how common law relates to that.  Some of these things 

have not been tried in any court in Canada to find out what that 

really is, and I'm not even sure whether British law has 

established what common law is. 

 

I know that in United States, which uses the British system for 

rights, have established . . . for example, California had to take 

and remove about a million acres of irrigation that they had to 

give back to Arizona because the water rights really were an 

entitlement for the state of Arizona. 

 

And that's the sort of thing that we have to think about when 

we're dealing with these two items.  One is the riparian right, 

and the other one is the common law riparian involvement in 

this.  Would you give me an explanation of how you see this 

and how your department sees it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I've taken advantage of the 

presence of my officials to upgrade my knowledge of the 

subject, which as I said at the beginning is one of the more 

complex areas of this agreement. 

 

The Indian band of course will have riparian rights because 

either the river flows through the reserve now or because it will 

flow through their land.  And the agreement recognizes that.  

And also by the agreement, the Indian band recognizes that 

other people have their full riparian rights with respect to the 

quality of the water and quantity of the water and rate of flow 

and those sorts of things. 

 

This was a vexing problem during negotiations, as your leader 

will know, and was eventually resolved by the concept of 

jointly managing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, right, 

jointly managing the question, and we hope that will work.  I 

think it will.  It seems to be the only possible answer. 

 

The whole agreement, with respect to the whole agreement, 

with respect of riparian rights, is based on the assumption that a 

co-management regime will sort this thing out. 

 

So far as the broader common law rights of people with respect 

to rivers and the use of rivers -- and there are many of them: 

water skiers, power boats, recreational use of one kind or 

another -- there is really an uncertain area of the law, and quite 

likely they don't have any rights at common law which could 

interfere with the regime set up by the framework agreement. 

 

It's quite likely with the mutual respect for the riparian rights of 

all of the stakeholders, that the whole system can be managed 

in such a way that other common law interests will not be 

unduly prejudiced, on the one hand.  Because if you take care 

of all of the riparian right owners, you're probably taking care 

of the other people too.  In any event their common law right 

will probably not be sufficiently dominant as a 

consideration to upset these mutual arrangements. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That's good.  I don't have a problem with that 

at all.  And I just wanted to make this point, that when the 

riparian rights are established and as common law establishes 

what the riparian rights really are, then common law takes off 

from that point and establishes what the rights of the Indian 

bands are equivalent to the rights of individuals along that 

same stream.  And that common law will establish a practice or 

a precedent what that common law will be. 

 

And I don't think there are too many places where we have 

established these kinds of laws in Canada.  So then it has its 

roots in a beginning that gives equity between the players along 

that stream.  And I think that that's the most important part and 

that's the part that needs to be protected.  That not only 

enhances the opportunity for the Indian bands but it also 

enhances the opportunities for the non-entitlement areas. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's a good point, Mr. Chair. 

 

Clause 9 agreed to. 

 

Clause 10 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- In clause 10, Mr. Minister, I need you to 

refresh me about the arbitration process, because in this 

particular instance it talks about the transfer of buildings and 

that type of thing.  And I need to understand this arbitration 

process better because that wasn't quite as far along as it 

needed to be in my time. And I would like you to refresh me 

because I think it's important that we all understand that this 

arbitration process will be without political interference.  So 

can you enlighten the legislature on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The arbitration can arise in connection 

with the disputes about the value of, or the purchase price of, a 

school that is located in the Northern Saskatchewan 

Administration District.  Either the school board or the 

entitlement band may submit the question of the appropriate 

price to an arbitration board. 

 

There is a permanent, independent chairperson of the board 

who is appointed under the agreement within six months of the 

execution date.  That person has not yet been appointed but 

there is provision there for the appointment of the chair. 

 

The composition of the board . . . Sorry, Mr. Chair. I just 

couldn't find my place and this is a complex agreement.  Under 

article 1907 of the framework agreement the number of 

arbitrators comprising the arbitration board shall be three 

unless the parties agree to another number.  And each of the 

parties involved in the dispute appoints one of the arbitrators, 

and the chairperson is the person who is appointed by 

agreement of all parties to this agreement as I mentioned in the 

first part of my answer. 

 

So that gives you a three-person arbitration board who then 

hear and determine the question of what is the 



2374 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1993 

appropriate purchase price for the school. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Maybe we should try that on NewGrade, Mr. 

Minister, and see how it works. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you anticipate this arbitration process being 

expanded beyond . . . Obviously the school buildings were a 

crying necessity because of the percentage split in the 

framework agreement and they have to be dealt with 

immediately.  But is it envisioned now, as this process has gone 

down the road, that this arbitration will work in some areas -- 

for instance water or others?  Is it anticipated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The mechanism for arbitration is 

actually used very often in the agreement.  There is a long list 

of matters included in article 1902, part (b), and includes 

whether a particular water body is or will be wholly enclosed 

within an entitlement reserve and the appropriate representation 

of an entitlement band on a co-management board, and whether 

a provincial road is used primarily to provide access to 

locations within the reserve, and on and on.  There's quite a 

long list of them.  So arbitration is a concept that's widely used. 

 

And I can't speak with certainty, but I'm sure that with 

experience with respect of those matters, if other disputes arise 

in the agreement, I believe the parties will probably find it very 

convenient to resort to the arbitration mechanism to solve other 

kinds of disputes as well. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Has anyone suggested, Mr. Minister, that one 

be set up, or do you have any situations now where that is in 

fact the case as per the agreement?  There's nothing sitting 

there on the horizon? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, no arbitration boards have been 

constituted to this point.  And the chair, as I mentioned earlier, 

has not yet been put in place. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, would you 

be able to tell me what the criteria will be for those band 

entitlements where they have received funding to purchase 

land?  Is there any involvement by your department and the 

federal government where the money is placed -- how the 

money will be spent in the purchase of this property? 

 

Or will the Indian band receive the entitlement and then they 

have exclusive jurisdiction for the 5 million or whatever dollars 

that that entitlement relates to?  Will they have absolute . . . 

will the band council have absolute jurisdiction over that dollar 

value that flows into that entitlement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The situation is that approximately 25 

per cent of the total land entitlement money has to be used to 

buy land.  And in each case the entitlement band will enter into 

a trust agreement with the federal government with respect to 

that land.  The provincial government has no role or place at all 

with respect to that process.  And our only 

obligation is to the federal government under the natural 

resources transfer Act, and we do that, and we take no part in 

the land selection or the other details of how the entitlement 

band spends its money. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So, Mr. Chairman, the minimum amount is 25 

per cent.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's on average.  Each band has got a 

different situation.  But overall it'll be 25 per cent. 

 

Clause 10 agreed to. 

 

Clause 11 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 78 -- An Act to confirm an Agreement between the 

Government of Canada and the Government of 

Saskatchewan varying the Saskatchewan Natural 

Resources Transfer Agreement 

 

Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Appendix agreed to. 

 

Schedule 1 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, on behalf of the members of 

the Assembly I'd like to thank the officials who are present 

today.  They are part of a team that spent a great deal of time in 

the negotiation of these arrangements and in the preparation of 

this legislation, and I'd like to thank them for coming today to 

assist the committee. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I too would like 

to thank the officials for coming in today and helping the 

minister answer our questions, and I hope that they raise . . . 

down the road, that some of those concerns that we've raised 

will be taken into consideration as you draft further legislation.  

Thank you. 

 

Bill No. 88 -- An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  With me today 

is Susan Amrud of the Department of Justice, a Crown 

solicitor, who's sitting beside me; and behind me is Ms. Andrea 

Seale who is also a Crown solicitor with the department. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, it's 

certainly nice to see some brightness on that side of the House 

right now. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I have a . . . Mr. Minister, I have a number of 

questions that have been prepared for me that I'd like to raise 

with you.  Actually, Mr. Minister, a 



June 9, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2375 

couple of concerns that . . . we've raised them before.  I believe 

the Bill is more or less a housekeeping Bill, but what you're 

doing in the Bill is creating a commission that is going to 

address the salaries and establish the salaries of judges.  And 

also, I believe another aspect of the Bill sets up the plans for 

pension plans for the judicials . . . or the judiciary.  And I'm not 

sure if it goes beyond that. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, I'm not exactly sure what the difference is 

regarding the pension plan you're establishing through this 

piece of legislation versus the pension plans that are established 

today.  And I wonder if you could inform the House of those 

different measures. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- There have been a number of changes 

on the pension, the pension area.  All judges will contribute, 

whereas previously only those under 60 contributed.  There 

were special rules respecting public servants who were 

appointed to the bench by way of the options that they had 

about which pension plan would apply to them, and those have 

been deleted so they move to the judges' pension plan. 

 

The 10-year vesting provision that was in the old pension plan 

has been reduced to two, which brings it in line with the 

provincial pension benefits Act.  And there is a better early 

retirement provision in this Bill than previously existed.  The 

judges may now leave at the age of 60 without a reduction in 

respect of their retirement.  They're entitled to the benefit that 

they've earned.  It is of course a contributory plan and they are 

eligible for early retirement at the age of 60. 

 

There are other provisions but I think they're minor. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, you made a comment about vested, 

10-year.  You've changed it to two years.  Now I'm not exactly 

sure what that means.  I wonder if you could explain the intent 

or the reasons for that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Previously, before this Act, they had to 

serve 10 years in order to become entitled to a pension, before 

the pension locked in.  They now get a locked-in pension after 

two years. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I take it then from your comments 

that the pension plan that we're discussing or that has been 

established in Bill 88, The Provincial Court Act, is a pension 

along the lines of the old-formula pension plan.  I realize that 

there's contributory factors where judges pay into the pension 

plan but it's based on a formula that states that after two years, 

if I hear you right and if they're 60 years and they retire from 

the bench, they would receive that equivalent amount. 

 

Is there a prorate factor based on your number of years service?  

Are you just saying if you've served on the bench for two years 

and you are part of the pension plan that you automatically 

receive what portion?  Would that be a 70 per cent portion of 

your salary or what portion would that be, Mr. Minister? 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Let's say that the judge was appointed at 

the age of 63 and serves to age 65 so the judge therefore serves 

a period of two years.  They would receive a pension on 

retirement equal to 6 per cent.  They get 3 per cent per year and 

it's a defined benefit formula in that sense.  So they would 

retire with a pension that is 6 per cent of their income.  And 

similarly if it were a five-year judge, that judge would get 15 

per cent of the income. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So then it isn't just a factor that you've served on 

the bench for two years and you would receive say a 50 or 70 

per cent, like a long-term individual paying into a pension plan. 

 

This pension plan as well, you mention that anyone say, 

moving out of the public service and say moving up to a 

judiciary position, would this pension plan then fall in 

alongside any other pension plan the member may have, or 

does it all accumulate into one? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, they'd be totally separate.  

Whatever they had become entitled to in a pension plan in their 

former life, whether it's public service or whoever, whatever 

their pension arrangements were, that's left off to the side.  

They begin to earn benefits under this plan on an entirely 

separate basis.  They get no credit for past service or anything 

like that.  They are simply credited for their years as a judge. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I was just looking through the Bill.  

I believe it does establish a contributory factor that the 

judiciary puts in is . . . if I'm not mistaken, I believe I saw some 

place where it's 9 per cent.  Is that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- My understanding is that the judge's 

contribution is 5 per cent of annual salary. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- What would the 9 per cent factor be?  I thought I 

saw in . . . I can't remember exactly where I saw it right now 

but in going through the Bill there was a place where a 9 per 

cent factor was in.  I just took that as being a contribution that a 

judge would make to the plan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I know where the member got that 

number.  For the period between October 1, 1978 and 

December 31, 1980, the judges contributed 9 per cent of their 

salary to the fund.  Those arrangements were changed then in 

1980 and for the period on and after January 1, 1981, the judge 

contributed what the legislation provided and this provision is 5 

per cent. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I guess the other question 

poses, why would there have been a reduction in light of the 

fact that if a person is in a position of judgeship for a number 

of years, the potential is there for a fairly substantial 

accumulated pension plan.  And I guess the problem as we look 

at the broad spectrum of pension plans across the country and 

the unfunded pension plans that are out there, that it would 

have been probably fair and equitable to have judges 

themselves put 9 per cent 



2376 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1993 

towards the plan to try and make these plans or help these plans 

become or maintain their actuarially-sound formation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- None of us were here in 1980 but I 

suspect that the reason was changes to The Income Tax Act.  

That's what it looks like anyway. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, in bringing forward the Act I understand that 

you're going to be implementing a commission, a group of 

individuals, that will make recommendations.  I wonder if you 

could let us know how many people you're suggesting would 

be part of this commission and who you would be looking at or 

who you are suggesting.  Are you looking at someone 

representing the broad spectrum of the general public -- the 

taxpayer out there -- or do you have specific type of personnel 

in mind with any specific qualifications? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- There has been a good deal of 

discussion with the judges about the composition of the 

commission.  And the composition that's set out in the Bill is 

set out in section 5.1(2).  And here's how it will be . . . it will 

work. 

 

I will appoint one member on behalf of the government.  The 

association, that is the judges' association, will appoint one 

member.  And those two will then agree upon a chair.  In the 

event that they are not able to agree on a chair, then the chair 

will be appointed by the person who is the dean of law at the 

University of Saskatchewan. 

 

I might mention to the member that this was . . . this particular 

provision about who would appoint in the event they were not 

able to agree was the subject of lengthy, protracted negotiation, 

and the suggestion for the dean of law was the product of that.  

But a number of other officials, chief justices and the like were 

suggested and discarded for one reason or another, and finally 

this formulation was agreed to. 

 

As to who, we're not at the stage yet.  But I can say that so far 

as the person I've appointed is concerned, it will be someone 

from outside the government who is of the province -- you 

know what I mean?  A person who knows about these things. 

 

It could be a lawyer, but it doesn't have to be a lawyer.  

Lawyers are in a bit of a compromisable position because they 

are members of their firm, appear before Provincial Court 

judges from time to time.  So I just haven't got a clear idea of 

who will be appointed, but in this great province I'm sure we 

can find somebody to adequately represent the interests of the 

government. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, if you're 

looking for someone . . . Actually, Mr. Minister, I see you've 

got . . . so actually this would be a three-person commission, is 

what you're suggesting.  And I guess, if I could make a 

suggestion, I think it would be only fair that maybe someone 

outside of the 

legal community, there should be at least one individual 

appointed that would have some knowledge -- and it doesn't 

really matter to me who it is -- but I think outside of the legal 

community just to give a broader perspective to look into 

judiciary salaries. 

 

Because there's no doubt that we receive criticism all the time 

regarding our compensation and salaries because of our board 

being made up of MLAs.  And I think maybe the judicial . . . or 

people in the judiciary or judges, lawyers, whoever, would 

probably feel somewhat more comfortable and at ease 

themselves if their commission that's setting salaries is a little 

broader and far ranging so that they can say: well listen, we had 

people outside making recommendations.  And I think that it 

would be a sound suggestion. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the 

officials for coming today to assist the committee in its work 

with respect to this Bill -- Ms. Amrud and Ms. Seale -- and 

thank them for coming and helping us today. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd also like to extend 

my appreciation and thanks to the minister and his officials for 

their time this afternoon.  Thank you. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 49 -- An Act respecting Correctional Services 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 77 -- An Act respecting the Implementation of 

Certain Treaty Land Entitlement Settlement Agreements 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 78 -- An Act to confirm an Agreement between the 

Government of Canada and the Government of 

Saskatchewan varying the Saskatchewan Natural 

Resources Transfer Agreement 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 



June 9, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2377 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 88 -- An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(1630) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Economic Development 

Vote 45 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- It's my understanding that there's a 

grouping of questions that we were to prepare for the 

opposition.  I don't think we took an opportunity on our first 

exchange to get that for the members.  I will see that that is sent 

to the office of the member from Kindersley at the first 

opportunity. 

 

Items 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 45 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Economic Development 

Vote 167 

Nil vote. 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation 

 

Nil vote. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992-93 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Economic Development 

Vote 167 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 167 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank 

the members of the opposition not for today's questions, but the 

other night I think we had a fair exchange. 

 

I would also like to ask the committee to be patient for the 

return of the Minister of Finance.  It might take maybe five 

minutes before she arrives back in the Assembly. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Finance 

Vote 18 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask the Minister of Finance to introduce 

her officials to the members of the 

committee. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It's my 

pleasure to introduce the deputy minister, John Wright, who's 

on my right.  Next to him is Len Rog, the assistant deputy 

minister of revenue, pensions, and administration.  Behind Mr. 

Wright is Craig Dotson, associate deputy minister, budget 

analysis division.  Next to him is Bill Van Sickle, executive 

director, administration division.  Next to him is Terry Paton, 

executive director, financial management branch, Provincial 

Comptroller's office.  And on my left is Bill Jones, associate 

deputy minister. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

in the short time that's available to us today, maybe we can deal 

with that one specific area and see if we can move along here. 

 

We have done some consulting of our own on your move to 

accrual accounting and how you come up with the numbers in 

your budget.  I'd like to ask you a few questions about a 

number of areas. 

 

The consultation that I've done tells me that you've got about 

$106 million in the accumulated deficit over equalization 

payments, federal equalization overpayment, you've allocated 

106 million.  And what people are telling me is that these . . . 

because these repayments are scheduled over a number of 

years, that you should not be including the whole amount in 

this year's deficit.  And the fact that these things are being 

negotiated even, that this isn't a hard and fast number, means 

that you should not under accrual accounting be including the 

amount in your accumulated deficit, that this amount has not 

been finalized, and is in fact simply speculation. 

 

So I would wonder how you would respond to that. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes.  In response to 

that question, we got an opinion from Deloitte & Touche on 

how we should book that particular item.  And the advice was 

that we should book it in the way that we have done so. 

 

I would also point out that this is consistent with the practices 

of other provinces who are on accrual accounting system. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I find that a little strange, Madam Minister, 

because I sought the advice of firms as eminent as Deloitte 

Touche and they're saying that if you do that you presuppose 

negotiations.  By taking that entire figure and stating that that 

has to go on the accumulated deficit, in effect you are saying 

that there is no negotiation in place, that we are responsible for 

that entire amount. 

 

The opinion I received is that even under accrual accounting 

the payments should be applied only in the years they are 

actually due, and that writing off the amount during 

negotiations presupposes the outcome of those negotiations.  

And that is a firm that is every bit 



2378 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1993 

as reputable as Deloitte Touche, Madam Minister. 

 

I'm wondering, if there's this much uncertainty out there, why 

you would err on the large side rather than perhaps waiting 

down the road before you sort of jumped that great leap of 

faith.  Is that because you simply wanted to make that 

accumulated deficit number as large as possible?  Is that the 

only reason that you did that? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, no, we did it because 

it was an appropriate way to account for the expenditure of 

public monies.  Under accrual accounting what you book is 

what you know today.  The 106 million is the figure that we 

know today.  If in fact that figure changes, then the amount that 

you book changes. 

 

But as I say, we got an opinion from a reputable firm, Deloitte 

Touche, and the opinion was that this is quite consistent with 

general accounting principles, public sector accounting, and 

audit committee principles. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- It's interesting, Madam Minister, how you 

agree and disagree with Deloitte Touche these days.  FCL got 

an opinion from Deloitte Touche that is totally contrary to what 

Madam Minister, I suspect, has been up to lately, and there 

wasn't a whole lot of compliance with Deloitte Touche 

yesterday. 

 

Madam Minister, would you tell me then if the 106 has been 

negotiated to a finality, or are you still negotiating these parts 

of the sum? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer to that is 

the 106 million is based on the formula as it exists; it's not a 

negotiated formula.  If it changes, then we change the number.  

But as I said before, under accrual accounting what you book is 

what you know now, and you book it when you know it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, you did not answer the 

question.  Is any of that 106 under negotiation between the two 

governments?  My understanding is that it is. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, if you would like me 

to repeat it, what we have booked is based on the formula that 

exists.  The formula is a set formula; it's not a negotiated 

formula.  Anything that changes with respect to negotiations 

that occur will be changed in the numbers.  But the formula is 

obviously not negotiated; it's a set formula. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, what if that 

negotiating process as per the formula happens to relieve you 

of a whole bunch of accumulated deficit, say, conveniently a 

year and a half from now. How will you record it then? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, we will book it 

appropriately.  That is, if in fact the 106 million is not accurate, 

in fact it was 100 million, we'll take a $6 

million gain.  If in fact 106 million was not accurate because 

it's 110 million, we'll take a $4 million loss on the deficit. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, when would you expect to 

know when this number might be arrived at?  Give us your best 

guess on when this negotiation might be concluded. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to again clarify, this 

is not negotiation we're talking about.  What this number will 

depend on is the population estimate which will be available to 

all concerned in September.  But then the numbers are not 

adjusted until March 31, 1994. 

 

But again I stress we're not talking about negotiation, we're 

talking about a formula and how the population statistics fit 

into that formula.  We've made an estimate.  We will find out in 

September whether the population estimate is accurate and this 

will affect our numbers in March '94. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So it's conceivable, Madam Minister, given 

that there's a whole lot of things going into equalization, that 

this number could change somewhat significantly for you 

approximately a year from now? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, that would only 

occur if there's some radical change in the population numbers.  

As the members opposite would know, when you do a budget 

you do it on the basis of estimates, what the best estimate is in 

light of all the information you have available at the time that 

you make the estimate.  The estimate is based on population 

statistics.  We do not see any reason for a dramatic change in 

those statistics and there is no reason for equalization to change 

before March 31, 1994. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, I'm going to go to another 

topic for a minute and may come back to this one because 

some of my other questions may trigger things. 

 

You have allocated $187 million for capital projects, and this 

once again was pursuant to the changes to accrual accounting.  

My consultation says that this appears to be fairly overstated, to 

be mild; because if I believe the principle is that if a school, for 

instance, was 40 per cent complete, 40 per cent of the cost must 

be included whether or not any cheques had been written. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, are you going to tell me that, whole or 

in part, that there are $187 million worth of capital projects 

ongoing in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, this is one of the 

fundamental principles of accrual accounting.  Many of these 

projects have been completed.  What happened in the past was 

the cost of those projects were spread over a period of time, 

over 10 years. 



June 9, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2379 

Under accrual accounting, as soon as you know that you have 

to incur a cost for a building that is constructed, you have to 

book those costs that year rather than being allowed to spread 

the costs over 10 years, which is one of the advantages of 

accrual accounting -- once you know you have a liability, you 

have to book it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, my understanding, and this 

is from a number of people in the accounting business, 

reputable firms, is that only the portion of a capital project that 

is completed can be reported as spent, i.e., the example I used 

-- if you have completed 40 per cent of the school, you report 

40 per cent of the cost. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, what I asked you was, given that 

principle, are you telling me that, whole or in part, there are 

$187 million worth of capital projects ongoing in the budget 

year that you refer to?  You've allocated $187 million. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to repeat, these are 

projects that have been completed.  Okay?  In the past we were 

allowed to spread the costs of those projects over a period of 

time.  Now with accrual accounting, the idea is that once you 

have . . . the taxpayers have a liability, you book it right that 

year rather than having the liberty of spreading it over a period 

of time.  So these are projects that are completed. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, how can that be?  Last year 

you wrote off everything in SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation), in other words all 

government-connected projects.  You wrote them off.  You 

wrote off the hospitals.  All of that stuff had already taken a 

write-down. 

 

How can you say now stuff that was completed in the past that 

have already written off, are now going to move it up and take 

a hit on it on accrual accounting?  That simply doesn't work. 

 

What you should be able to provide to me is $187 million list 

of projects currently under construction or to be completed this 

year and the portions of each one that you're claiming for this 

year.  You can't be dragging stuff out of the past when you've 

already written that off. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, these projects have 

not been written off in the past.  What was written off in the 

past, I think what the member is referring to is SPMC.  We 

wrote off a series of expenses associated with SPMC.  These 

have not been written off in the past. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, then what I need from you 

is the commitment to provide this list in its entirety, the year 

when completed, or the portion thereof being completed; 

because we asked questions earlier on in interim supply about 

what you were doing with hospitals that you'd written off, what 

you were doing with schools that you'd written off, what you 

had done with other institutions attached to 

government and Crown agencies.  So we're going to have to be 

able to make that comparison. 

 

So I think that you had better provide for us the list of 

everything that you wrote off and everything that you're 

assigning to this $187 million. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to point 

out to the members opposite that they were invited to a session 

on accrual accounting, at which time these lists were available.  

For some reason which I'm not clear about, they chose not to 

attend.  I have no problem in providing those lists.  The lists 

have been available for some time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay, Madam Minister, we'll hope that you 

get those lists over fairly quickly to us. 

 

Another issue here is the one of . . . our calculations show 

about $110 million that seems to be sums included in . . . that 

were put under interest payments but in fact aren't.  These are 

such items as the cost of issuing securities, departmental 

expenses associated with managing debt, and that type of thing 

that have been included as interests costs, because that's the 

only way I can make the numbers add up.  And I come to about 

$110 million.  I wonder if you have any comment on that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, could I ask the 

member opposite to clarify which particular 110 figure he's 

referring to. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Yes, I didn't . . . I believe it's the 847.5 

million.  I don't have it in my file with me, Madam Minister, 

but it appeared . . . Perhaps you can tell us then the cost of 

issuing securities and the departmental costs associated with 

managed debt.  And this would be departments across the line, 

what that process would be.  Where would that be recorded? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, with respect to first 

of all the 847.5 million, that's interest on the public debt.  It's in 

vote 12.  And if you look there, there is also a line, fees and 

commissions, and the number there is 1.5 million. 

 

Also in the Department of Finance, subvote F104, there's 

treasury and debt management which relates to this particular 

issue.  And the budget there is 2.1 million. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 

 


