




















































Hansard: June 08, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2325 

 June 8, 1993 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992-93 

Consolidated Fund 

Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Vote 46 

Item 1 

 

The Chair: -- I believe the minister had just finished.  Or do 

you wish to make a response from the question before the 

break? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, I think I answered the 

question.  If I didn't, have it repeated and I'll answer it. 

 

I have officials who will be here momentarily with some 

answers, some material that you'd asked for.  And we'll get that 

to you immediately. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I have some of the information that was asked 

for before supper and I'll pass that over.  I think there's one 

more sheet to come yet. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

just a question on the cheques that was just announced -- 

maybe my colleague did ask this question but I wasn't here all 

the time -- the ones that were just announced in the last week or 

10 days on something to do with the low-grade grains.  I heard 

a little bit about it.  Could you just explain how much that was 

and when they'll be out, or are the cheques in the mail or 

whatever. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The amount of that payment is 

about $33 million and the cheques will be out early next week.  

If you want me to go into detail as to where it comes from I 

can, but those are the numbers. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, yes, maybe you could give me 

a breakdown on how much on the, say, grade 3 and feed.  

That's the two things.  Those are the only two that I'm 

interested in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Right.  The pay-out will be almost 

exclusively on feed wheat, on the spring wheat.  There'll be 

some on the lower grades of durum as well.  The number 3 will 

. . . for producers who had 3 wheat and a crop insurance claim, 

they won't be getting any payment here.  The number 3 is 

basically on target, or the same amount or the same price, as 

the old calculation would give so it'll be . . . It's mainly on 

spring wheat, the feed grades of wheat, that the payment is on 

-- producers who had a crop insurance claim and had feed 

wheat. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- How many cents a bushel is that going to 

amount to, or can you break it down that way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The amount of . . . The difference 

is the old calculation, the way that Crop Insurance had always 

calculated the difference in 

quality, would give us a factor of .83 which in the situation we 

had this year with such a widespread frost caused a wider 

spread in grades and that was obviously not going to be fair to 

producers.  What we negotiated is to pay it on the actual final 

payments.  We're estimating right now that the actual final 

payments will give us a spread of a quality factor of .69.  So it's 

the difference from .83 to .69.  We're paying out 75 per cent of 

that as an interim payment, and the balance will come when we 

know the final prices and we can do a final calculation on it 

this fall. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I didn't get that quite straight 

from you and that would be me not hearing just quite right.  

You said . . . give me the figures again that you're paying 75 

per cent of.  I didn't . . . you said factor 3, and then you said six 

point some, and something else.  I didn't quite get you there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Okay, I maybe didn't speak very 

clearly on that.  The calculation that we normally did in Crop 

Insurance would have given us a .83 and that obviously was 

not adequate.  We went to the federal government and said, you 

know that's not going to be a right factor this year. 

 

The agreement that we got with the federal government was 

that we would pay it out at the end of the crop year on actual 

difference in price that was there.  Then we further agreed to 

pay out as much as that as we could to get some money in 

farmers' hands.  So we're paying out 75 per cent of what we 

think the actual difference will end up being.  And that results 

in $33 million being paid out some time next week and the 

balance will be paid out after we know . . . when the pools are 

closed and we know the exact differences in the final prices. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I'm still not getting it quite clear, Mr. 

Minister.  Let's put it this way.  If a farmer's in a crop insurance 

claim -- now this different payment could bring people into a 

crop insurance claim, I understand that -- but just say you're 

already in and it's all feed wheat.  That's the big number out 

there that people are in trouble with, with the feed grain.  How 

many cents a bushel, approximately, would it . . . could it 

amount to?  That's what I need; that's what I want. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I don't know if we can work that 

out.  We're trying to calculate in a price per bushel.  The 

situation is this:  if a person had no grain, say they had a 

complete crop failure, they would be paid, if they were covered 

say for 30 bushels to the acre, they get 30 bushels times two 

nine nine or whatever price option they chose and that would 

be the payment. 

 

For a person who had some bushels of grain that were of feed 

quality, they are adjusted down and counted for a smaller factor 

and that's where the adjustment comes in.  So the people who 

would get the biggest payment are those who had right around 

their coverage of feed wheat or maybe had enough feed wheat 

that they actually got no claim or very little claim because of 

the feed wheat that's in a bin. 



2326 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

Now the value of that feed wheat will be discounted and they 

will get the bigger payment.  So it'll vary from producer to 

producer.  The people who obviously didn't have a crop 

insurance claim at all but enough bushels to be . . . ever had 3 

wheat or whatever and didn't get a claim, won't get any money.  

The people who got a complete crop failure would have been 

paid out fairly.  It's the people who have feed wheat and the 

larger quantity of feed wheat approaching their coverage is the 

people who will get the most money. 

 

And in some situations, it could be as much, I believe, as 8, $10 

an acre approximately, but that won't be for all producers, 

that'd be just depending on how many bushels of feed wheat 

they had that was discounted from their crop insurance 

payments. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the reason why I'm 

questioning here because the farmers are desperate for cash out 

there.  And even though it's only going to be a short time they 

get their cheques, I'm getting . . . I was quite involved for years 

with Crop Insurance, in fact I was the minister for three years.  

And I do get a lot of calls.  And they're just trying to get an idea 

from you tonight what they maybe have coming. 

 

So maybe we could do it this way. You said that we'll go by the 

quality factor.  It's supposed to be .83, and that means for every 

thousand bushel in your bin you'd have 830.  But what is the 

actual factor on feed wheat right now then?  What did you set it 

at? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- What we're working on now as our 

estimate is .69.  So for somebody with feed wheat, if they had 

the two nine nine price option, it would probably be around 33 

cents a bushel for every bushel of feed wheat for which they 

had deducted from their crop insurance claim.  So that may 

give you some idea of what it could be. 

 

So if they had 20 bushels of feed wheat, and they had a 2.99 

price option, that would probably be about 6.60 an acre that 

they would be receiving.  So that's just some idea of how they 

might be able to calculate it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Mr. Minister, when they . . . we'll just 

talk about a farmer, he had a crop insurance claim.  He didn't 

have to use . . . he was into a claim but he had his 10, 15 

bushels acre, whatever of feed wheat.  So he would have . . . 

for sure have a claim with the factor. 

 

Now either get it straight.  When they were paid last fall, what 

factor were they paid on?  When they got their crop insurance, 

when they were paid out last fall, what factor were they paid on 

then?  I should know this too, but I kind of forgot it last fall 

when it was happening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- They were paid on the factor of 

.83.  They will now be paid on a factor of .69, except that we're 

only paying 75 per cent of that difference until we know the 

final price.  So that gives 

you some idea.  It might be helpful, I think there were about 

20,000 producers who will be getting a cheque and the average 

will be about $1,650.  That may be of some help. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right, Mr. Minister, thank you.  Mr. 

Minister, could you tell us the figure of how many insured 

farmers of crop insurance and revenue insurance were in 

delinquent of their arrears or their payments at the end of the 

year, whatever the date-line was that they had to have their 

premiums paid.  How many farmers were in that situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There were about 4,100 who were 

in arrears at the end of the year.  We sent letters to them.  

About 3,100 have either remitted their accounts or made 

arrangements, and there are about a thousand who are still at 

this time delinquent. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, what kind of arrangements did 

you make with them if they couldn't pay their premium up, say 

those roughly 3,000?  What kind of arrangements? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- For the producers who had 

overpayments, the arrangements varied.  It was negotiated.  

One to five years is the . . . I guess is the range we spread the 

payment out over on the overpayments. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I wasn't talking about overpayments; I was 

talking about the . . . You said 4,500 were approximately 

delinquent in paying their premiums.  They were due at the end 

of the year.  And you said approximately 3,000 made 

arrangements and approximately a thousand . . . or I didn't get 

your exact figure, but approximately, still haven't made 

arrangements yet. 

 

What kind of arrangements did you make with those people or 

was there a certain policy, or what was that policy to make 

arrangements for the farmers that could not pay those 

premiums? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- For the ones who were . . . The 

number that I gave you includes premiums who were 

delinquent and overpayments who were delinquent, as the 

member from Morse was questioning earlier.  So it included 

both.  The overpayments, as I said, we've gone terms from one 

to five years. 

 

The people who were delinquent in premiums we insisted on 

25 per cent of the premiums and then we gave them a one-year 

grace.  That was the arrangement for those . . . arrangements 

that were made with people who were delinquent with 

premiums only. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Like you're saying if you owed a thousand 

dollars you'd have to come up with $250 and you could carry 

the other 750 for one year.  Is that what you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's correct. 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2327 

Mr. Muirhead: -- What about the other, Mr. Minister?  What 

about the other thousand-and-some that you said that haven't 

been able to make arrangements?  Are they still trying to make 

arrangements or are they just out for crop insurance to cover 

your revenue insurance for this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- With the ones who are delinquent, 

their accounts will be cancelled if . . . We would still take 

money coming in now, but sometime this month notices of 

cancellation will be going out on those thousand who do not 

have their premiums paid. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So you're saying that, Mr. Minister, if 

someone is down and out and they cannot raise their premium 

money, and which that could very easily be -- I mean, there's 

some farmers that are in desperate need out there -- you're not 

going to try to make some arrangements to carry these here 

thousand people somehow or other?  Did you ever consider 

maybe post-dated cheques or something that . . . We did that 

back in the early '80s, or middle of the '80s I believe it was, Mr. 

Minister, when we had 3,700 farmers that couldn't pay and we 

allowed them to have a post-dated cheque. 

 

You can't lose that way because if they get a crop they're back 

in business; if they have another crop failure you get all your 

money anyway.  These people must owe you money so it 

would help both ways if they are naturally being cut off 

because of the old premium.  But if you considered some way . 

. . because a thousand farmers that are not covered out there is 

going be some of the . . . be in pretty bad shape.  And if it's 

getting dry out there now, it's a desperate situation.  Is there 

something you can't do to try to carry these here . . . and I 

understand there maybe would be some would be impossible, I 

understand that -- but is there some way you can take . . . 

There's too many people to leave out there uninsured. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I think the policy that we're 

following is a long-time policy.  Certainly there are hardships 

out there and some very difficult situations. 

 

We did send letters to the producers in April and asked them to 

come in and try to make arrangements.  And we offered them 

the one-year grace period if they can come up with 25 per cent 

down.  And the people who've come in, I think by and large 

have been able to make arrangements.  But if they haven't 

come in and haven't responded and haven't paid their 

premiums, we will certainly be having to send out cancellation 

notices.  As tough as that may sound, it seems that's been a 

long-standing policy of Crop Insurance. 

 

And remembering again that we're in a federal-provincial 

agreement, and if we don't follow the agreement, we can easily 

lose the federal support of it, and it puts us in a greater liability 

position. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- No you don't need to tell me that if you 

won't . . . whatever arrangements you want to 

make on carrying somebody that you have to get permission 

from the federal government on premiums; because that's not a 

fact, Mr. Minister.  That's up to the provincial government and 

they can do anything they want.  And I understand that if 

you've got a thousand people, or whatever that figure was, Mr. 

Minister, and if they haven't done anything . . . 

 

Can you give me the figure on how many farmers did not 

respond at all?  Can you give me the figures of how many 

farmers never responded whatsoever when they got this letter 

to come in and talk about it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Those are the thousand who 

haven't responded to us who are delinquent, and people who 

have come in have been able to make arrangements but people 

who do not respond . . . and remembering this is an insurance 

program and certainly premiums have to be paid and the longer 

you go into a crop year, the easier it is to predict the results of a 

crop.  And certainly we're aware of the tough situation in 

farming in Saskatchewan but that indeed is the policy.  And it 

is people who have not responded to our letter to come in and 

try to make arrangements. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, you're telling me everyone 

that responded were all able to make arrangements and that 

every one single one that didn't respond . . . I can't believe that 

somebody didn't come in and respond and they weren't able to 

make arrangements, couldn't come up with the 25.  Is exactly 

what's happened, right on that very figure, the ones that didn't 

respond and everybody that did respond got a deal made?  Is 

that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There certainly were a handful, 

probably maybe a dozen, who were unable to make 

arrangements.  By and large, the people who came in made 

arrangements.  The situation's . . . and I think there are some 

situations, as you may know, where people who are going 

through bankruptcy and so on, who, you know, just aren't 

responding to those sorts of letters at the time.  But most of the 

thousand who are delinquent are people who did not come in -- 

not every one of them, but all but maybe a dozen or so. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well that's fair enough, Mr. Minister, if they 

don't come in to talk about it.  But would you make this 

commitment:  you said, if you're still dealing with them now 

but it's going to cut off very quickly and I understand that, that 

they're going to have to have a coverage of some kind.  Would 

you make the commitment to get the message out there 

somehow or another that you've only got a short time to come 

in, maybe another week or whatever.  Crop Insurance can get 

that on the air very quickly.  I know how quickly that can 

happen.  Would you make the commitment that if you don't get 

here on a certain date there's no more negotiations and you're 

cancelled.  But would you give them another week or 10 days 

or whatever and still try to do something with them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well we can certainly 



2328 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

attempt to do something.  I don't know what form it would 

take, whether we'd have the agents contact them or do, as you 

suggest, some electronic media or whatever.  But certainly we 

have no desire to see people not covered by crop insurance 

because it can only compound the problem, as you say.  If 

there's a drought then it would create real difficulties for 

producers who are not covered. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, and I'm agreeable with the 25 per cent, 

if they can come up with 25 per cent, but I'd just ask you to 

give them one last chance because they may think, well I've 

missed the date-line and I couldn't raise the money.  And 

maybe they just need that one last chance, and I'd like to give 

everybody a last chance, as I'm sure you would, Mr. Minister.  

If you would undertake just to promise that you'll give them 

one last chance in this month of June some time.  Whatever the 

date-line, that's up to your department of course.  But I'd be 

satisfied if you'd give that commitment that they'd either be 

contacted by . . . that's a good idea to have the agents contact 

because that don't take them very long.  They'll know how 

many.  Would you give that commitment, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We will certainly attempt to 

contact or in some way spread the message that we want people 

to get in immediately. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I appreciate that. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, can you tell me how many Crop Insurance 

employees in 1993 that have been fired by your government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Twenty-six. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Do you have a breakdown, Mr. Minister, on 

whether these were adjusters or agents or Crop Insurance 

employees?  I know you fired some out of the office in 

Melville.  Do you have a breakdown on who these people 

were? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There were seven agents and the 

others were from CSO (customer service office) offices out of 

Melville -- a mixture of those. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- How many of those firings, Mr. Minister, 

were just straight political firings? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- None of those were political 

firings. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- How could you, Mr. Minister, stand there, 

just stand up there as a minister of the Crown under oath, and 

say there was none of them political firings when you know 

different than that?  Ask your officials what happened to 

Delores Sogge, worked in the Outlook office, she was head of 

the Outlook office.  Ask what happened to her, why they fired 

her, and cold-bloodedly fired her -- a few minutes to get her out 

of the office, with everybody crying.  Just ask your officials 

how necessary that was and if that was a political firing or not. 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we have gone 

through some major reorganization, major downsizing, major 

changes of personnel in Crop Insurance.  I think that certainly 

all can be justified.  I would stand behind the record of Crop 

Insurance and the improvements that we've made in the 

management and the operation of Crop Insurance. 

 

I think when I first became minister at the first . . . '91, at the 

end of the year, we had something like 13,000 uncorrected 

errors outstanding.  We had new programs, new computers, 

and all sorts of problems.  We had people who were hired who 

were not qualified for some of the positions, and we had some 

major problems in Crop Insurance. We've done some shaking 

up, and I think we've made major improvements, and we 

certainly stand behind the record of Crop Insurance.  There 

may be things that we can do yet but I think we're operating 

more efficiently and providing a better service.  And that's what 

I think is sometimes the hard necessity of operating a Crown 

corporation. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- It's easy for you to stand there, Mr. Minister, 

and say, oh yes, it's running more efficiently, and it's much 

more efficiently than it was, and all those errors that were there 

when we were in government.  That's absolutely wrong.  When 

you took over government in '91 in October, the errors weren't 

there.  It is because you changed things around so fast out there 

and moved things around. 

 

It was in the winter of '92, '91-92, that you had all the 

problems.  You can't blame that back on the previous 

government.  Come on now.  Get up here and give us the right 

times that all those errors were because I happen to know.  And 

you know different than that.  It's easier for you to say that your 

new people . . . You fired so many people then and brought 

new people in off the street and they made the errors in '91-92 

and then you said, oh that's the previous government done that, 

and you've improved it. 

 

Naturally you've improved it because your people you fired, 

they're gone, and you brought in some greenhorns and it took 

them a few months to get things straightened out.  That's within 

your own efficiency.  You naturally will get better if you leave 

them there long enough they might learn how to run a 

computer.  But those computer foul-ups were in '92, fall of 

'91-92, after the election.  And it wasn't a problem before so 

don't stand there and tell us that. 

 

Now I want to know why you fired . . . why was Delores Sogge 

fired?  Your officials must know that.  You got people from 

Melville there.  Why was she cold-bloodedly fired until 15 

minutes after 10 years of faithful work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That was a downsizing move.  

Nobody has replaced that person and that is the . . . 

Restructuring is the reason for that person no longer being with 

the department. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, it wouldn't be 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2329 

anything to do with her husband, Stan Sogge, being my 

president of my riding for a good many years, and she was 

absolutely a political appointment by me.  I appointed her a 

position but she needed the job and the job was vacant and 

there was several people applied, and she did a good job.  And 

so don't think that that wasn't through the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) in the Outlook area, that there was pressure 

on Crop Insurance to get rid of Muirhead's president's wife.  So 

come on now, stand up and admit, yes we do have political 

hirings in this government . . . 

 

The Chairperson: -- Order, order.  I'll just remind the member, 

and I'm sure it was a slip of the tongue, not to refer to members 

here, including himself, by proper name but by constituency. 

 

Order.  Order. 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I was not 

aware that this person's husband was your campaign manager, 

and I guess, as always, members over there have a hard time to 

believe that we don't run our hiring and firing on a political 

basis, that as a minister I don't get involved in staffing CSO 

offices. 

 

That's not the way government should run and it's not the way 

it does run, and I know that you find us hard to believe but I 

welcome you to the '90s and to the new reality of politics. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, you can stand there and sound 

holier-than-thou but you know that you're just trying to be nice 

to the television public who hear you out there.  Come on now.  

You know that you . . . When this government took over that 

you went right through government and you cleaned them out. 

 

You phoned the old Crop Insurance board yourself, and I 

congratulate you for that.  You phoned the Crop Insurance and 

said -- the board -- you phoned them and said that you're no 

longer on the board but if you wish to apply we'll maybe 

consider you on the new applications.  You phoned every one 

of the Crop Insurance board. 

 

Now why did you lay the Crop Insurance board off?  Because 

they weren't hired by the NDP.  I don't mind you doing it but 

for goodness' sake don't be so holier-than-thou and stand here 

and say, we don't believe in that, that we want that out of there.  

And I'd just like to know how many people . . . no sense asking 

you because you'll get up and say they hired because of their 

qualifications. You know, pretty near everybody that you bring 

into that department are hired because they've got a card.  And 

there's no other reason why.  They've got the right coloured 

card.  Why was Dan Mengel fired out of Melville? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Dan Mengel's position -- the 

official was telling me -- was eliminated. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, we know it was eliminated.  

So was he.  He was eliminated.  And it was 

because that young man, farmed out here at Dilke, 

Saskatchewan . . . and he had a hard time on the farm, he had to 

quit farming, and he paid his debts off the best he could, and he 

had a real good job, and he came to me and wanted to get a job 

some place.  I got him one as a adjuster first.  And then he 

applied for a job at Melville, and Melville hired him.  And he 

needed that job pretty bad, and he was an excellent man and 

you know he was. 

 

And so you could . . . if it wasn't for political reasons, you 

would have put him in some place else, if you eliminated that 

position.  You fired him because you knew that the past 

minister hired him, that's why. 

 

And what happened to Jim Walters?  He wasn't hired by the 

member from Arm River.  He was there through three 

governments.  But you canned him because he stood up at 

election time and had an ad in the paper, or done something for 

the Progressive Conservatives on television over Fair Share 

Saskatchewan, so goodbye Jim Walters. 

 

And you can give me a comment on one person that I haven't 

heard from, but I just was concerned about.  Was one of the 

best individuals I ever knew to work for Crop Insurance, 

faithful from way back in the '60s.  I'm sure he won't mind me 

mentioning his name because he was a very faithful servant, 

but maybe he quit on his own, maybe he took early retirement.  

I don't know.  But I'd like to know whether he, Mr. Chris Wass, 

took early retirement or quit on his own or whether you fired 

him like you did the rest. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Wass took early retirement. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Was he . . . That's fine if he took it 

voluntarily. But was he offered early retirement, or was he 

forced into early retirement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Again, that position was 

eliminated.  He was given the option of early retirement and he 

took it.  I think that's . . . we did that where we could 

throughout government when positions are eliminated.  If 

people who are eligible for early retirement . . . If you take 

early retirement it makes room for somebody younger.  

Certainly don't deny that there are a lot of good people in 

Saskatchewan who need jobs and are looking for jobs, and 

there certainly are, but they can't all have jobs or they aren't 

finding jobs.  Certainly when we downsize somebody has to 

go, and I guess with the admissions that the member opposite 

makes that they all were political hirings, I guess we would had 

to have eliminated all of them to be truly political, and we 

certainly didn't do that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- No, you wouldn't have to do that because we 

fired very few of them in 1982.  Mr. Wass and Mr. Walters was 

there through three governments.  And you had absolutely no 

reason to take a man like Jim Walters and fire him -- a good 

man like him -- and he was good. 

 

And I'm quite satisfied if Chris Wass took an early 



2330 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

retirement on an involuntarily.  And I just want to leave this 

comment, that of all the years that I've been involved with 

government, and that was over nine years, and I never knew an 

individual that was more dedicated to his job than Chris Wass.  

And I'd just like to take this opportunity also to . . . if he's 

listening tonight or whatever, somebody knows him -- that I 

want to congratulate him for his dedication to Crop Insurance 

for a long period of time.  I know he started sometimes in the 

'60s.  And I'm hoping that what you're saying is a factual, that 

he did take . . . and I'll take that for granted that he had 

voluntarily took early retirement. 

 

Just got one last question and that's . . . and I don't know this 

individual's name, but it was the individual that was fired from 

Rosetown about a year ago from now, the clerk out there.  And 

that's the one that denied the then minister of Agriculture's wife 

crop insurance. 

 

Now did she ever get a job back with the Crop Insurance?  Did 

that go to court?  Because I had letters from a lawyer wanting 

information on that and I haven't heard what's happened to that.  

Could you update me what happened to that lady that got 

popped because she wouldn't give crop insurance to the 

minister of Agriculture's wife? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That person was let go on June 1 of 

'92 and received a severance, and settlement is complete to the 

best of my knowledge. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay, thank you.  That's all the questions I 

had, and I thank you for your questions and your . . . for your 

answers to my questions. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a couple of 

questions on your costs on administration, Mr. Minister.  As I 

was going through a review of the different administration 

costs over the years, 1991 stuck out significantly.  And as I was 

going through it, I wondered why, because I didn't have the 

'92-93 estimates, nor did I have the actual.  And when I looked 

through it, you took and put $36 million of interest costs into 

the administration. 

 

And my question to you is: where did that administrative costs 

come in 1991 that made it that high?  And I guess I need to 

know which interest-accumulated group . . . did it come from 

the reinsurance side of it?  Did it come from the debt side of 

Crop Insurance?  Where did that come from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The admin, of course, went up 

because of GRIP (gross revenue insurance program).  The 36 

million that you point out in interest is basically, as I 

understand it, an accounting change.  It's a flow-through. It's in 

revenue and then it appears again as expenses.  And that's there 

because of a change in accounting, which I'm not . . . totally 

understand why.  It's a reinsurance fund interest, is the interest 

that's there.  It didn't show up before but it shows up in this 

account in two places, as offsetting revenue and expense. 

Mr. Martens: -- Does the federal government pay 50 per cent . 

. . no, it pays about 65 per cent of the reinsurance interest costs 

and we pay about 35 per cent.  Is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Each party is responsible for their 

own interest costs on the reinsurance fund, so it doesn't show 

up in the accounting.  The formula is, I think we pay the first 

two and a half per cent and then the balance is split 75/25. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Today?  Or is that what was in place for this 

year, for 1991? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That formula hasn't changed.  

That's the same. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- You're saying that the interest costs on the 

reinsurance fund is two and a half per cent ours, and then 25 

per cent, and the rest is all federal government's share. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That is correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On administration costs . . . What's the split 

on the administration costs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Admin costs are split 50/50. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Did the federal government pay twice?  Did 

the federal government pay the 75 per cent on the 

administration . . . or the interest costs on the reinsurance?  And 

then did you re-enter the $36 million under the administration 

costs, and then get another 50 per cent of that paid? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, unfortunately not. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Could I have . . . could I have a letter from the 

Department of Agriculture federally that would indicate that 

that was not the case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We could confirm that.  I certainly 

wouldn't want to tell them about it if they had, because it would 

be a major bonus for us.  But we can . . . They certainly don't . . 

. They don't pick up a share of the interest costs on the 

reinsurance fund.  That is our responsibility.  The 

administration of the program is split 50/50.  The reinsurance 

fund is another formula and they certainly didn't get double 

billed.  But we can have that confirmed.  I believe they will do 

that for us. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I'd like to have that because I picked that 

up because actually what you said to start with, was that the 

reason this went . . . the administration costs went up in 1991 

was because of GRIP.  That's not a fact, Mr. Minister.  Because 

that interest taken out, out of the 60 million, is $26 million cost.  

Your cost in 1992 is substantially higher than that.  In fact your 

administration cost is 28 million plus another 5 million.  So 

you got $33 million roughly in total costs and administration 

for 1992.  If what we do is add those numbers together from 

your supplementary estimates and what was in there from 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2331 

the previous year -- even if we don't -- you're still $2 million 

higher than you were in 1991. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is really the fact.  What you did is you . 

. . I don't know for what other reason than to identify that the 

$60 million was because of GRIP.  Because it wasn't because 

of GRIP; it was interest cost on something else that you put in 

there. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, I'd like to have you confirm that with 

the federal government, Department of Agriculture, that that 36 

million was not paid . . . 50 per cent of that administration cost 

did not include that $36 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well when I said '91 was up, I 

didn't mean it was up from '92.  Normally you go the other 

direction.  And I think '91 was the first year of GRIP and so the 

crop insurance was up from the previous year, which is 

absolutely natural.  And GRIP of course remained in '92 

somewhat, I might add, cheaper, a more efficient program to 

administer. 

 

But the administration costs in '92 again were up from '91, 

certainly, and that largely the result of a frost and 50,000 

claims, which I don't think is probably a record high for the 

province.  And that's where the admin costs are in '92. 

 

But you asked why the '91 was up -- I assumed you meant over 

the previous year -- and that was because of the first year of 

GRIP.  Obviously there was some administration cost to the 

program. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The member for Arm River asked you a 

question about some individuals that were fired.  You said 26.  

Is that include the 7 agents that you released? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, those numbers apparently do 

not include the agents, and I again may have misspoke that.  

We have a real difficulty with the numbers because we have 

positions that were eliminated.  And then you asked for people, 

and it's . . . we're running through it, trying to count up people.  

But the 26 employees was separate from the 7 agents. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- In your lay-offs in Agriculture when we were 

going through the estimates in Agriculture, did you move any 

of the employees of Crop Insurance into the . . . or Agriculture 

into Crop Insurance?  Did you do any transfers in any one of . . 

. that way at all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, we did not either way. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Of these 26 individuals, is that individuals or 

positions or which way?  And if you want to talk about 

positions and these are individuals, then tell me how many 

positions you eliminated. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There were 16 positions 

eliminated, not including the agents. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I would assume then that the 26 is the 

number of people and then 16 on top of that.  Or does the 16 

positions eliminated constitute part of the 26? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well the 16 constitutes part of the 

26. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How many of the 26 are you having difficulty 

with in relation to a challenge by the Labour Relations Board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There are two positions which are 

issuing a challenge through the Labour Relations Board. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Did any of the 26 have a severance package 

attached to any of their releases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There are 16 positions that had 

severances. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- For a total of how many dollars?  And how 

many are outstanding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There is one outstanding severance 

remaining.  The total of the others is $528,889. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- A question on this spring's seeded acreage 

report.  When are the customer service offices and the agents 

going to get those . . . or the farmer is going to get those seeded 

acreage reports? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Those reports went out yesterday 

I'm told. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- We had a significant group of people asking 

for them already and so they were worried about that. 

 

If an individual does not file his seeded acreage report, what's 

the status of that contract? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- To clarify my previous remark, I 

said they went out yesterday.  They went out to the agents so 

they should be to the farmers very shortly. 

 

If they're not filed, then we will go out and get it, and they will 

be insured as if it had been filed.  There is a $60 penalty, I 

believe.  I know because I've paid it once.  I don't know, if the 

policy hasn't changed, I think it's still a $60 penalty for not 

filing on time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What is . . . I don't know whether I entirely 

heard you.  What is the status of the contract if the person 

doesn't file his seeded acreage report? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The contract will still be in force as 

if he had filed it.  We will go out and be sure that it gets 

completed so that we have their record of the acreages and the 

producer will, I think, get a $60 penalty but he still will have 

insurance as if he'd have been filed on time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay. The member from Arm River raised 

some questions about political appointments 



2332 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

and you were naive enough to get up and talk about the fact 

that you were so generous and did things right and all that.  

Well there was a individual who was the business agent for the 

NDP candidate in my constituency who got appointed to the 

Crop Insurance board.  Of course it wouldn't have been 

anything political, but on the other hand it might have been. 

 

And so I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, that I don't have a 

problem with political appointments. I have a problem with 

people saying they're not going to do it and then they do it 

anyway.  That's what I have a problem with and that's what a 

lot of people in this province have a problem with. 

 

The problem is that you said it: you weren't going to do it and 

you went ahead and did it.  And you've done it across the board 

in hundreds and hundreds of people.  And that's what the 

problem is, Mr. Minister.  I'm not going to give you the 

individual's name but you can find out where she's from and 

you'll know who it is.  And that, Mr. Minister, is the reason 

why people in the province are sceptical about what you do, 

and they're sceptical about what you're going to do. 

 

Another question I have for you: what are you going to do 

when you phase out the revenue insurance in two years and you 

phase it out? Are you going to go back after the farmers for all 

of the premium payments that are going to be required to 

reduce the volume of indebtedness in reinsurance?  Are you 

going to go after the farmers for that volume of dollars? 

 

The second question to that: if in fact there is a surplus in that 

fund, will you give it back to the farmers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The GRIP program, as you know, 

now has a deficit.  If prices hold at what we predict or national 

grain bureau predicts -- and of course that's a very shaky 

prediction, as you know, with grain prices -- but if those 

predictions hold, our numbers show us with a slight surplus in 

the fund at the end of the two years.  The agreement is silent as 

to what happens to a surplus in the fund.  The deficit, if there's 

a deficit in the fund, is the responsibility of 35 per cent 

provincial government, 65 per cent federal government.  But 

the agreement is silent on the surplus.  Certainly one option 

would be to repay it to the farmers, particularly if it's a sizeable 

amount. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On the details as it relates to the opting out of 

the federal-provincial agreement, you have two years to get out 

of it.  You said that the volume of dollars, if everything is sort 

of average, then we'll probably have a surplus, a slight surplus.  

Is there any reason to believe that you should be changing the 

numbers any more than you did this year?  Because this year 

you changed them very significantly in relation to the 

individual's coverage.  And that is the reason why you're going 

to have a change in the whole format of what is going to be 

able to or required to be paid out and what is going to be 

received by the farmers.  So there was a significant change this 

year already.  Are you going to do that again next year in 

order to make that little bit of a surplus? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I thought you were referring to 

gross revenue insurance and GRIP premiums.  We reduced our 

GRIP premiums by about 20 per cent this year.  We could have 

reduced them more except the agreement, the 

federal-provincial agreement on the original GRIP agreement 

has a sleeve in it which only allows premiums to move up so 

much over a five-year period.  It also only allows them to drop 

so much over a five-year period, and we hit the limit as to how 

much we can drop. 

 

And unless we can get agreement with the federal government, 

we will next year be in a position where we will not be able to 

lower our GRIP premiums because we will be at the bottom of 

the sleeve and the five-year period. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That drop was 2 per cent . . . no, 5 per cent 

below the average and 5 per cent above the average.  And that 

was a 10 per cent moving sleeve, I believe.  Is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- It's a 6 per cent moving sleeve. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- 6 per cent above and 6 per cent below? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So then we need to encourage the federal 

government to see whether they're going to realign that sleeve.  

Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That certainly will be correct for 

next year.  And as you know, the coverage levels on the GRIP 

program are going downhill.  And if grain prices move up and 

it looks like there won't be a pay-out next year, we will 

certainly be negotiating to be able to reduce our premiums. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I don't recall whether you answered the 

question on whether there was -- maybe I didn't even ask it -- 

was there a reduction in the volume of individuals who took 

contracts on their livestock, the grass side insurance and the 

feed option? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, there was a substantial drop in 

the livestock feed insurance -- 2,993 people for our producers 

for a 37 per cent drop in people covered. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And what was the reason for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The reason for that was 

dramatically higher premiums and lower coverage.  The 

program was not actuarially sound, had run up some huge 

deficits in a very short period of time, and the actuary study 

that we did demanded drastic action to bring the thing back into 

line to be actuarially sound.  And that resulted in very 

substantially higher premiums and less coverage, and that, I 

assume, is the reason that producers dropped out. 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2333 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I just happen to live on a split between 

two regions -- one was high and one was low.  And when we 

got the balance back, it was a 1 per cent increase.  So which 

parts of the province really were the highest out of line in 

relation to their production yields and which ones were most 

reasonable? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We'll have to get that for you, I 

think.  We just don't have the numbers here. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- If you wouldn't mind, get for me the 

information that dealt with what they were and what they 

changed to, and that would provide a reasonable observation. 

 

What's the earliest date that you could possibly pay out on the 

feed program, both the grazing and the feed option.  What's the 

earliest possible date you could pay that out? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Likely it would be . . . sometime in 

October would be the soonest that we would be able to collect 

all the data from the area to make the calculations in order to 

make pay-outs. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- If the conditions continue to exist as they are, 

there would be significant reason why you couldn't start a lot 

earlier, because you're not going to get the production -- 

especially on the native grass -- you're not going to get the 

production after the end of June anyway.  And so you're very 

safe in going out and looking into whether in fact you could do 

the assessments earlier than late. 

 

The reason I'm asking the question is if the ranchers and the 

farmers knew that they were going to have that come to them, 

they could probably go and buy their barley and their feed 

grains at a earlier date, rather than at a later date, with cash that 

they would have on hand.  And that's what this is for anyway.  

And I would suggest that, seeing whether you couldn't move 

that date forward sufficiently enough to give them a reasonable 

opportunity at some of this feed wheat that's hanging around 

that many people would like to get rid of. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, I think that's a very good 

point.  In fact at the stock growers' meeting, I talked to couple 

of producers who suggested the same thing.  Some of them are 

looking at feeding their cattle right now, and you know they 

obviously need money for feed and the sooner we can get the 

cheque to them the better.  I don't know exactly what we can 

do, but certainly it's an option.  If it doesn't rain till the end of 

the July sometime, we obviously know that there is not going 

to be any pasture and maybe we can speed it up.  That's 

something we certainly will be looking into. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- There's one thing that is certain, that your 

production, if it stays at the same level it is today, it isn't going 

to be equivalent to very much.  And calculate it on the basis 

that other years you've paid out, you should 

be able to calculate that you should be able to get some of that 

money, at least, to those producers, as an interim step. 

 

And I know you shouldn't do it without measuring, but I was 

out riding in the pasture on Saturday and there was almost 

nothing growing.  And that seeded grass is in . . . there was 

normally lots of volume there but it's a strange year out there.  

There's frost caught the damage, the plants; there's drought, and 

cold weather, and nothing seems to be growing in.  And so it's 

a very serious problem. 

 

The other thing that I wanted to raise with you on the question 

of crop insurance on the grain side.  Have you had any requests 

for reseeding come to the office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There has been some requests.  The 

officials say a small amount due to frost of course in some of 

the areas but not a large amount at this time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I've a 

couple of questions here.  First of all I'd like to go back to 

wildlife crop depredation.  I understand that Crop Insurance 

has now picked up and responsible for wildlife crop 

depredation.  What I'm wondering is, does a person, a farmer, 

have to be . . . carry crop insurance to receive any coverage for 

wildlife damage? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So if a farmer isn't involved in crop insurance, 

and they have wildlife damage, they make a claim to Crop 

Insurance, Crop Insurance comes out and adjusts.  What basis 

then does Crop Insurance use to arrive at a settlement factor?  

Is it based on what the crop would have produced in the area 

that's destroyed?  And what dollar value would they use? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, that has been the procedure.  

We are looking at that program and there may be changes to 

the wildlife side again.  There's two programs:  one which is 

wildlife, which is big game, which is provincial; and the other 

which is waterfowl, which is federal.  But that's essentially how 

damage is measured.  It's the area and the amount the crop 

would have yielded, and the per cent, and paid out on that 

basis. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So, Mr. Minister, I guess I should have clarified it 

a little bit because what I'm talking about is the big-game 

damage.  And that's certainly an area -- down in my area, 

anyway -- there's a number of . . . down along the Qu'Appelle 

and along the Moose Mountain, getting toward harvest time, 

there's an area where we do run into some major problems.  

Mr. Minister, is there a maximum amount paid out, or is the 

payment now based on actual loss? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The maximum is $2,500.  This had 

been in effect this year, and apparently has been for a few 

years. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying, even though Crop 

Insurance administers it, there's still a maximum of 



2334 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

$2,500.  And when you talk about that maximum $2,500, is it 

also true that there's a maximum in the fund, and if the requests 

for that fund far exceed, then the pay-out is prorated on the 

basis of the requests and the dollar value that's available? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That has been the practice.  This 

year fortunately the damage was not that high and we did not 

have to prorate it.  They were paid out 100 per cent this year.  

But that has been the practice. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well it would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that 

maybe the reason the damage wasn't that high was the fact that 

more people than not chose not to report their claims.  Because 

that's one of the major concerns I get, at least that are raised 

with me.  And people have just gotten tired of applying 

because of the fact that when they've applied . . . They've had 

their damage assessed, and then they've made their application; 

their application may be for a $1,700 claim, and maybe a year 

later they might receive . . . the information comes back, well 

we've had so many claims, we have to wait till all the claims 

come in and we'll see whether we've got enough money to pay 

you your full amount or to prorate that factor.  And I think 

what's happening, Mr. Minister, more people than not are just 

deciding that it's just a waste of time and it's a hassle to apply 

for crop compensation for wildlife damage, when at the end of 

the day you may end up rather than in that 2 or even $5,000 

range, you may end up with $200.  So I think that's one of the 

reasons that people aren't applying. 

 

Another question I'd like to ask, Mr. Minister.  And it goes 

back to a file, and I sent a request to your office.  Unfortunately 

I didn't receive anything back from your office regarding the 

request.  It goes back to a contract on yellow mustard, I believe 

it was, in 1991.  And it comes from a constituent at Welwyn, 

contract number 01633.  And I spoke to you personally about it 

and at the time, and I believe you followed up but I didn't 

receive any response yet.  The letter I sent to your office was 

dated March 24.  I don't remember if I put the individual's 

name in here but it's . . . yes, I received a letter back from your 

office that you'd be looking into it.  And I actually sent you all 

the information.  It comes from a Mr. Henry Griemann. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, back on . . . this is regarding a 1991 claim 

and in December of '92, Mr. Griemann received a payment of 

5,141.94 and his balance outstanding was considered zero.  In 

February of . . . and that was received on January 31, 1993, and 

this is going back to a 1991 claim.  And then a month later, Mr. 

Griemann received a notice in the mail that he now owed Crop 

Insurance 3,195.64. 

 

Now this contract was based on a point . . . I believe the grade 

factor used at that time in establishing his yellow mustard . . . 

he had a hail insurance claim on the mustard, he had hail had 

gone through, and then he was able to harvest the mustard, but 

at the end of the day the mustard came off as sample.  And 

going back and relating the prices at that time, they established 

the grade factor to be .35 and based on that he received that 

payment. 

And then as I indicate, all of a sudden on . . . his payment was 

received in January of '93 and in February of '93 he now owes 

$3,195.  And when he went to try and find out why the change, 

he was finally told at the end of the day that the grade factor 

had changed to .6 from .35. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, Mr. Griemann took the time to . . . and he 

was told the grade factor had changed because of the price 

differential, the price changes.  And yet he checked -- he'd 

always marketed his product through Humboldt Flour Mills -- 

and he checked the prices and 1991 no. 1 mustard was 11 cents 

a pound, sample 5.75.  The '92 price was 11.50 and sample was 

6.75; '93 was 11 cents a pound and sample was 5.75. 

 

And to me, Mr. Minister, and in his mind as well, there isn't a 

big change in the price factor that should call for a major 

change in the grade factor which indeed then put him, instead 

of a claim position, put him in a position where he actually . . . 

it cost him some money and he had to pay back to the 

corporation. 

 

I'm wondering how the corporation came about and decided 

that over a year later the grade factor was wrong and they 

changed it without even conferring with the customers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I can remember the particular file 

but only vaguely.  I believe we did write to the producer to 

explain the situation to him and we didn't carbon copy you.  I 

apologize for that. 

 

The situation I think was an error and I just . . . Nobody here 

has that at their fingertips.  That may have occurred with 

several.  I think there was one error we made with peas which 

people got a cheque, and the other error on mustard was the 

other way and they got a bill which was unfortunate.  But we 

certainly will . . . I will commit to again look into that and get 

you the facts on it and any correspondence that we sent to the 

producer if we did so. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I certainly would appreciate 

receiving the comments or at least a copy of the letters so I can 

be better informed and also follow up with Mr. Griemann. 

 

I guess the major question I have is the information he received 

indicated that the reason was the change in the . . . I think right 

here I'm just going to quickly . . . Mr. Griemann was told that 

the factor was changed because of the difference in the price of 

no. 1 mustard to sample mustard price had changed.  And as I 

indicated I went through those prices and basically it's almost 

fairly level.  There was very little change between no. 1 and 

sample.  They basically stayed pretty close to the same which . 

. . 

 

So I don't exactly know how the grade factor could be changed 

and why it should be changed a year after the fact when this 

was a 1991 claim and partial pay-out was made out in 1992.  

Final pay-out was made in January of '93 and then in February 

of '93 -- this is a year and a half after the claim was submitted 

-- why 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2335 

there would be a change made at that time and a substantial 

change to say the least. 

 

Certainly I'm sure any producer would find it very difficult to 

all of a sudden understand why he owed money when he had 

received a cheque and had basically signed off, saying okay, I'll 

accept that.  I think it's fair.  Maybe Crop Insurance made out 

better than I did but I think we've come to a reasonable 

consensus on that and then to have it, all of a sudden have it 

changed. 

 

And I'm wondering how Crop Insurance could make a change a 

year and a half after the fact.  And I'd also like to know, Mr. 

Minister, how many other contracts ended up in the same 

scenario? 

 

(2015) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I don't have an explanation 

for you on that and certainly we'll get one for you and again 

apologize if we did not get back to you on that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I have just one final question on the agents.  

Are you going to phase out the agents in two years?  What's 

your plan for that area?  I know that there has been significant 

use of those men and women across the province for a variety 

of responsibilities.  And I think they have served their 

communities well, knowing some of the responsibilities they've 

taken on and delivered, even some of the things that you 

suggested like your former minister, the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose, asked them to go out and do a sell job on the 

variable price option.  And they went and did that.  And I think 

that they have done almost a yeoman service for the 

corporation out there.  I do not believe that the dollars spent 

there is being misused, or it is a value for the dollar because of 

a customer service option that they provide. 

 

What's your view of where they're going to be in two years, 

because I suspect that they're beginning to wonder, knowing 

that you're phasing out of the revenue insurance portion.  Are 

you going to phase them out as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well to start with I would like to 

agree with your comments that they have done yeoman service 

in some very rushed circumstances when members opposite 

were in government and when we were in government making 

changes at the last moment and again this spring having great 

difficulty getting actuarial reports and numbers from the 

federal government.  So that we put them under a great deal of 

pressure and they were able to deliver the program in a very 

timely fashion.  And certainly I agree with the member on that. 

 

I guess there are several options that we're going to have to 

look at.  There are some factors we have to look at. What 

program ultimately replaces GRIP will have some influence on 

it, whether that's administered through Crop Insurance.  

Certainly we don't expect Crop Insurance to disappear so there 

will be some possible function there and we will have to 

look at the most cost-effective way to deliver the service.  And 

we have the CSO offices and the agents and adjusters and the 

whole . . . We're constantly looking at this system.  And I guess 

I can't make any commitments as to where we'll be in two 

years, but certainly there's no decision been made to phase 

them out or eliminate them at this time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Are any of the offices that they have been . . . 

taken, that Crop Insurance has been reducing their volume of 

staff, are any of those offices now being . . . Is the rents being 

still paid on them or are there any empty ones in relation to the 

52 rural service centres that had some closures in them?  Were 

there any Crop Insurance offices in any one of those 52 that 

were closed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There were three of the rural 

service centres that had Crop Insurance staff in them that were 

closed.  I don't know the situation, whether any of those have 

been sublet to date or not.  I think certainly we have contracts 

on them, some of them for a very long period of time, some of 

them for a year or two.  I don't know on those particular three 

but we are attempting to sublet or renegotiate leases on those. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Vote 46 agreed to. 

 

The Chairperson: -- If the minister would like to thank his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly, Mr. Chairman.  I would 

like to thank my officials for their attendance here tonight and 

the hard work they've done.  And also the members opposite 

for the questions and the cooperation. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  You did the 

Supplementary Estimates and where are the Crop Insurance 

estimates for '93 going to come?  Are they going to be voted in 

Agriculture or are they going to be voted here today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I believe they're going to be voted 

at Crown Corporations which is where we've just done the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I don't think you're right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That was my understanding.  If 

they're not then they will be voted here with Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I may have to get back to you on that.  

I'm not sure we know for sure.  But if you like, we'll get back 

to you in writing on that, if you want that undertaking. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  They are $104 

million under the Agriculture budget, and if they're going to be 

voted there, I have no problem 



2336 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

doing that.  I would have liked to have known that prior, then I 

would have asked it on the supplement only and then we could 

have gotten out of here quicker.  And we could ask the question 

in Agriculture estimates and done that, but we will wait for 

your explanation at a later date. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I will move the committee rise, report 

significant progress and ask leave to sit again at an early date, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to thank 

the minister and his officials for attending and answering the 

questions here today, and we'll wait for that resolution of the 

problem to come forward. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 56 -- An Act respecting Occupational Health and 

Safety 

 

The Chair: -- I'll ask the Minister of Labour to introduce his 

officials who are assisting him in the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The members will recognize the 

deputy minister of Labour, Merran Proctor, from yesterday 

afternoon and evening.  Seated behind Ms. Proctor is the acting 

executive director of occupational health and safety, Terry 

Stevens; sitting behind me is John Alderman, the director of 

special projects. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to say 

hello to John Alderman whom I met in North Battleford not so 

long back.  Good to see you here tonight. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have sort of gone through this in round one 

last night with Bill 56 . . . or 55 rather, and 56 of course is 

tonight. 

 

Response of course to Bill 55 would be interesting because it 

will directly reflect the views the people will have on how we 

handle Bill 56.  And the fact of the matter, sir, is that we have 

had no positive response today to what we did in achieving any 

changes to Bill 55 yesterday.  In fact the business community 

and the province in general have reported to me that they are 

feeling betrayed, in a word.  The only word that I can use to 

describe what they have said. 

 

They said that they had thought that by asking the opposition to 

work in the direction of making sure that these Bills didn't pass 

immediately that they in fact were kept from going into the 

final stages of becoming law for some period of time, that they 

would in fact then have enough time to initiate some 

consultation, some negotiation, and hopefully some 

compromise. 

 

We in opposition were happy to take the position of attempting 

to orchestrate that from our point of view. 

And I don't know how we accomplished that, but jointly 

between your side and ours, we've managed to keep this from 

becoming law for some considerable length of time. 

 

One of the dates I have on here is April something, and 

obviously there has been a considerable length of time, so we 

feel that we have done our part in the process. 

 

We also were asked if we would assist with making some 

amendments up that would alleviate the concerns and 

problems.  With the help of the Law Clerk we did that, and 

we've done it again with this Bill tonight. 

 

And I want to, Mr. Chairman, to have the minister reflect on 

how the feelings of the community out there with regards to 

Bill 55 will be reflected once again with Bill 56 because they 

are so closely linked in the effects that they will have on the 

community of Saskatchewan as a whole. 

 

(2030) 

 

The fact of the matter is, Minister, that the business community 

let us know that they felt that they had come to some kind of a 

consensus of an agreement with your officials and with 

yourself with regards to bringing in amendments to Bill 55 and 

Bill 56 that would legitimately alleviate their concerns and 

their problems.  They felt they had that assurance.  They felt 

that they had been not totally satisfied, but a compromise had 

been struck. 

 

The reality is though that today upon reflecting on what has 

happened to Bill 55, the community, as I have said to you, has 

indicated that in a word they are betrayed.  I hope that we can 

do better tonight on Bill 56.  I hope that we can be honest with 

the people of Saskatchewan and not once again betray either 

the business community or the working people of our province. 

 

And having said that as a general comment, I want you to know 

that we have here delivered to the Clerk, we will be tabling, 46 

amendments to the Bill before us, Bill 56, The Occupational 

Health and Safety Act, 1993. 

 

Now we have had requests from the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business as well as several other groups in the 

province.  But I will mention them because they went to the 

physical effort of spelling out specifically what kinds of 

amendments would alleviate their concerns.  We took them and 

compared them to briefs and presentations that we got from 

others, for example the Prairie Implement Manufacturers. 

 

We found a lot of similar requests from all of these 

organizations, and so the lists were submitted to the Law Clerk 

and he has been kind enough to put the effort and work 

necessary into drafting the amendments to  . . . 46 amendments.  

A tremendous workload that we have put on this gentleman 

and his 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2337 

staff and he did a remarkable job in such a rather short time I 

think that he's had to work on it.  So I want to compliment the 

staff of the Assembly there for the good work that they've 

done. 

 

I hope that that work is not all in vain.  I hope that you can find 

it in your heart to accept some of these amendments, not 

because they are particularly the amendments of the opposition, 

but because they are presented by the opposition on behalf of 

the people who will be most concerned with the result.  That 

being of course the workers of our province and the business 

community who provides the jobs, and of course those 

third-party entities such as local governments, municipalities, 

and government itself who employs a lot of people. 

 

All of those people are concerned with this legislation because 

The Occupational Health and Safety Act of course requires 

people to do things in a safe and reasonable manner so that 

people don't get hurt.  It's as simple as that.  Unfortunately I 

don't believe that we will ever have 100 per cent perfection yet 

it is worth striving for. 

 

And with that I want you to know as we set out here where 

we're coming from with some of our amendments and why, and 

what the concerns of the community is in general as they have 

presented them to us, those concerns.  They have presented 

these concerns to us.  As they did with The Workers' 

Compensation Act, they did with this Act.  And the most 

ominous things that they find of course are the scariest, the 

liability, and of course the search and seizure. 

 

The search and seizure clauses of the Bill make it the most 

ominous and repugnant Bill that I've ever seen and hope never 

to see ever again.  It is my opinion that this turns our province 

into a police state.  I don't believe that justice is served by 

going this far any better than by doing it through the legal 

system of warrants through our court system.  When court 

warrants are requested, it is my opinion that, and has been 

explained to me, that this is done without forewarning the 

people that are going to be checked on.  They are not tipped off 

as the phrase out on the streets might be put.  It is simply a 

safeguard where you have an independent person, a judge, 

someone who is free of all of the encumbrances that go along 

with our society such as pressure of finances, pressure of 

politics: all those things are supposedly removed from the 

judicial system and from judges.  And when a judge is asked 

for a search warrant, Minister, that doesn't tip off anybody 

that's going to be checked out.  It simply means that you have a 

third, independent party assessing whether or not what is going 

to be done is rational or if it is vindictive or mean spirited.  And 

while that can't always be 100 per cent for sure, it does take out 

an awful lot of the risk of unfair treatment of the people 

concerned. 

 

And I think that when you set up a law that takes away one 

person's rights in order to give somebody else a right, you have 

not served society very well and it will backfire.  I'm quite sure 

that you will find serious, 

serious problems with this piece of legislation if we allow it to 

go as it has been written. 

 

And not knowing just for sure how many amendments you 

yourself plan to put in, whether or not they will in fact correct 

some of the problems we have identified, we have no choice in 

the matter but to proceed with the presentation of our 

amendments.  Had we been able to compare notes, we might 

have been able to save the taxpayers a lot of time and a lot of 

money.  But we just have to plod on because this is the nature 

of the beast, I guess, in the way that we are required to do the 

job. 

 

I'm going to refer to some of the notes from each of the 

participants who have presented us with material, to give you a 

view and a spectrum of where they are coming from and to 

show you that they are basically agreed.  From the 

Saskatchewan business coalition news release, which you 

obviously will have had, I will just simply quote a couple of 

paragraphs to make my point. 

 

It starts: 

 

 Occupational Health and Safety Act too ominous. 

 

 The Saskatchewan Business Coalition says that "the proposed 

new Occupational Health and Safety Act, as drafted by the 

Department of Labour is too ominous".  The business 

community is supportive of changes designed to enhance a 

co-operative approach to workplace health and safety 

concerns.  The Coalition says the Minister of Labour is 

proposing unreasonable rules and procedures that could lead 

to confrontation, rather than co-operation.  Business leaders 

are expressing concern that "the proposed legislation will be 

a disincentive to job creation and economic renewal, which 

(would) . . . be the prime focus of both the Government and 

business." 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, reflect on that for a minute.  I haven't heard 

anyone say that they don't want you to make the necessary 

changes to make the workplace a safer place.  I haven't heard 

business say that; I haven't certainly heard labour say that.  

They want the workplace to be safe.  But they don't want a ton 

of paperwork and they don't want their rights taken away under 

the court system to protect their interests and their rights. 

 

The tone of many of the proposed amendments is disconcerting 

because the amendments are coupled with extreme 

discretionary powers which the Act vests in Labour department 

officials.  No problem with labour here.  The problem with the 

kind of power structure that you're setting up, with officials in 

charge having the kinds of rights that I've only heard described 

in the movies, as going along with people like the SS 

(Schutzstaffel). 

 

In fact I'll quote again. 



2338 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

 . . . the Coalition points out that the powers of 

Occupational Health and Safety Officers exceed those of 

peace officers for search and seizure without warrants.  

These new powers are to be exercised by Occupational 

Health and Safety Branch personnel who have limited or 

no training in newly assigned areas such as harassment 

adjudication, mediation, assessment of violence, etc.  The 

complete immunity provided to branch employees is 

unacceptable, without some protection from vexatious or 

frivolous acts by branch officials, which could be very 

costly to employers.  There is not even any time frames 

within which branch officials would be required to attend 

and attempt to resolve alleged problems which could for 

example, involve a serious work stoppage. 

 

Now, Minister, obviously in our world we have the misfortune 

of having some people who are vexatious and who are 

frivolous.  It's not nice to have to say this, but I have to accept 

the reality that there are some people who are rather wicked 

and will do things in order to hurt other people without just 

cause. 

 

And those people who have the responsibility of providing the 

jobs and the economic backbone of our country through 

industry and business, those people have to be protected to 

some extent in that those folks who make accusations against 

them have to be held accountable, and have to held accountable 

in such a way that when they make an accusation, if they are 

wrong, they either have to apologize, or if they're seriously 

wrong and cause very serious trouble, they have to be in a 

position to receive a penalty for that unnecessary problem that 

they cause for society and for that particular business.  You 

have removed all of that in this Act.  I see every, every bit of 

all responsibility removed.  No one in . . . all the way through 

the list, and I recall looking at the one list where there's a list of 

five or seven or more different named groups that are immune 

to all kinds of redress or any kind of reprimand or any kind of 

court action, starting from the minister and going all the way 

through. Any department official can literally decide to wipe 

out a business. 

 

What might such a vindictive act be?  Suppose the 

businessman has had some kind of a personal relationship with 

an employer, and that goes sour.  And that individual gets to 

know an occupational health worker -- perhaps it's a 

brother-in-law or someone close to him, a friend -- and he says, 

this fellow who runs the business did me wrong.  I'd sure like 

to get even with him.  And the other guy says, let me take care 

of it; I'll shut his plant down and make up a story about how 

he's got some unhealthy work conditions. 

 

He can literally go in there, start all this process, could stop the 

whole business, shut it down, simply because of some frivolous 

little thing like that.  And yet there's no redress against that 

officer.  The businessman could prove beyond a shadow of a 

doubt that that officer had been vindictive and had done 

nothing right at all and 

yet the court system couldn't touch him.  That's not right.  And 

I know that is a very serious thing to talk about, and it's a very 

serious exaggeration, but I feel like I have to make an 

exaggerated point in order to make our point tonight. 

 

Believe me, Minister, if we had had any success whatever with 

Bill 55, I certainly wouldn't be standing up getting blisters on 

my feet, doing this long deliberation tonight to try to make our 

point.  But it is unfortunate but necessary that we do in fact 

make this point tonight. 

 

I want to now go to some notes that we have from the Prairie 

Implement Manufacturers to prove our point that these folks 

are on the same wavelength.  The introduction: 

 

 The business community of Saskatchewan is completely 

supportive of the principles of Occupational Health and 

Safety.  The environment in which we all work, whether 

management or labour, should be free from hazard as is 

reasonable and practical given current technology and access 

to resources.  It is for this reason that the business community 

of Saskatchewan is concerned with the revisions to The 

Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993 as proposed. 

 

 Many of the revisions included in the draft Act do little to 

improve occupational health and safety and are seen to 

entrench an adversarial relationship between the 

Occupational health and Safety Branch and employers, and 

among employees in a workplace environment. 

 

Almost exactly the same kind of thought trend as we have 

noted from the other groups. 

 

(2045) 

 

  The draft Act has made provisions in several sections and in 

numerous circumstances for referral to Branch Inspectors.  

These include, beyond health and safety issues, mediation, 

harassment investigation, and human rights investigation.  

These are well beyond the scope of traditional occupational 

health and safety officers creating unnecessary duplication of 

legislated enforcement and review. 

 

Now having heard that all of these folks are so upset with the 

way and the process that you have gone about this amendment 

to the Act, I want to pose to you a couple of direct questions, 

Minister, before I go into the rest of the process of getting into 

the amendments. 

 

We will see identified in the Act immunity against all, and it's 

under section 85 if you want to simply take note of that.  Under 

section 72, we have the problem -- I have to get my ducks in 

line again -- relating to search and seizure -- that's the one -- 

and there are several sections in 72.  Now I've cherry-picked a 

couple of those because they are of importance.  Also of 

importance, of course, will be the vicarious liability 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2339 

section.  I think that's 52, I didn't double-check that.  But 

anyway, whatever sections those are that deal with those three 

specific issues. 

 

Have you any intention, Mr. Minister, of tonight introducing 

amendments that will alleviate the problems that the business 

community and the workers of this province have with the way 

you have drawn up this draft legislation which is now 

becoming legislation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I thank the member for his 

comments.  And I tend to agree with the member that there is 

no difference in our goals.  Our goals are a safer workplace, a 

reduction in accidents, a reduction in the number of deaths. 

 

And in case anyone thinks the problem belongs to another 

decade or another era, we just had a young workman driving a 

tractor, killed a few days ago, who it appears drowned when his 

tractor upset and he was pinned underneath it . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I didn't catch the learned comments of the 

member from Wilkie . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I just say 

with respect to the member from Wilkie, I wouldn't make any 

judgements about that.  The matter is under investigation.  I 

wouldn't make any hasty decisions.  We're not, and I advise 

you not to either. 

 

The history of these amendments is it's not something that was 

concocted in the dead of night by the department.  This process 

began with the establishment of an occupational health and 

safety council under the government of . . . the former 

government in 1989.  It reviewed the area, made a number of 

amendments.  The government of the day did not act upon the 

amendments and they were still in virgin form -- if I can use 

that phrase -- when we took office. 

 

We reconstituted the committee, asked them to review them, 

and they did so.  The amendments were then introduced as a 

White Paper in the last session and received very little 

comment.  They received considerable comment when a draft 

of the Bill was circulated along with the workers' compensation 

Bill to the business community. 

 

The degree of consultation which has surrounded this Bill must 

exceed anything which has ever been done for any piece of 

legislation in the history of this province.  The process began in 

1989.  Briefs were held.  A White Paper was introduced.  The 

Act was redrafted.  A draft was -- and this is what is so unusual 

-- a draft was circulated among the business community.  Their 

response was received.  Quite a number of meetings were held 

between representatives, people lobbying on behalf of the 

business community, and members of this department.  We 

also met extensively with injured workers and with members of 

the trade unions. 

 

All of that went into the making up of this Bill.  And many of 

the concerns expressed by all parties, be they business or 

labour, were reflected in the final work.  What was introduced 

in this Assembly, and what 

we're recommending this Assembly passes, differs in some 

very important respects from the White Paper that was 

introduced in this Assembly last year, and from the draft which 

was circulated.  The degree of consultation was very broad and 

very extensive.  The legislation reflects some of those 

concerns. 

 

I recognize that there are some of the people we met with who, 

it can be fairly said, never wanted to see this legislation passed.  

I met with some representatives of some of the groups.  Their 

opening request is -- this in October of 1972 -- their opening 

comment is, we don't see how this legislation can possibly get 

ready for the 1993 session; we urge you to stand it.  That was 

six, seven months in advance of the session.  What did they 

want?  They didn't want any changes at all; quite happy with 

what they had.  That is clearly not a satisfactory state of affairs 

when you have our accident record. 

 

The member from Maple Creek is correct. Bill 55 and 56 are 

tied, are tied together and interlinked.  The Occupational 

Health and Safety Act, which is number 56, is an Act which 

seeks to prevent accidents, to lower accident levels.  It seeks to 

do what all legislation should do, and that is provide a context 

and an atmosphere in which employees and employers can 

resolve their own problems. 

 

That's what all . . . really all legislation should do.  It 

establishes the occupational and health safety committees; has 

the employers and employees working together to reduce the 

accident rate; the employees contributing a detailed knowledge 

of the workplace; the employers contributing their 

organizational know-how in resolving those problems. 

 

The purpose of this legislation is to reduce accidents, to reduce 

death, to reduce injuries. To the extent that this Act succeeds, 

the cost of the workers' compensation scheme is lower.  It is in 

everybody's interest to see this succeed.  There's nothing about 

the past accident record which would suggest that this has 

succeeded in the past.  Our accident rate is unacceptably high.  

I said last night that there were over 30,000 claims filed with 

the Workers' Compensation Board. That's a city the size of 

Moose Jaw, every man, woman, and child in the city filing a 

claim.  Over 12,000 of those claims were lost-time accidents.  

Given Saskatchewan's small workforce, that is an unacceptably 

high figure.  It is high in absolute terms; it is high in 

comparison with other provinces. 

 

The goal of this legislation is to drive that accident rate 

downward.  We make no apology for making this legislation as 

effective as it can be.  We make no apology for bringing this 

legislation on at this session.  Workers are being injured, 

workers are being killed, and it isn't happening to the 

managers. 

 

I heard one spirited exchange between a trade unionist and Mr. 

Botting.  Mr. Botting asked, what's the proof that there's any 

need for this?  The response was, it's 40 to zero.  When he was 

asked what did that 



2340 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

mean, he said, there's been 40 workers killed last year and no 

managers; the score is 40 to zero.  And that's true, in a sense; it 

is the workers who are injured, not the senior people who may 

make representations to us. 

 

I personally did something last year that the representatives of 

the CFIB (Canadian Federation of Independent Business) did 

not do, the representatives of the chamber of commerce did not 

do; I went and talked to all the members.  I don't think they did 

that.  I spoke to well-attended meetings in every city in this 

province, well-attended meetings of business people, 

well-attended meetings of trade unionists, and, where such a 

group could be identified and organized, well-attended 

meetings of injured workers. 

 

I've done something nobody else has bothered to do, I've gone 

and talked to as many of the interested people as I could get to.  

It has given me a fair insight into the operation of this.  The 

notion that this Act is turning this province into a police state 

may be of interest and may titillate members opposite.  It may 

cause a rushing of blood to the ears of some of the people who 

say it, some of the lobbyists, but it's nonsense and it's not 

believed by very many business people in this province. 

 

You see, Mr. Member, most business people in this province 

judge occupational health and safety not by what is said by the 

lobbyists, they quite wisely judge it by what they've seen, the 

people they've met, the officers who they work with. 

 

I want to say, and I want to say in the presence of the senior 

public servants who represent them, I got a lot of compliments 

about the occupational health and safety officers around this 

province.  I didn't get it from the lobbyists with whom I met, 

but I got it from the people who dealt with them. 

 

Most of the people, most of the business people I dealt with -- I 

dealt with a lot of them -- felt the occupational health and 

safety officers were courteous, well-trained, reasonable people.  

They sometimes wanted more in terms of explanation and more 

in terms of training than they got, but a wide variety of 

different employers spoke highly of this section of the 

department. 

 

Employers don't speak highly of all of the sections of my 

department, but they did in this one.  And I want to say this 

because this department has been subject to some unfair 

criticism. 

 

I note the term "betrayal".  I have heard one or two lobbyists on 

behalf of the business community use that term.  I have no idea 

why they feel betrayed -- none at all.  We gave them advance 

copies of the Bill.  We met with them, we discussed their 

concerns, and we adopted some, but only some, of their 

suggestions.  If they're betrayed because they didn't get every 

single one of their demands met, then all I can say is this 

government doesn't work that way. 

 

Early in the day we had some people in this Assembly 

to whom we had to say no.  There have been some of the 

requests of the business community to whom we have had to 

say no.  I say to members opposite and I say to members of 

some of the groups who have scripted the amendments which 

you're putting forward, that no is a perfectly proper word in the 

English language, and we've had to say no to some of them. 

 

I want to spend a moment on the powers of search and seizure 

since that has occupied . . . since that has given the member 

such angst.  I'm going to pass to the member, if I can have the 

assistance of one of the pages, I'm going to pass to the member 

a comparison of the powers of search and seizure in 

Saskatchewan with that of other provinces. 

 

By and large Saskatchewan has approximately the same 

powers that they've always had.  By and large the powers of 

search and seizure which are here now are what have always 

been in the Act.  Do they exceed that of a peace officer?  They 

may, because this is a division with a different function.  This 

is not criminal law.  This is not the administration of criminal 

law. 

 

My esteemed colleague from Saskatoon, the Minister of 

Justice, administers that.  We don't.  This is not criminal law; 

this is a preventative measure.  And I say if the lobbyists on 

behalf of the business community don't understand that, most 

business people in the province do. 

 

Do they occasionally exceed a peace officer?  Yes, they do.  

Why?  Because they're not enforcing criminal law.  This is a 

preventative measure.  I've said that they're roughly 

comparable to what other provinces have.  And I just want to 

make one other comment and then I'm going to bring my 

remarks to a conclusion. 

 

(2100) 

 

You gave an illustration of someone who filed, who slapped a 

bogus complaint against the business.  Just to take that 

example, that would clearly be unlawful under this Act because 

it wasn't done in good faith in your example.  They knew it 

wasn't a bona fide claim. 

 

I've had no one in this province -- and I've met with hundreds 

of business people -- no one's ever suggested such a thing has 

ever occurred but if it did, it would clearly be outside the Act.  

Both the government and the individual involved would be 

liable for damages in a civil court.  Your example's not a very 

good one. 

 

I want to say one other thing with respect to these broad, 

sweeping powers which would make the SS blanch, according 

to your description which you just gave.  I've not had a lot of 

experience with the SS. It's a little before my time -- perhaps 

not the members opposite -- it's a little before my time.  But it's 

my understanding that the SS officers in Nazi Germany were 

not subject to any appeal. 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2341 

I want to point out for the member that there's a new element 

added in this Bill. There is a right of appeal.  Any decision 

taken by an occupational health and safety officer is subject to 

appeal.  That's new in this legislation and it is unique to this 

legislation.  That's something that came about as a direct result 

of the discussions we had with the business community.  So 

this Act reflects their concern so far as it is possible to do so. 

 

I say to members opposite that the . . . and I'll close on this 

note. The business community in this province, whom I met 

with in very large numbers, judge this legislation by what 

they've experienced in the past.  What they've experienced in 

the past has by and large been a useful and a productive 

experience. 

 

One of the business organizations, I think it was the Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business, wrote to all their members 

inviting a grass roots revolt, I think was the phrase that was 

used.  What was the revolt?  I got 20, 30 letters, most of them 

form letters.  That was the extent of the grass roots revolt.  

Why did the revolt never take fire?  Because their experience 

with this division had been good and productive.  They used 

their common sense.  They fully expect that's going to 

continue.  That's why this legislation may have been fought 

vigorously by some organizations.  That's also why there's not 

much visible sign of concern from the business community 

themselves because they judge us by what we've done, and 

what we've done has been quite productive. 

 

This is an able, effective area of the public service which I am 

proud to be associated with and for which I've received a lot of 

compliments. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Minister, I 

won't deny some of the remarks that you make are true.  It is 

true, we have been made aware of the fact that a review of The 

Occupational Health and Safety Act had begun in years before, 

probably 1989 is a good guess, as good as any.  I actually have 

had it implied that the work had begun sooner than that. 

 

And that's a reasonable and acceptable proposition because I 

think it matters not what party is in power in government, these 

kinds of legislation that affect so many people by their very 

nature of the changes in our technology and the changes in our 

workplace would have to be reviewed on a continuing basis.  

And as you suggested yourself last night, the Bill that we 

worked on might in fact end up having to come back again next 

year because by then we may see that we have to have changes.  

So that doesn't surprise me or shock me or amaze me.  In fact 

I'd have been amazed if it had been anything else. 

 

I would take some exception on behalf of the business 

community with some of your remarks though.  I'm not too 

sure that they will agree that they have had all the opportunities 

that you say that they have had or that the consultation has 

been anything other than you talking down to them.  And in 

fact, that's the implication that has been made by some 

quarters, is that you did talk to a lot of people, but there's a 

difference between talking down to people and consulting with 

people. 

Consulting means you talk to people and you listen to people, 

then you compromise after you've negotiated.  That's how the 

process works when you call it consultation.  Otherwise, it's 

preaching.  And you, sir, you and your government are good at 

preaching.  And you're not very good at listening and you sure 

don't know how to compromise. 

 

I'm going to read just a little bit more out of a letter here, so 

that the folks in the world of Saskatchewan will know exactly 

what's been going on.  It says: 

 

 Enclosed please find our considerable list of concerns and 

suggested changes to various clauses of Bill 56. 

 

The one we're dealing with tonight. 

 

 In our opinion there are numerous House amendments still 

required.  We regret that the Bill was tabled as early as April 

26, and we were unable to work with you on a second draft.  

We now must express our concerns as widely as possible. 

 

Now doesn't that sound a little bit contradictory to what you 

said, Minister, about your consultation and all of the work that 

you did together with folks?  Doesn't sound that way to me. 

 

In fact, if you did so much consultation and so much work with 

all of the folks, how come they spent thousands upon thousands 

of dollars advertising their plight and their condition in all of 

the newspapers of this province?  Why did they go to the media 

at that kind of expense, if they're all so happy with the way that 

the process was conducted? 

 

How many people do you know that spent literally thousands 

of dollars for nothing?  Deliberately.  They wouldn't do that.  

They have a problem with you and your government or they 

wouldn't have spent all that money. 

 

It goes on. 

 

 We particularily regret that so much of this legislation 

represents a huge, regulatory leap of faith. 

 

I couldn't have found a better explanation than that anywhere 

because that's what this legislation is -- it is a leap of faith into 

the unknown -- and quite frankly, unnecessary.  I'll go on. 

 

 Some of your officials have told us that certain regulations 

have already been drafted, yet your department continues to 

withhold distribution of any of these follow-up draft 

regulations at this time.  We are waiting for your department 

to honour the spirit of your government's recently proclaimed 

code of regulatory conduct. 

 

Now is that saying that there is good conduct?  No. 



2342 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

They're saying they don't like what you're doing here, sir. 

 

And it goes on.  It says: 

 

 Please give these suggestions your very serious consideration 

before the third reading and final approval of this Act. 

 

Now, sir, that hardly sounds to me like a group of people that is 

very happy and has gotten a whole lot of input into a piece of 

legislation that seriously affects every business that they 

represent and all businesses in our province. 

 

And I suggest to you, sir, that while you say you didn't get 

many letters -- I have no way of confirming that or denying it -- 

but I will suggest to you that legislation like this is not by its 

nature well understood or well-known about by the people in 

the province.  Every business in this province likely had been 

contacted in a very general way if they were at all.  But once 

again if they were so knowledgeable about what needed to be 

done, why would these groups of people spend all of these 

thousands of dollars advertising to let folks know what's going 

on. 

 

Obviously their presumption was, as mine is, that most folks 

simply don't understand how ominous this Bill is going to be, 

and what a leap of faith it is into a zone of the unknown.  We 

simply don't know how this Bill is going to affect the job 

creation ability of this province, and we simply don't know how 

it's going to affect the cost of business, and we simply don't 

know what that will have in terms of attracting new, outside 

business to our province.  Will it be an acceptable proposition 

or will they simply run away? 

 

I say that this Bill in itself -- if it weren't ominous -- connected 

with all of the others, makes this a province that most people 

would not want to do business in any more.  Now you have to 

couple that with tax structures and all those other things 

because this is not a single identifiable problem with our 

province.  The fact that we can't attract business and can't 

attract jobs goes far beyond one Bill obviously.  But each one 

of these things is a straw on that old proverbial camel's back 

and which straw will break that back?  I don't know but 

obviously we have to be getting closer if we're not careful. 

 

So I'm going to suggest, Minister, that while we're not very 

happy with your Bill and we want to express that we even 

believe that many people in the workforce are concerned that 

their jobs may be at jeopardy if the business places that they 

work in can't function in a rational and reasonable and 

economic manner, that is making it a problem for all 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We do have to deal with the reality that you have a majority in 

government and will outvote us at the end of the day.  

Recognizing that, we're going to play on your conscience and 

your intelligence and hope that you will go along with some of 

the recommendations of the amendments that we're going to 

propose to your Act. 

I see no reason why we shouldn't get at that and put it to the 

test and see if we can get something rational into this Bill by 

going into the process of dealing with our amendments.  So I'm 

prepared to continue into that part of the process. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I just want to make a couple of 

comments and I'll be brief.  The member is quite right when he 

says this is an area which is not well understood.  I think that's 

accurate.  It's not well understood that this legislation . . . most 

of these powers have existed for a long time.  The Bill on its 

face looks like a brand-new Bill.  It is in fact a series of 

amendments incorporated into a new Bill, and I think the 

member is quite right. 

 

There's one other thing I want to mention.  The member 

mentioned the regulations.  I just want to outline very briefly 

for the member's benefit what we intend with respect to the 

regulations.  The work has been ongoing in drafting those.  It is 

a huge job.  The work is ongoing in drafting those regulations. 

 

I hope within a couple of weeks of the passage of this to 

circulate those amendments among the business community 

and among injured workers and among the trade unionists.  We 

hope to get their response back within a month thereafter, and 

we'd like to think that some time in early fall, perhaps starting 

as early as September 1, we'll begin to put the regulations in 

place.  So we do intend to pursue a consultative process with 

respect to these regulations. 

 

With that I thank the member for his constructive approach to 

this, and I think you have been.  I've been critical of some of 

the lobbyists on behalf of the business community.  The 

member however, I think, has approached it some in a 

constructive fashion, and I thank you for that.  We may as well 

proceed. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will make a 

brief comment about the proposed amendment and then read 

the amendment as we will move it. 

 

In section 2(1)(h), the "discriminatory action" -- delete; "or 

threat of actions" is very difficult to adjudicate, it says in my 

notes, especially with the reverse onus on employers.  And it 

says we should also consider the later section 28 when we deal 

with this. 

 

I think that's fairly self-explanatory, so I think I'll just go on 

and read the motion which I will move: 

 

 Clause 2 of the printed Bill 

 

 Amend clause 2(1) of the printed Bill at clause (g) by 

deleting "or threat of action". 

 

And I so move, Mr. Chairman. 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2343 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- In other labour legislation which 

seeks to protect workers who . . . from discrimination where 

they enforced their rights, it is common to define the prohibited 

action as an action or a threat of an action.  Threat of an action 

may be as effective as the action itself.  So I'll be urging the 

Assembly to defeat the motion. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Under clause 2(a) 

we are proposing the amendment.  Our notes I think refer to 

this one now -- if I've got the right one, yes -- also would like 

to see deletion of any reference to the "reprimand, coercion, 

intimidation or the imposition of any discipline or other 

penalty."  These words are too subjective and other 

circumstances are already spelled out clearly in this section. 

 

I'll read the motion which I will now move: 

 

 Clause 2 of the printed Bill 

 

 Amend clause 2(1) of the printed Bill at clause (g) by 

deleting "reprimand, coercion, intimidation or the imposition 

of any discipline or other penalty". 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- My comments on my last one apply 

to this one as well.  I think there's no need to repeat them. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Under 56-2(b) 

now, we are looking at employer association which should be 

deleted -- not necessary, and could be manipulated or abused 

by future governments, or other administrations, I guess.  And 

so we are moving the following amendment, which I will now 

move. Clause 2 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 2(1) of the printed Bill by deleting clause (j) 

and re-lettering clauses (k) through (gg) as clauses (j) through 

(ff) respectively. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: --  The purpose that this definitional 

section serves is that the government is required . . . or the 

minister is required to consult with employer organizations 

with respect to certain matters.  We need a definition of 

employer organizations. That's why it's in here.  It's only 

purpose in the Act is that it requires the minister to consult with 

them about certain changes or certain things.  So we'd urge the 

Assembly to defeat the amendment and leave the subsection as 

it is. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. While we're still 

on clause 2 here, we would suggest another amendment, under 

2(c) . . . 2(ii), harassment.  We feel this should be deleted and 

best covered through the human rights Act rather than create 

costly, confusing, and duplicate regulatory activity by 

inexperienced occupational health officers.  And as a result of 

that we would move the following amendment to clause 2 of 

the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 2(1) of the printed Bill by deleting clause (l) 

and re-lettering clauses (m) through (gg) as clauses (l) 

through (ff) respectively. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This matter of harassment has 

received a lot of comment.  I'm going to try to be very brief.  

Suffice it to say that there is ample evidence -- hard statistical 

evidence -- that harassment is a serious health problem in the 

workplace.  Some polls suggest . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Don't you harass me here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes.  Ministers of the Crown . . . The 

member from Morse, that's a very accurate comment.  

Ministers of the Crown, particularly they, some ministers of the 

Crown, know what harassment is like.  We know how much we 

suffer.  Seriously though, there is hard statistical evidence that 

this is a serious health problem.  Some recent polls suggest that 

over 40 per cent of women in the workplace claim they have 

suffered health problems because of harassment.  It's almost 

always women.  We believe this is a significant health 

problem.  We believe the way to resolve it is in the workplace. 

 

This system provides a mechanism for resolving it.  People 

who are harassed can have the complaint taken to the 

committee in a kind of an anonymous fashion.  The employee 

representatives on the committee can bring it to the attention of 

the managers, who can bring it to an end.  It's a quiet, 

anonymous process for resolving it. 

 

The problem with the Human Rights Commission is there's 

nothing either quiet or anonymous about it.  The employees 

must trot their problems out into the public.  The employers 

must defend themselves in public.  The result is, generally 

nobody wins.  Employers are often found guilty; the employees 

can rarely go back to the place of employment.  That's just the 

simple facts of it. 

 

This provides a mechanism for resolving this problem in a 

quiet and dignified fashion and we think it makes a lot of sense.  

For that reason, I will be urging the Assembly to leave the 

definition of assessment of harassment in and to vote against 

this amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Again on 



2344 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

clause 2, we will move on to an attempt to amend part (d).  As 

a fall-back alternative, it could be reworded to more simply 

state that harassment means any objectionable conduct by a 

person made on a continuous basis and which reasonably 

constitutes a threat to the health and safety of the worker. 

 

And I guess simply what we're saying is that we anticipated 

you would defeat the past one and are trying to do a more 

moderate approach of the same thing by moving the following 

amendment which I will now move to clause 2 of the printed 

Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 2(l) of the printed Bill by deleting clause (l) 

and substituting: 

 

 "(l) "harassment" means any objectionable conduct by a 

person made on a continuous basis and which reasonably 

constitutes a threat to the health or safety of the worker;". 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The existing section simply defines 

harassment as any objectionable conduct, comment or display 

by a person that . . . and away it goes.  Your amendment would 

add the word continuous.  We think that may not be wise in all 

cases.  There may be some forms of conduct which, although 

not continued, although not continuous, are objectionable and 

shouldn't be tolerated. 

 

The member's amendment would lay down a general rule 

which would suggest that no harassment can exist unless it's 

continuous.  Simply is, I think, at odds with the facts and I'll be 

urging the Assembly to vote against this amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, again on Clause 2 

we will attempt to convince the minister to make some 

changes.  Under 2(e), 2(l) and (m), labour organizations -- 

delete or modify.  Why should trade unions who represent less 

than 10 per cent of all the private sector workers in 

Saskatchewan be guaranteed monopoly representation of all 

working people under this Act?  Why don't speak for 

non-union workers as well? 

 

And I think that's fairly clearly stated there so I will move our 

amendment to Clause 2 of the printed Bill. 

 

 Amend Clause 2(l) of the printed Bill by deleting Clause (m) 

and re-lettering Clauses (n) through (gg) as clauses (m) 

through (ff) respectively. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Just very briefly, the purpose of this 

definition is because the minister is required to consult with 

employer organizations and labour organizations and only for 

that purpose.  It doesn't define representation on occupational 

health and safety committees by any means. 

For many purposes it would be useful if there were associations 

of unorganized workers.  In fact there isn't any.  Virtually the 

only organizations which represent workers of any sort are 

trade unions.  And so we've defined it in this fashion.  It's not 

intended to exclude or downplay the importance of the 

unorganized worker.  It's just that these are the only 

organizations in existence.  I'll therefore be urging the 

Assembly to defeat the amendment. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to 

comment, Minister, that your reason for defeating the last 

amendment seemed rather odd and confusing to me.  Simply 

because the workers don't now have an organization or an 

organized way of you finding workers to represent them, they 

are excluded from being represented.  You say 90 per cent of 

the workers of this province can't be represented because you 

can't find anybody that will represent them and they don't seem 

to have an organization.  That seems really odd to me. 

 

But I guess it's your argument and you will have to live with it.  

I think 90 per cent of the workers of this province are going to 

say, we can find somebody that would come in and help out.  

So let's maybe have to put that to the test later. 

 

I want to go on to our amendment 2(f) wherein we are saying 

that occupational health and safety under 2(1)(p) and (i), we're 

saying delete social well-being.  This gives the occupational 

health and safety division way too much power and they could 

start delving into a lot of non-traditional labour-related issues. 

 

Now having said that, I will move: 

 

Clause 2 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 2(1) of the printed Bill at subclause (p)(i) by 

deleting "physical, mental and social well-being of workers" 

and substituting: 

 

 physical and mental well-being of workers. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The words social well-being has been 

a part of the Act for quite some time; was a part of the Act 

administered by the former Progressive Conservative 

government; didn't cause any noticeable problems then, at least 

not that the members would ever . . . the members of that 

government were ever inspired to change.  In addition, it is part 

of the standard definition used by the international labour 

organization.  It's a standard around the world and has been a 

part of this province's legislation for some time, and I'd urge 

that this be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Again, Minister, 

I'm surprised at your comments and logic to 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2345 

defeat the last amendment because after all, you say that just 

because it was a part of the old Act it's good enough.  Why are 

we doing the whole Act over then if the old Act was good 

enough?  I mean this doesn't quite add up here.  I mean just 

because part of the Act was old and we now say it was good . . 

. and we've said to you when we started out that we recognized 

that there was a need for some changes.  Now you yourself are 

saying the old one was good enough, so let's keep it. 

 

So anyway while I fail to see your logic, you obviously have 

the weight of the majority with you.  I would hope though that 

you might reconsider that kind of an argument to defeat 

amendments and make us a little better comment on the real 

reason why we would want not to change things.  I think the 

business community and the workers of our province deserve a 

little better explanation than it was a part of the old Act so it's 

good enough. 

 

I want to move on to our amendment 2(g)(i) under 2(1)(p)(iv) 

-- delete -- not necessarily to be this specific as it is already 

covered in other sections.  What has the department got in 

mind here?  Forced, heavy-handed, ergonomic requirements in 

certain cases.  I think I pronounced that word wrong, but 

anyway I'm sure you'll pick it up. 

 

I'll move on to moving our amendment.  Under clause 2 of the 

printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 2(1) of the printed Bill at clause (p) by 

deleting subclause (iv). 

 

I so move. 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes.  This also has been a part of a 

legislation for some time and has not caused any problems.  

And therefore we left it in the legislation. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Under 2(1)(r) we 

are going to move our amendment 2(h) -- occupational health 

and safety services.  We say delete -- redundant with other 

powers already specified in the Act.  We are concerned this 

could be manipulated to abuse by future governments or future 

administrations.  And for that reason of the unclarity we would 

like to move the amendment which will be 2(h). 

 

I will now move: 

 

 Clause 2 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 2(1) of the printed Bill by deleting clause (r) 

and re-lettering clauses (s) through (gg) as clauses (r) through 

(ff) respectively. 

 

I so move. 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This is a fairly basic definition.  This 

is occupational health and safety service.  This section doesn't 

give anyone any additional powers.  Indeed it helps to curb the 

excessive use of powers by providing a tighter and more 

defined network within that should operate.  So I'll be urging 

members to defeat this. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We would like to 

suggest, in spite of our lack of success on clause 2, that we 

might go ahead and amend clause 3.  Under 3(a), the general 

duties of employer, delete "and welfare."  Now this term is not 

defined in the Act and could go way beyond the current 

intention.  And I guess we're simply thinking that in this matter 

it could be interpreted to go a lot further than it really is the 

intention, and we want to see it spelled out more clearly. 

 

So I will move the amendment to clause 3 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 3 of the printed Bill at clause (a) by deleting 

"health, safety and welfare at work" and substituting: 

 

 health and safety at work. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'll be making this same comment 

with respect to a fair number of these amendments.  This 

legislation . . . this language was part of the Act since 1977; has 

caused no problems.  Those parts of the Act which cause no 

problems, we've left alone and haven't changed them.  But this 

is one of those many amendments to sections which have 

caused no problems, have been there for now 16 years, and we 

want to leave it there.  So we urge this be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 4 and 5 agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, again you, in the last amendment, encouraged your 

members to defeat it on the argument that it has been there 

since 1977.  And we would of course make the point again that 

that's why we think the Bill has to be changed.  Some things 

from 1977 may not be good enough. 

 

True fact of the matter is, sir, business is extremely worried 

about your government and your administration.  They never 

had the same worry about 



2346 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

the past administration or perhaps I should say administrations 

even.  But the truth of the matter is they're very nervous today 

in Saskatchewan and very nervous about the changes in 

definitions that are made by your government in a lot of areas.  

So with that nervousness the amendment had some legitimate 

reason to be there. 

 

I want to amend clause 6 . . . under clause 6, 7, and 8, they 

have here in my notes, now general duties of contractors, 

owners, suppliers, all start with the phrase "shall ensure".  

Ensure is a very strong and definitive word which could result 

in a very stringent and massive due-diligence defence when 

later interpreted by the courts.  Words like encourage, promote, 

or make reasonable care to, are far less costly and may not 

carry the same costly legalistic connotation.  Why not be 

consistent with the words describing general duties of workers 

in section 4? 

 

Now having said that, we would propose the following 

amendment which I would move to clause 6 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 6 of the printed Bill at clause (a) by deleting 

"ensure" and substituting "take care". 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'll make only one set of comments to 

all . . . to sections 6, 7, and 8.  My comment is as follows:  I 

think I'd have more sympathy for the amendment were it not 

for the fact that the verb "shall ensure" is followed by the 

phrase "insofar as is reasonably practicable."  I think it is that 

that will be the defining phrase.  I therefore think the 

amendment is unnecessary given that.  So I will urge that the 

amendment on 6, 7, and 8 be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 6 agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well the minister 

has already pretty well indicated that he is aware of what our 

amendments are going to be now and he has made his 

argument against this amendment, but none the less I'm going 

to move it, but I won't bother wasting the time of the Assembly 

by going into our reasons on this one.  We will simply go into 

the moving of the clause 7 of the printed Bill 

 

 Amend clause 7 of the printed Bill at clause (a) by deleting 

"ensure" and substituting "take care". 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 7 agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'm reminded of 

how when we were kids, one would say, yes you did, the other 

would say, no you didn't.  And we'd keep saying it back and 

forth until somebody made a mistake.  It almost seems like we 

were going to play in that game with these amendments.  Like 

maybe I'll say yes so many times and you'll say no, and after a 

while you'll say yes and I'll say no, and we get something done.  

It's a new strategy we're going to try. 

 

Nevertheless, to clause 8, we have basically the same argument 

that we made in the previous two, and so I won't bother going 

into a preamble on the reasoning.  I will simply move clause 8 

of the printed Bill as such: 

 

 Amend clause 8 of the printed Bill at clause (a) by deleting 

"ensure" and substituting "take care". 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 8 agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I simply would like to make a little comment 

on clause 9.  I have no amendment to clause 9, so the Minister 

needn't get excited. 

 

We did want to mention though that duty to provide 

information, review carefully to make sure it is harmonized 

with other federal laws and definitions.  Why create confusing 

regulatory overlap or inconsistencies, e.g., with the 

transportation and dangerous good Act or with the existing 

federal workplace, hazardous information management system. 

 

And we wanted to get that on the record that we have some 

concern there, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister.  So I hope that 

you will take note of that and perhaps you can check out to 

make sure that we haven't in fact gone into a duplication. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: --  Yes we have, in fact we've already 

had this raised with us by the CFIB and we have already done 

so.  We think it is in harmony. 

 

Clause 9 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 10 and 11 agreed to. 

 

Clause 12 agreed to on division. 

 

Clause 13 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Under clause 13, 

duty to provide occupational and health safety programs, use of 

the phrase "shall establish" implies that this massive new 

paperwork requirement will be mandatory in all cases, 

including the self-employed and all Saskatchewan 60,000 

farmers.  Change the beginning of the clause to "an employer 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2347 

may establish" and clarify the small, self-employed business or 

farmers must not have to endure such rigorous paperwork. 

 

Perhaps the section 4 should instead say "maybe" in writing to 

give small business a greater degree of comfort on this clause.  

Now we have three amendments in this clause, but we wanted 

you to hear the whole argument as we go, so we will start with 

the first amendment, Mr. Chairman, to clause 13 of the printed 

Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 13 of the printed Bill at subsection (1) be 

deleting "An employer shall establish" and substituting: 

 

 "An employer may establish". 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We agreed earlier that the 

amendments put forth by the member from Maple Creek 

should go first to avoid some of the confusion with 

renumbering, which happened last night.  I think, Mr. 

Chairman, unless you're advised differently, you may look to 

the member from Maple Creek. Where there's amendments 

from both of us, we kind of agreed upon that. 

 

This however is one section where we might have gone first 

because I think our amendment would go some distance 

towards alleviating the concern which the member justifiably 

has.  This was . . . we are proposing an amendment which will 

state that "only employers at prescribed places of employment" 

have to have occupational and health safety committees. 

 

The member's amendment would make it voluntary in all cases.  

We don't want to do that.  We admit however our section may 

go too far, and we are therefore amending, and I think we're 

going to pick up and alleviate the concern of the member from 

Maple Creek.  So I'll be urging members to vote against this 

and then we'll be moving our own amendment which I think 

will cure the ill. 

 

(2145) 

 

The Chair: -- I recognize the member for Maple Creek.  In the 

interest of clarification and order, he has another amendment 

with respect to 13.  I'd like to ask him to move that now.  And 

I'd like to ask the minister to move his amendment and then 

there will be the other opposition amendment to 13 which was 

moved and we'll hold in abeyance at this point. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, we will be happy 

to cooperate in that way.  And because the argument is 

basically as we made, I'll simply read the other amendment to 

clause 13 of the printed Bill. 

 

 Amend clause 13 of the printed Bill at subsection (1) by 

adding immediately after "An employer" the following: 

 

 ", other than a small business consisting of the 

majority shareholder as the only employee, or a farmer,". 

 

And I will so move that, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Again my previous comments apply.  

The member has referred to an actual problem which has given 

us some concern.  I think our amendment, which will prescribe 

the places by regulation, will take care of that. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that: 

 

 Section 13 of the printed Bill be amended.  We amend 

section 13 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) by adding "at a prescribed place of employment" after 

"An employer" in subsection (1); and 

 

 (b) by striking out "at a prescribed place of employment" 

after "safety program" in subsection (1). 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- Now we're back to the other amendment to 

clause 13 that was previously moved by the member from 

Maple Creek. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think the 

argument has been fairly well made for why we need this next 

amendment.  I simply will say to the minister that we are glad 

to see him make at least one change to the Bill.  Even though 

he couldn't find it in his heart to use an opposition amendment 

to achieve the necessary goal, at least we have achieved 

something of a compromise.  It obviously will be said that it 

doesn't go far enough by some people in some quarters. 

 

And having said that, I think we will progress on with the next 

amendment in the hope that we can make this a workable Bill. 

 

Now in clause 13 of the printed Bill, we move the following 

amendment: 

 

 Amend clause 13 of the printed Bill at subsection (4) by 

deleting "must be in writing and must be made available" and 

substituting: 

 

 may be in writing and may be made available. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I understand the concern the member 

has.  I think, however, with reasonable administration and 

reasonable interpretations, the existing wording will be 

satisfactory.  I therefore urge 



2348 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

this be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 13 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 14 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Under clause 14, 

duty re policy statement on violence, delete subsection (2) at 

this time. 

 

Employers are extremely concerned about any regulations 

along with this.  What does the government have in mind?  

Prohibiting use of replacement workers during strikes to stop 

picket-line violence, mandatory doubling up or tripling of staff 

to ensure safety of night workers.  This subsection could be 

potentially quite costly and represents huge leap of faith for 

employers unless we see the regulations first. 

 

Having made that comment, I will move the House amendment 

to clause 14 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 14 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) by deleting subsection (2); and 

 

 (b) by renumbering subsection (1) as section 14. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We do in fact, as I mentioned earlier, 

intend to make the regulations, a set of draft regulations 

available to any interested person to comment on before they're 

passed.  So I think the concern of the member will be met by 

the fashion in which we proceed with the regulations.  I 

therefore urge this be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 14 agreed to. 

 

Clause 15 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Under clause 

15(1) establishment of committees, the threshold should be 

changed to 20 or more, like most other provinces in Canada.  

Saskatchewan has the most costly and onerous paperwork and 

regulatory requirements in all of North America on this issue, 

and I think I might as well throw in there that we have an awful 

lot of paperwork in an awful lot of areas of our society that 

seems like we're trying to get rid of all the trees in the world. 

 

Having said that, I want to move clause 15 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 15 of the printed Bill at subsection (1) by 

deleting "10" and substituting "20". 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We believe this amendment should 

be deleted.  It somehow or other seems to assume that 

accidents only take place at large places of employment.  In 

fact the number of claims which are forwarded to the board, the 

Workers' Compensation Board, from small places of 

employment has been growing fairly rapidly.  And it's felt that 

while we may not want to have an occupational health and 

safety committee if you've only got one employee, the 

threshold needs to be lowered if we're going to drive the 

accident rate down, and we must get the accident rate down.  

So I'll urge this be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Even with a 

hearing-aid I'm quite convinced that the votes are getting closer 

in our favour.  It was fairly quiet over there and I think we 

almost won that one. 

 

Having said that, I want to go on to clause 15(4), delete (b) and 

(c).  To be democratic and fair and to ensure that the unions 

don't parachute in their candidates, the health and safety 

representatives should be elected from the actual place of 

employment.  In all circumstances, as it stands, there could be a 

blatant union pork-barrelling, which is not conducive to a 

cooperative workplace community. 

 

I think that point is well made, Mr. Chairman, and Minister, so 

I will go on and move our amendment to clause 15 of the 

printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 15 of the printed Bill at subsection (4): 

 

 (a) by deleting clauses (b) and (c); and 

 

 (b) by deleting the clause reference "(a)". 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The vast majority of unions in fact 

are very democratic.  Almost all of them call for the election of 

members in circumstances such as this.  So we think it's 

unnecessary and we urge this be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 15 agreed to. 

 

Clause 16 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Under clause 16, the designation of 

small-firm representatives, cost of these small-firm 

representatives, could be proportionately very onerous for 

small businesses.  This is without precedent in North America.  

Delete this section and all other related sections, is what I have 

written in my notes here, Mr. Chairman, and I think I'll move 

into this first amendment on 16.  No, I have to read on because 

the part that affects this amendment is yet to come. 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2349 

Alternatively, delete section 2.  It is crazy to force artificial 

votes with labour separate from management in very small, 

mostly family-owned workplaces.  This is a big union, 

quasi-certification kind of voting process which is not 

applicable to small businesses. 

 

With that, I will move the amendment, Mr. Chairman: 

 

 Amend clause 16 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) by deleting subsection (2); and 

 

 (b) by re-numbering subsection (1) as section 16. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm only going to make one comment 

with respect to all of the amendments to this section.  I 

understand the member may be moving more than one.  OH&S 

(occupational health and safety) reps will only be required in 

prescribed workplaces with fewer than 10 employees.  The 

designation criteria will include hazard level of the workplace.  

The rep, like the committee members, will work with the 

employer to make the workplace safer which will reduce the 

employer's compensation costs. 

 

We're therefore urging that these series of amendments to 16 be 

defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 16 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 17 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 20 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Under clause 

20(a), duties of a small-firm representatives, delete reference to 

these small-firm representatives being able to control health 

and safety hazards.  This violates the spirit of the consultation 

and cooperation.  They should be able to participate and help 

resolve matters but not the control of health and safety hazards 

in or at the place of employment. 

 

And with that I move the following amendment to clause 20 of 

the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 20 of the printed Bill at clause (a) by deleting 

"and control". 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This amendment was raised with us 

by the Canadian Federation of Independent Business.  We 

sought an opinion from Justice.  They assured us that the 

wording of the section which uses the verb "to participate", "to 

co-operate", in these two subsections does not give the rep any 

executive authority.  We therefore urge this be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

Clause 20 agreed to. 

 

Clause 21 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We're 

suggesting an amendment to clause 21(5).  We say that should 

be deleted altogether, this subsection.  It only undermines the 

spirit of the labour-management cooperation and allows 

workers to bypass a committee system and cause direct 

confrontation without trying to be internally communitive or 

responsible first.  And with that we suggest the following 

amendment be passed to clause 21 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 21 of the printed Bill by deleting subsection 

(5). 

 

I so move. 

 

(2200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This is intended to deal with 

emergency situations in which there may be a real danger to 

life and limb.  There may not be time to refer it to a committee.  

The policy of the department is clear, and that is the worker 

should refer any complaint to a committee before it goes to an 

OH&S officer, unless there is a clear and present danger, and 

unless there is not time to refer it to a committee.  We therefore 

urge this be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 21 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 22 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 25 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Under 25(1), 

no time limits.  So this is a very serious matter and there should 

be an obligation for the government officer to investigate and 

decide as urgently or expeditiously as possible.  If they take too 

long the results will be chaos, i.e., must investigate within 24 

hours maximum. 

 

Also all notices of a contravention requiring remedial action 

should be in writing to ensure there is always proper 

documentation in case of appeal.  Why have it in writing under 

subsection 25(2) but not in 25(1)?  With that argument, we 

present the following amendment to clause 25 of the printed 

Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 25 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (b) in subsection (1) by adding immediately after "may issue 

a notice of contravention" the words "in writing", and 

 

 (a) in the general words preceding clause (2)(a):  by adding 

immediately before "an occupational health officer decides" 

the following: 



2350 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

 ", within 24 hours of being requested to investigate a matter 

pursuant to section 24," 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Just to show the member that we are 

cooperative, I think we're going to accept this amendment.  I 

am told by the officials that notice of contraventions are always 

done in writing; it's not possible to do it otherwise than in 

writing because reasons must be given.  So just to show you 

that we appreciate the spirit -- keeping in mind the concerns of 

our House Leader, I think even given that -- I think we will 

accept this amendment.  It may well clarify it.  So I think we're 

going to agree to this one. 

 

But I think the member only moved the amendment to section . 

. . to the first one, the words "in writing".  I want to be clear 

about this.  I don't think the member moved the second of those 

two, my copy of which would add, "within 24 hours of being 

requested".  The first one we can accept; the second one I think 

we can't. 

 

Now I heard, I think, the member just move the first of those 

two amendments.  . . . (inaudible) . . . then we'll agree to that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Just for the minister's clarification, we only 

read one. 

 

The Chair: -- Just to clarify, the amendment before the 

committee then is to: 

 

 Amend clause 25 of the printed Bill in subsection (1) by 

adding immediately after "may issue a notice of 

contravention" the words "in writing". 

 

And that's the amendment that's before the Committee. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- No, I had read the section (b) as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Perhaps the member would like to 

move these two things separately.  Why doesn't the member 

simply move the first of those two amendments now.  We'll 

deal with the second one separately because I don't think we 

can accept it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I think we will allow that to happen, Mr. 

Chairman, if that's okay? 

 

The Chair: -- To do that the member will require leave.  Is 

leave granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Chair: -- Then as I understand it, we have in effect two 

amendments before us.  The first one as I read out.  And we'll 

put the question on the first one. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- Then the second amendment, just to 

make it clear. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes.  The member . . . We're going to 

be urging the Assembly to defeat this.  The member may take 

some comfort in section 87 which requires these decisions to 

be taken "as soon as is reasonably possible".  Given the 

different complexity of the various decisions they make, this 

may be all that's attainable. 

 

I'd urge the members to defeat the amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 25 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 26 agreed to. 

 

Clause 27 

 

The Chair: -- There are amendments by the opposition and by 

the minister, and in this case the opposition amendment takes 

precedence. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We have 

indication that the government is going to have an amendment 

and hopefully it will accomplish the same thing and we can get 

together on this one.  But we'll go to work on this one to start 

with, to get our point across. 

 

Under 27, discriminatory action . . . prohibits in certain 

circumstances.  We suggest deleting (c), (d), and (e).  These are 

not necessary because of what is written in other subsections of 

this clause.  They are worded too generally and imply complete 

immunity because of special committee membership and 

standing and not because of any specific action.  Does this 

mean that once a worker gets on a health and safety committee 

or becomes a small-firm worker representative, an employer 

can never reprimand, lay off, reduce wages, etc., ever again.  

This wording should be clarified to not to suggest this intent. 

 

Having made that point I will read the amendment which I will 

now move to clause 27 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 27 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) by deleting clauses (c), (d) and (e); and 

 

 (b) by re-lettering clauses (f) through (j) as clauses (c) 

through (g) respectively. 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We are also going to want to tighten 

up this a little.  We think our amendment accomplishes that in a 

more effective fashion.  Don't deny the value of what the 

member has to say but we think our amendment will 

accomplish this in a more effective fashion.  I'm therefore 

going to urge that this amendment be defeated and ours be 

accepted when we get to it. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2351 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that: 

 

 Section 27 of the printed Bill be amended: 

 

 (a) by striking out clause (j); and 

 

 (b) by renumbering clause (i) as clause (j) 

 

Okay, let me just redo this.  The printed version which the 

members have is accurate.  We corrected it and our corrections 

were in error. 

 

 Amend section 27 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) by striking out clause (i); and 

 

 (b) by renumbering clause (j) as clause (i). 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, unfortunately, Mr. 

Minister, we haven't gotten together on this one.  I may be 

wrong here but I don't see anything close to being similar to 

your amendment, to ours.  And so the intention we were trying 

to get in obviously hasn't been addressed by your amendment. 

 

So what you're doing is something that you're doing on your 

own and until I think this through a little bit more, I don't think 

that we have really done anything to help anybody with what 

you're doing. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 27 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 28 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

under clause 28, referral to officers, note once again that there 

are no time limits.  If the government officer is slow to arrive 

and the employer is completely frozen from making any 

management decisions, changes in pay, changes in working 

conditions, etc., until the government inspector finally arrives, 

this could become a very nasty and insidious tactic used in a 

poisonous labour climate and could be exploited for other 

reasons.  There must be time limits. 

 

Example: a maximum of 20 hours for officers to arrive, 

investigate, and decide.  Also note that officers' notice of 

contravention should there again be in writing, to provide 

proper documentation in case of an appeal.  I think that point is 

well taken, Mr. Chairman, so I will move on to the motion of 

moving our amendment to clause 28 of the printed Bill. 

 

 Amend clause 28 of the printed Bill in the general words 

preceding clause (2)(a): 

 

 (a) by adding immediately before the words "an occupational 

health officer" the following: 

 

 ", within 24 hours of being informed of a discriminatory 

action pursuant to subsection (1),"; 

 And 

 

 (b) by adding immediately after "shall issue a notice of 

contravention" the words "in writing". 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Again, we think section 87 covers 

this and we'll be urging this amendment be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 28 agreed to. 

 

Clause 29 agreed to. 

 

Clause 30 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well very simply, Mr. Chairman, in clause 

30, notice of contravention should always be in writing and we 

feel that we must add this in.  Okay now, the clause 30 of the 

printed Bill, the amendment that I will now move: 

 

 Amend clause 30 of the printed Bill in the general words 

preceding clause (1)(a) by adding immediately after "may 

serve a notice of contravention" the words . . .. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We're prepared to accept this 

amendment. 

 

(2215) 

 

The Chair: -- The amendment before the committee then is to 

clause 30.  Can we take the amendment as . . . or I better just 

clarify this.  This is to: 

 

 amend clause 30 of the printed Bill in the general words 

preceding clause (1)(a) by adding immediately after "may 

serve a notice of contravention" the words "in writing". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 30 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 31 and 32 agreed to. 

 

Clause 33 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Under clause 33, 

this gives a junior government inspector the power to shut 

down an entire workplace.  There should be time limits on this 

and clear mechanisms to immediately launch an appeal.  I 

guess very simply, Mr. Chairman, and Minister, we find this to 

be something that could be tremendously abused and 

tremendously expensive.  The right to shut down a workplace, 

even in a small workplace, can cost enough money that the 

profit margins are lost.  It could drive people out of business.  I 

don't 



2352 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

think that's what the workplace was intended to be like and I 

don't think workers want to have that happen either, so I will 

read the following amendment which we hope that you will see 

fit to accept and to support. 

 

Clause 33 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 33 of the printed Bill at subsection (1): 

 

 (a) by deleting "until the requirement to cease work has been 

withdrawn by an occupational health officer" and 

substituting: 

 

 for a maximum period of 24 hours; and 

 

 (b) by adding immediately after subsection (2) the following 

subsection: 

 

 (3) Any requirement for the cessation of work made by an 

occupational health officer pursuant to subsection (1) may be 

appealed immediately to the chief occupational medical 

officer, and until the chief occupational medical officer has 

reviewed the alleged contravention, no requirement for the 

cessation of work made pursuant to subsection (1) shall be of 

any effect. 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member's comments . . . both 

amendments are to the same effect.  That is, there should be a 

finite time on the length of time a cessation order applies.  

While cognizant of the problems this causes -- and these will 

be used only very, very sparingly -- nevertheless finite times 

are not possible and the situations in which they might be used 

vary considerably and the OHS officers need the flexibility 

with which to deal with them.  So I'll urge these amendments 

be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 33 agreed to. 

 

Clause 34 agreed to. 

 

Clause 35 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you again, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, under 35 we feel that seven days is too brief a period 

for small business to respond.  We suggest 14 days instead.  I 

think that's fairly pointed and to the point and should be an 

acceptable suggestion, simply because I'll make the case that 

I've seen this in other parts of legislation in years gone by, and 

the onus to respond in seven days -- with our mailing system 

sometimes being a little bit slow, and with people sometimes 

not being able to be contacted by telephones and that sort of 

thing; in Saskatchewan with our very broad expanses of travel 

and that kind of things, our geography and what not -- in some 

cases seven days to get information back and forth simply is 

not a reasonable approach to our society and the way that we 

live in Saskatchewan.  And so we suggest that 14 days would 

be better.  And we do that by 

amending, or suggesting that you support our amendment to 

clause 35 of the Bill, which I now move: 

 

 Amend clause 35 of the printed Bill in the general words 

preceding clause (a) by deleting "seven days" and 

substituting: 

 

 14 days. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This provision has been in effect 

since 1977 and has caused no problem.  It's simply been carried 

forward. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 35 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 36 to 43 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 44 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

under the regulations these are massive regulatory powers -- 

over 44 separate powers listed.  All of this follow-up work 

provides the real teeth of this Act, but the Legislative Assembly 

will never have the opportunity to review these regulatory 

provisions.  The Canadian federation of business, among 

others, has been told that some of these regulations have 

already been drafted, but they claim that they have not had the 

chance to see them and have been denied access to view them. 

 

This is a violation of the government's own code of regulatory 

conduct just announced on March 8, 1993, and I suggest, Mr. 

Minister, that you should correct this kind of action because it 

is, if not anything else, at least immoral and you ought to treat 

people more fairly and reasonably than that.  With having said 

that we're going to suggest the following amendment and hope 

that you can, in fact, support it.  Do the right thing, Minister. 

 

I move that we, under clause 44 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 44 of the printed Bill at subsection (1): 

 

 (a) by deleting clause (a); and 

 

 (b) by relettering clauses (b) through (pp) as clauses (a) 

through (oo) respectively. 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This is a standard clause in regulatory 

sections which is used throughout legislation.  The effect that 

this section may have has been sharply circumscribed by 

courts, and thus I think much of the danger which concerns the 

member has been eliminated by judicial decision which has 

restricted the ability to use this within very narrow perimeters. 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2353 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- We'll try once more, Mr. Chairman.  Under 

44(a), if a latter regulation can totally redefine in large . . . or 

restrict the meaning of these words, then it makes a mockery of 

the entire current review by the Legislative Assembly.  We feel 

that we have to delete this section in order to put credibility 

into the process, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And with that I move the following amendment to clause 44 of 

the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 44 of the printed Bill at subsection (1): 

 

 (a) by deleting clause (jj); and 

 

 (b) by re-lettering clauses (kk) through (pp) as clauses (jj) 

through (oo) respectively. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This deletes the ability to prescribe 

regulations with respect to violence in policy statements.  This 

is something we think that is a very worthwhile addition to this 

Bill.  Regrettably, violence is a part of the workplace.  This Act 

seeks to eliminate that violence and provides a framework and 

a committee within the workplace in which these problems can 

be dealt with and eliminated.  This is not a problem which the 

government seeks to cure in and by itself, but seeks to provide 

a mechanism whereby management and employees can get 

together and resolve these themselves.  We therefore urge this 

be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We will try again 

under clause 44(c), as we will call our amendment.  We think 

that we have to delete . . . Again all aspects of adjudication 

should be clearly defined in the Act, is the note that I have 

made here.  And I hope that the minister will see fit to 

encourage his members to support this amendment, which I 

will now move to clause 44 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 44 of the printed Bill at subsection (1): 

 

 (a) by deleting clause (nn); and 

 

 (b) by re-lettering clause (oo) and (pp) as clauses (nn) and 

(oo) respectively. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Ideally the member is right.  Ideally 

one wants to put as much in the Act and as little in the 

regulation as you can.  There are some circumstances however 

in which one cannot always foresee all of the powers which 

adjudicators might need.  And don't forget these are 

adjudicators which are set up as an appeal mechanism against 

decisions 

of the OHS officers.  We want these adjudicators to be as 

effective as possible.  To do that we've retained a certain 

flexibility to describe their powers.  It is however one that 

would protect the citizenry and particularly the employers. 

 

We therefore urge this be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you again, Mr. Chairman.  Once again 

we will try with clause 44.  We'll call it (d) of our amendments.  

We feel, Mr. Chairman, that we should delete this subsection.  

This completely nullifies any assurances given in 44(4).  And 

any bureaucrat could decide whether a delay would be contrary 

to the public interest or the subject matter of the proposed 

regulation is of a minor nature.  It has the potential to turn 

44(4) into nothing more than an empty political rhetoric. 

 

I guess that's fairly explanatory, Mr. Chairman.  So, Minister, 

we suggest that here you could do an act of good faith, take the 

politics out of your Bill that you claim is intended to help 

people and not to be a political tool, and accept our amendment 

which I will now move.  Clause 44 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 44 of the printed Bill by deleting subsection 

(5). 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There is a rationale for each of these 

three exceptions.  Where an emergency exists and something 

needs to be dealt with, this often implies a danger to life and 

limb.  And we think in this case it makes sense not to wait the 

60 days. 

 

The second section would envision a variety of different 

circumstances, basically where we want the changes in the 

regulations to take longer than 60 days.  We want to give notice 

of them but not have them come into effect for a longer period 

of time.  We think that'll make sense in a number of 

circumstances. 

 

The third section where they're of too minor in nature, this 

simply is a matter of trying to keep the Saskatchewan Gazette 

in the form of a usable document.  If every jot and tittle which 

is changed must appear in this Gazette, it's going to be 

worthless because it'll be too large and bulky.  So it's an 

attempt to keep that document as a usable, workable document. 

 

We therefore urge this be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 44 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 45 to 48 inclusive agreed to. 

 

(2230) 

 

Clause 49 



2354 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, I think you realize that 14 days is too short for a small 

business.  We suggest 21 days as the time.  Again we think that 

you're trying to crowd people too much in the province of 

Saskatchewan where our distances and our communication 

systems are not always as dependable as they could be in a 

big-city type of atmosphere.  We think that we have to give this 

consideration and allow for the realities of the world that we 

live in. 

 

With that I will move the amendment to clause 49 of the 

printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 49 of the printed Bill at subsection (1) by 

deleting "within 14 days" and substituting: 

 

 within 21 days. 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member will have noted that we 

had proposed exactly the same amendment.  It is our intention 

to accept the amendment from the member opposite in a spirit 

of cooperation and goodwill.  Ours, Mr. Chairman, will be 

withdrawn and there is no need to refer to it.  We would urge 

the Assembly to pass this amendment and I'd urge the Chair to 

ignore our amendment which has been previously filed with 

you. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 49 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 50 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: --  I think the members will see that this 

is simply ancillary to the amendment which was passed by 

yourself.  I'll therefore without further comment move that we: 

 

 Amend section 50 of the printed Bill by striking out "14" in 

subsection (1) and substituting "21". 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 50 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 51 to 55 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 56 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Several groups, 

Minister, have suggested to us that they prefer a further appeal 

to the Queen's Bench in all cases as per the existing Act.  Now 

Queen's Bench appeal should be possible on not just a decision 

of an adjudicator pursuant to section 33, but also on adjudicator 

decisions pursuant to all other sections of the Act, is the case 

that they have made with us. 

And I think that their case might be well taken, and with that in 

view, we would like you to consider supporting the following 

amendment which I will now move to clause 56 of the printed 

Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 56 of the printed Bill by deleting subsection 

(1) and substituting: 

 

 (1) An appeal lies to Her Majesty's Court of Queen's Bench 

for Saskatchewan from any decision of an adjudicator. 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm going to urge this be defeated 

although we gave this very careful consideration.  The . . . 

some members of the business communities, CFIB were the 

ones I recall, did urge this upon us.  At the end of the day after 

giving it some consideration we decided not to proceed with it. 

 

The existing wording is a very common wording.  We did so 

on the advice of the Department of Justice.  The existing 

wording is a very common wording in providing appeals for 

inferior tribunals.  It is on a question of law or jurisdiction, a 

question of law as defined fairly broadly, including those cases 

where there's no basis for the finding of fact. 

 

And it is such that it allows the appellate courts -- the Queen's 

Bench in this case -- to really control the sort of appeals it has 

to hear.  It gives the judges control over the appeals and we 

think that's appropriate.  It is a very expensive mechanism.  We 

think it's useful to give the judges a control over the mechanism 

and that's in fact the end product of what this does. 

 

So I think this is a reasonable balance between providing an 

appeal and not clogging the court system with a number of 

appeals which may not have a lot of merit.  I therefore urge this 

be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 56 agreed to. 

 

Clause 57 agreed to. 

 

Clause 58 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I didn't think we'd 

have to issue a wake-up call just yet; after all we did work until 

4 o'clock in the morning one night and there were still some 

people that survived.  It's not late yet, so let's get right at her 

here and see if we can't improve this Bill. 

 

Under clause 58 we suggest, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 

that the penalties -- penalties as high as $50,000 for a single, 

isolated offence -- are too high.  They should be up to $10,000 

as per subsection (4).  Penalties under subsection (7) and (8) 

still allow plenty of opportunity for additional punishment. 

 

And I guess that's fairly self-explanatory in what we 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2355 

intend there, so I will move the amendment. 

 

Clause 58 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 58 of the printed Bill at clause (6)(a) by 

deleting "$50,000" wherever it appears therein and 

substituting:  "$10,000". 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The level of fines is in fact similar . . 

. is in fact identical to what's in Alberta.  I want to point out 

that these are maximums, always in the discretion of the person 

. . . of the judge who hears this, and they simply provide a 

judge with a broad discretion to levy a fine which is a deterrent 

but which at the same time is not unduly harsh.  So it provides 

a judge with a maximum amount of discretion and we would 

urge that it be passed. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 58 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 59 and 60 agreed to. 

 

Clause 61 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, the 

vicarious liability, we feel we have to delete or neglect 

somehow this section.  This sets up an almost impossible 

due-diligence defence and will likely discourage many people 

from ever accepting board offices or executive appointments. 

 

Here again, Mr. Chairman, I can't see how we are really 

benefiting the workplace or the safety of the workplace by 

holding people responsible for decisions that they have not 

made.  I can see people being responsible for their actions for 

the things they do, but being held responsible for things that 

you aren't even aware of, that you may not have made a 

decision on, I mean come on, give us a break.  How are we 

supposed to live with that kind of thing in a free, democratic 

society? 

 

I mean I just can't see how you can hold people responsible for 

things they don't know about, and that they haven't made a 

decision on because they haven't known about it.  That just 

doesn't make any sense, and it's bound to scare people out of 

corporate boards.  You are definitely here attacking any kind of 

an institution or structure within our society that in fact has to 

operate with appointed boards or boards of any kind. 

 

And that is an attack on business of some size, mostly, and as a 

result I think you will see another exodus of business 

opportunity and job opportunity in our province.  Because 

these people that have rather larger businesses in our world 

quite simply don't need Saskatchewan very much.  I haven't 

heard of a big multinational corporation yet that has claimed 

that they can make very much for profits in Saskatchewan as 

compared to places where they have bigger populations. 

There are some exceptions and I'm sure you're going to pick 

one up right away.  But there are very few of those exceptions 

and the reality of the real world is that most big companies 

have been moving out of Saskatchewan because the 

opportunities for profit are not big with our small population.  

And if we set more stumbling blocks in their way, I can't see 

how we're ever going to hope to build this province into a very 

heavily populated area of the world. 

 

Now you may want to have it without a population, but you 

have to face the facts, sir, that without a population, we also 

have no tax base to pay the bills that you seem to want to run 

up -- $5 billion worth and more already this year. 

 

So let's take a hard look at this, Minister, and see if we can't 

come up with an amendment that will correct some of the 

problems in this area.  I would like to move an amendment to 

clause 61 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 61 of the printed Bill by deleting the words "or 

neglect" where they appear therein. 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Neglect doesn't add anything new 

here.  There are positive duties within this Act.  This only 

provides that this corporation or the owner, as the case may be, 

is vicariously liable.  It's a well-accepted principle in the whole 

area of commercial law, and this section is no different than 

other sections in similar statutes appearing in this province and 

every other province and state in North America.  It's a 

well-accepted section that I would urge this Assembly pass. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 61 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 62 to 64 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 65 

 

The Chair: -- We should take the government amendment first 

in this case. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This may clarify it.  This section 

refers only to . . . the section on confidentiality refers to 

medical examinations of a worker pursuant to the section 64 

and not pursuant to this Act and regulations.  Sixty-four is I 

think self-explanatory but it refers to medical examinations the 

medical officer requires. 

 

We therefore are, in a sense, tightening up the section and 

making it more focused.  I'm sure all members will want to join 

with us in passing this amendment. 

 

The Chair: -- I'd like the minister to move the amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that we: 



2356 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

Amend section 65 of the printed Bill by striking out "this Act 

or the regulations" and substituting "section 64". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- At this point I'll take the amendment from the 

member for Maple Creek. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had hoped that 

the minister would move an amendment that would take care of 

ours so that we wouldn't have to do it, but it didn't do that so 

we'll have to carry on and get at it here and do our own. 

 

Confidentiality of medical examinations under clause 65.  Now 

this is still written in very confusing language and still seems to 

prohibit any employer from being able to know whether his or 

her employee has a serious, suddenly occurring health problem 

which could endanger the lives of other co-workers.  I guess I 

can identify with the suggestion that's made in my notes here 

more than some other people might, but I have worked in 

rather dangerous occupations, both myself and alongside of 

dangerous occupations where I've watched the results. 

 

(2245) 

 

The petroleum industry, for example, in the exploratory stages.  

The drilling process is extremely dangerous at times, and if a 

worker happens to be ill from some kind of fainting spells or 

something like that, and he happened to be the fellow that's 

running the main switch on the equipment, certainly two, and 

three, and sometimes four other employees can be killed very 

suddenly by one mistake of a switch of the lever on that 

equipment. 

 

And noting that, I want to move the following amendment to 

clause 65 of the printed Bill. 

 

 Amend clause 65 of the printed Bill by deleting the words 

"shall not communicate, to the employer or to any person 

other than the worker or the worker's physician," and 

substituting: 

 

 "shall not communicate to any person other than the worker, 

the worker's physician or the employer," 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This section was the subject of fairly 

extensive discussions.  It was reworked more than once and the 

section has been amended by ourselves.  I think at the end of 

the day, after all the permutations in this section, it is 

satisfactory to all concerned.  The comment with respect to this 

amendment, the reason why I'm going to urge it be defeated, is 

that the medical records are confidential and they shouldn't be 

disclosed to anyone other than the worker.  It's fairly basic sort 

of human rights. 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 65 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 66 to 68 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 69 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The functions of 

division we say quite simply should be deleted out of this part 

of the Bill.  And for the expediency of time, I simply will go on 

to the moving of the amendment. 

 

Clause 69 of the printed Bill, I now move the amendment: 

 

 Amend clause 69 of the printed Bill by deleting clause (d). 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I shall be equally brief and say that 

this has been a part of this Act since 1972 and has not caused 

any problems.  I urge this amendment be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 69 agreed to. 

 

Clause 70 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

your remarks in the last statements were something along the 

line that this has been in the Act since 1970.  I think maybe 

when it's been there that long, it's high time we did examine it 

and maybe we should have taken it out. 

 

With that, I'll say simply that in section 70, we should delete 

number (e).  I think you will understand it as I read it, and I'll 

move the following amendment to clause 70 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 70 of the printed Bill by deleting clause (e). 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I don't know if the member is 

going to find this argument all that appealing, but may I say 

this has been in the Act since 1972 and has not caused any 

problems.  I therefore urge it be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 70 agreed to. 

 

Clause 71 agreed to. 

 

Clause 72 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I guess we do have an amendment for clause 

72 so . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It looks 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2357 

like more than one, yes. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We have several amendments, so 

this will just take a minute.  Under 72, inspections, 

investigations, search -- generally speaking, these sections of 

the Act will provide more power to the Labour department's 

bureaucracy than either common law or the criminal law, i.e., 

exceeding powers of the city police and the RCMP (Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police). 

 

This section is arbitrary and excessive because its exercise is 

totally within the discretion of the government officer, 

requiring not even a suspicious . . . a suspicion rather, that an 

offence contrary to the Act has been committed. 

 

Only a suspicion, Minister.  I could make up a suspicion pretty 

quickly.  I suspect that a lot of folks could.  Entry onto private 

property to the extent authorized by this section also probably 

violates an individual's rights under section 8 of the Canadian 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

Many of the business groups are saying that our business 

colleagues have several legal opinions which express these 

concerns.  Now having said that, Mr. Minister, we want to go 

on to our amendment and the reason for it.  Under 72 (1), at the 

end of this whole list numbered (a) to (h) there should be an 

additional paragraph saying that relates to the reasonable and 

probable grounds that any workers' health and safety is in 

jeopardy. 

 

This additional wording is necessary to avoid abuse of power, 

to follow the chapter . . . charter rather, and to be consistent 

with similar changes made in The Environmental Management 

and Protection Act during these House amendments last 

summer.  If I get my lip around the right words here we'll be all 

right. 

 

Also under clause 72, I have further notes, Minister, under (a), 

and I think that that means that those are for the next 

amendments.  So I will now move the amendment that I have 

just given my argument to which goes along the lines: 

 

I move an amendment to clause 72 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 72 of the printed Bill at subsection (1): 

 

 (a) by deleting the period at the end of clause (h); and 

 

 (b) by adding immediately after clause (h) a general 

statement that applies to clause (a) through (h) as follows: 

 

 that relates to the reasonable and probable grounds that any 

workers' health and safety is in jeopardy. 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think the member's thought 

is already included in this section.  The section now says, 

"where the officer has reason to believe."  It implies a 

reasonableness on the part of the officer.  I think it's already 

included.  I think it's unnecessary, and I urge it be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- We were going to propose an amendment to 

clause 72.  We're calling it clause 72(a).  I think I'll just go 

through the rest of my briefing notes that I've prepared here and 

then we can apply the Bills to them, up to, it looks like, about 

three more. 

 

So with that there is little justification to authorize a 

non-consensual, non-warrant entry, under circumstances where 

workers are not even at work at the time, or where the alleged 

violation is not of a serious nature.  We also suggest that it may 

amount to a temporary expropriation without compensation of 

private property.  And further on, we feel that it requires an 

individual to provide information to the officer without the 

benefits of counsel, or even the protection afforded by the 

Saskatchewan evidence or the Canadian evidence Act, i.e. the 

right to silence is integral to the criminal process. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I can't help but to just ad lib a little from 

my own notes because I think that, seriously, you have to 

reconsider the position of your government in the direction it's 

going with the Bills that you are presenting to this province.  

You're suggesting that we change the whole format of our law 

making and law keeping in this province.  We are no longer 

working within the jurisdiction of our court system, and the 

established British-North American development and process 

of development of our democracy, and the system of 

democracy that we work under.  Jurisprudence, those kind of 

words, all fall into place. 

 

The reality, sir, is that you are now setting up a power structure 

in the province that deviates seriously from the democratic 

process that we have evolved.  I'm surprised if this isn't some 

kind of precedent for our country and for North America.  And 

I'm sure there will be some example that you can use to say that 

it's not. 

 

But when I make a statement that is very heavy, like a police 

state, I don't do that lightly, and I don't do that frivolously.  But 

the reality is that many of the things that you are doing in this 

Bill makes Saskatchewan into a police state, no matter how 

else you look at it.  I can't find other words that describe the 

direction that we're heading.  We're giving power to people 

beyond the reason, or the reasonableness, of a democracy, at 

the same time where there is judicial power and police power 

to protect all of the rights of the people of our province in every 

area.  You're overstepping the bounds of your authority, sir, 

and this is objectionable beyond words. 

 

I simply am going to do this and am going to place into the 

records another suggestion of an amendment.  I'm quite sure 

that you will find some way to excuse yourself from facing the 

reality of what you're doing, 



2358 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

but I'm sure that the people of Saskatchewan will hold you 

accountable. 

 

A few minutes ago you made the statement that you didn't 

think I would like your remark.  The thought crossed my mind, 

I really don't care what your remarks are here.  You're putting 

your remarks on the record for the public to judge.  I wouldn't 

vote for you anyway. 

 

So I'm suggesting, sir, that what you say is important to 

yourself, and you ought to consider heavily what you're saying 

because it's a reflection on how people are going to judge you 

in the days and the years to come.  I'm sure you shouldn't want 

to go down in history as the man who tried to destroy the 

province, along with a few of your colleagues. 

 

With that I want to move the following amendment: 

 

 Amend clause 72 of the printed Bill at subsection (4) in the 

general words preceding clause (a): 

 

 (a) by deleting the words "any place or premise" and 

substituting "any workplace"; and 

 

 (b) by adding immediately after the words "where the officer 

believes" the words, "under oath and with respect to a 

specific offence and the specific form or type of evidence 

sought," 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Notwithstanding the hour, I'm just 

going to take a very brief moment to respond to these 

comments.  This does go to the heart of what some of the 

organizations objected to about this Bill.  I just want to say 

again that this is not a criminal statute, this is a preventative 

statute. 

 

Perhaps one way to illustrate the comment is to refer to a 

former member with whom I once shared time in the 

Assembly, a former member from Kinistino, Art Thibault, who 

died in the early 1980s. 

 

Art Thibault -- I'm not sure what his education was; he was 

possessed with a lot of common sense -- he used to continually 

urge us to . . . not to be in his . . . in the language of a 

common-sense farmer, not to be guard dogs but to be 

sheepdogs.  Not to try to prevent . . . not to sort of growl at 

people when they crossed the line, but to try to work with 

people and prevent them from crossing the line.  That's the 

spirit of this legislation.  We're trying to be sheepdogs, not 

guard dogs. 

 

With that I'm going to urge that the . . . I'm not going to make 

these comments, although I know I will be asked to do so.  I'm 

not going to make these comments after each one of these 

amendments.  These comments, Mr. Chairman, apply to all of 

these amendments and they're the reasons why I would urge the 

Assembly to defeat all of the amendments under section 72. 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

(2300) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The comments 

made by the minister, Mr. Chairman, indicate of course that the 

next amendment attempts to follow up with alleviating some of 

the problems in this section and his comments are that he's 

going to oppose the amendments all for the same reason.  I'm 

going to suggest that I'm making the amendments all for the 

same reason, and basically that reason is that we don't agree 

with living in a police state and we will fight long and hard to 

change that for as long as it takes. 

 

And I think that your comment that this isn't a Criminal Code 

does not alleviate you from responsibility in treating people 

with fairness, with dignity, and with the right to use the proper 

judicial system that we have evolved in our democracy. 

 

And your friend who thought you should be a guard dog rather 

than a . . . or a sheepdog rather than a guard dog, I think must 

have rolled over in his grave tonight -- God rest his soul, 

whoever he is -- because you are certainly becoming not only a 

guard dog, you are becoming a vicious attack dog in this Bill, 

and nothing else. 

 

Now with that, I want to move the following amendment, and I 

move clause 72 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 72 of the printed Bill at clause (6)(b) by 

adding immediately after the words "that the delay necessary 

to obtain a warrant" the following: 

 

 (i) would jeopardize the investigation of an alleged offence of 

a very serious nature; and 

 

 (ii) under extreme and rare emergency circumstances. 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 72 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 73 and 74 agreed to. 

 

Clause 75 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Duties of the 

Occupational Health and Safety Council, subsection (a), should 

be amended to indicate the role is advisory only.  Protection of 

workers could evolve into yet another dispute, regulatory 

licensing or inspection agencies . . . another duplicate rather of 

regulatory licensing or inspection agencies.  Now I don't think 

that there's anything to be gained by going into any more length 

on the explanation so I will move an amendment to clause 75 

of the printed Bill: 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2359 

Amend clause 75 of the printed Bill at clause (2)(a) by 

adding immediately before the words "occupational health 

and safety generally" the words: 

 

 "in an advisory capacity only,". 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: -- I might say I'm corrected that there is no other 

amendment that's being proposed to clause 75. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We were briefly actually considering 

accepting this amendment.  Council always acts in an advisory 

capacity.  Quite frankly the section is wrong.  We've not had an 

opportunity to thoroughly consider this.  I think however the 

wording of the section makes this amendment unnecessary.  It's 

clear that the council is only advisory as is.  So we'd urge this 

be defeated as being unnecessary. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 75 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 76 to 83 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 84 

 

The Chair: -- There are two amendments and in this case we'll 

take the opposition amendment first. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In addition to 

reviewing the adequacy of this Act, they should be asked to 

review the adequacy of its administration similar to how it is 

written in Bill 55.  And I guess with that comment, I will read 

our amendment to clause 84 which I now move.  Clause 84 of 

the printed Bill, I move we: 

 

 Amend clause 84 of the printed Bill be deleting "review the 

adequacy of this Act" and substituting: 

 

 "review the adequacy of all matters concerning this Act, the 

regulations and the administration of this Act and the 

regulations". 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member will know, because he's 

been provided with a copy of an amendment which we're 

proposing, I think the two amendments had the same effect.  I 

think our wording is simpler.  I'm therefore going to urge that 

the amendment which you propose be defeated and ours be 

accepted. 

 

I say to the member opposite, that it appears from the material I 

have, that this was suggested to the member by the CFIB.  We 

got the same suggestion at about the same time.  The Justice 

department lawyers have worded that suggestion in the form in 

which we have it.  So I think if the member will accept our 

suggestion, it's gone through a vetting process which I think 

probably yours has not, otherwise it's the same force 

and effect. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- In light of what I've said, I move that 

we: 

 

 Amend section 84 of the printed Bill by adding "and its 

administration" after "this Act". 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 84 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 85 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Under clause 85, 

immunity, this complete legal protection being given to the 

bureaucracy and the workers of the occupational health and 

safety committees or small-firm representatives, goes way too 

far.  There should be a counterbalance, a new 85(2) which 

prevents vexatious or frivolous behaviour by those people and 

also includes penalties, appeals, etc., if they are acting 

vexatiously.  I guess that's fairly apparent to what we're saying.  

We're simply saying that the whole thing goes too far and that 

we ought to have some accountability in our process. And with 

that I move: 

 

 Amendment to clause 85 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) by renumbering the clause as subsection 85(1); and 

 

 (b) by adding a new subsection (2) as follows: 

 

 "(2) Notwithstanding the immunity afforded the persons 

mentioned in subsection (1), where any of those persons has 

acted in a vexatious or frivolous manner, 

 

 (a) a worker or an employer may bring an action in Her 

Majesty's Court of Queen's Bench for damage suffered as a 

result of any such vexatious or frivolous act, as the Judge 

may determine; and, in addition to any award of damages, 

 

 (b) where the Judge so determines, any person committing 

that vexatious or frivolous act is guilty of an offence and is 

liable on summary conviction therefor to a fine of not more 

than $5,000.00. 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The form of the section which is in 

this Act is in most Acts and has been used for a long period of 

time, both by this government and by the government of which 

the member from Morse was a member.  I don't know what it 

would take to actually persuade this entire system of ours to 

adopt a new form, but I frankly have neither the time nor the 



2360 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

energy to try. 

 

This section is of long-standing and we urge that the 

amendment be defeated, and we go with precedent, as we 

lawyers always do. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 85 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 86 to 90 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 91 

 

The division bells rang from 11:10 p.m. until 11:11 p.m. 

 

Clause 91 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Shillington Trew 

Goulet Serby 

Kowalsky Flavel 

Cunningham Roy 

Hagel Cline 

Bradley Harper 

Lorje Carlson 

Pringle Jess 

Calvert Haverstock 

Johnson  

-- 19 

 

Nays 

Martens Goohsen 

D'Autremont  

-- 3 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- In absentee, I thank my officials.  The 

members will note that they've sat outside for most of the 

afternoon, had nothing more to amuse them than to watch the 

elected members walk through the hallway, which is not high 

amusement.  And we're here all evening.  We have been here 

all day, but we at least have been inside.  I think we often fail 

to realize how much the public servants sacrifice to make this 

Assembly work, and I want to thank them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2315) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I will of course join with the minister in 

thanking the officials for their diligence and good work; 

however, I will point out to the minister that it is his timing that 

caused us all to sit around all afternoon.  I too sat here waiting 

all afternoon, waiting to take on this particular Bill. 

 

And the ill-timed program is the result of the things that 

happened on your side of the House today, not ours, and as a 

result we are here yet.  And hopefully we can still go home, but 

I do want to go home with a clear conscience, saying that the 

officials certainly did do a good job and we're happy that they 

were able to be here and did a good job for us, and we thank 

them. 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 56 -- An Act respecting Occupational 

Health and Safety 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move the Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:17 p.m. 

 


